THE 



ENCYCLOPAEDIA BRITANNICA 



ELEVENTH EDITION 



FIRST edit 


Ion, published 


in three 


volumes, 


1768— 1771. 


SECOND , 


» >> 


ten 




1777— 1784. 


THIRD , 


y ? 




eighteen 




17S8— 1797. 


FOURTH , 


9 » 




twenty 




1801 — 1810. 


FIFTH , 


9 » 




twenty 




1815—1817. 


SIXTH , 


» » 




twenty 




1823 — 1824. 


SEVENTH , 


> » 




twenty-one 




1830— 1842. 


EIGHTH , 


» J 




twenty-two 




l8 53— 1860. 


NINTH , 


> > 




twenty-five 




1875—1889. 


TENTH , 


, ninth edition and eleven 








supplementary volumes, 


1902 — 1903. 


ELEVENTH , 


, publi 


shed 


in twenty-nine volumes, 


1910 — 1911. 



COPYRIGHT 

in all countries subscribing to the 

Bern Convention 

by 

THE CHANCELLOR, MASTERS AND SCHOLARS 

of the 
UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE 



All rights reurvtd 



THE 



ENCYCLOPEDIA BRITANNICA 



DICTIONARY 

OF 

ARTS, SCIENCES, LITERATURE AND GENERAL 

INFORMATION 



ELEVENTH EDITION 



VOLUME IV 

BISHARTN to CALGARY 



New York 

Encyclopaedia Britannica, Inc. 

342 Madison Avenue 



Copyright, in the United States of America, 1910, 

by 

The Encyclopaedia Britannica Company. 



INITIALS USED IN VOLUME IV. TO IDENTIFY INDIVIDUAL 

CONTRIBUTORS,! WITH THE HEADINGS OF THE 

ARTICLES IN THIS VOLUME SO SIGNED. 



A. B. R. 
A. B. H. 

A. E. S. 

A. F. P. 



A. 


Go 


.* 


A. 


H. 


B. 


A. 


H. 


-S. 


A. 


H. 


Sm 



A. J. G. 



A. J. L. 



A. Lo. 



A. 


Me. 


A. 


M. C. 


A. 


N. 


A. 


S. C. 


A. T. Q.-C 


A. 


W. H.* 



Alfred Barton Rendle, F.R.S., F.L.S., M.A., D.Sc. 
Keeper of the Department of Botany, British Museum. 

A. E. Houghton. 

Formerly Correspondent of the Standard in Spain. Author of Restoration of the 
Bourbons in Spain. 

Arthur Everett Shipley, F.R.S., M.A., D.Sc. 



\ Botany. 



Cabrera. 



Fellow and Tutor of Christ's College, Cambridge. Reader in Zoology, Cambridge i Brachiopoda. 
University. Joint-editor of the Cambridge Natural History. I 



Albert Frederick Pollard, M.A., F.R.Hist.Soc. 

Professor of English History in the University of London. Fellow of all Souls' 
College, Oxford. Assistant Editor of the Dictionary of National Biography, 1893- 
1901. Lothian Prizeman (Oxford), 1892. Arnold Prizeman, 1898. Author of 
England under the Protector Somerset; Henry VIII.; Thomas Cranmer; &c. 

Rev. Alexander Gordon, M.A. 

Lecturer on Church History in the University of Manchester. 



Bonner; 
Burghley, Baron. 

J Blandrata; Brenz; 
I Buckholdt. 



Arthur Henry Bullen. f 

Founder of the Shakespeare Head Press, Stratford-on-Avon. Editor of Collection "j Burton, Robert. 
of Old English Plays; Lyrics from the Song Books of the Elizabethan Age; &c. I 



Bushire. 



Brooch. 



Sir A. Houtum-Schindler, CLE. 

General in the Persian Army. Author of Eastern Persian Irak. 

Arthur Hamilton Smith, M.A., F.S.A. 

Keeper of the Department of Greek and Roman Antiquities in the British Museum. . 
Member of the Imperial German Archaeological Institute. Author of Catalogue of 
Greek Sculpture in the British Museum ; &c. L 

Rev. Alexander J. Grieve, M.A., B.D. f 

Professor of New Testament and Church History, Yorkshire United Independent -I Butler Bishop (in part). 

College, Bradford. Sometime Registrar of Madras University, and Member of 

Mysore Educational Service. l _ . , _ ,. . _ 

r Bogota; Bolivia: Geography 

Andrew Jackson Lamoureux. _ __ _ __ .._.._ J and Statistics; Brazil: Gee- 



Librarian, College of Agriculture, Cornell University, 
de Janeiro), 18 79-1 901. 



Editor of the Rio News (Rio ' 



graphy and Statistics; 
Buenos Aires. 



Auguste Longnon. 

Professor at the College de France. Director of the Ecole des Hautes Etudes. 
Chevalier of the Legion of Honour. Member of the Institute. Author of Geo- 
graphie de la Gaule au VI. siecle; Documents relatifs au comte de Champagne et de 
Brie; &c. 

Mrs Alice Meynell. 

Author of Poems ; Later Poems ; The Rhythm of Life and other Essays ; &c. 

Miss Agnes Mary Clerke. 

See the biographical article: Clerke, A. M. 

Alfred Newton, F.R.S. 

See the biographical article: Newton, Alfred. 

Alan Summerly Cole, C.B. r 

Formerly Assistant Secretary, Board of Education, South Kensington. Author of J Brocade 
Ornament in European Silks ; Catalogue of Tapestry, Embroidery, Lace and Egyptian 1 
Textiles in Victoria and Albert Museum; &c. 

Sir Arthur T. Quiller-Couch. 

See the biographical article: Quiller-Couch, Sir A. T. 

Arthur William Holland. f Brandenburg: Margr aviate-. 

Formerly Scholar of St John's College, Oxford. Bacon Scholar of Gray's Inn, 1900. \ Burdett, Sir Francis. 

1 A complete list, showing all individual contributors, appears in the final volumvs. 



Blois: Countship of. 

Browning, Elizabeth Barrett 

Brahe, Tycho. 

Bunting; Bustard; 
Buzzard. 



\ Brown, Thomas Edward. 



vi 

A. W. Po. 

A. W. R, 

B. R. 



INITIALS AND HEADINGS OF ARTICLES 



c. 


B. 


* 


c. 


D. 




c. 


D. 


W 


c. 


E. 


* 


c. 


E. 


A. 



Book; 

Book Collecting. 



Editor of Encyclopaedia of the Laws < Boarding-House. 



Bitumen. 



Brequigny. 



Bookbinding. 



C. El. 

C. E. S. 
C. H. 

C. K. S. 
C. L. K. 
C. Pf. 

C. S. S. 

C W. W. 

D. B. Ma. 

D. C. B. 
D. C. T. 
D. F. T. 

D.H. 



Alfred William Pollard, M.A. 

Assistant Keeper of Printed Books, British Museum. Fellow of King's College, 
London. Hon. Secretary, Bibliographical Society. Editor of Books about Books 
and Bibliographica. Joint-editor of The Library. Chief Editor of the " Globe " 
Chaucer. 

Alexander Wood Renton, M.A., LL.B. 

Puisne Judge of the Supreme Court of Ceylon. 
of England. 

Sir Boverton Redwood, D.Sc, F.R.S. (Edin.), F.I.C., Assoc.Inst.C.E., 
M.Inst.M.E. 
Adviser on Petroleum to the Admiralty, Home Office, India Office, Corporation of 
London, and Port of Londpn Authority. President of the Society of Chemical - 
Industry. Member of the Council of the Chemical Society. Member of Council of 
Institute of Chemistry. Author of Cantor Lectures on Petroleum ; Petroleum and its 
Products; Chemical Technology; &c. 

Charles Bemont, D. is. L., Litt.D. (Oxon.). 
See the biographical article : Bemont, C. 

Cyril J. H. Davenport, F.S.A. 

Assistant to the Keeper of Printed Books, British Museum. Cantor Lecturer on 
Decorative Bookbindings, Society of Arts. Author of Royal English Bookbindings ; ' 
English Embroidered Bookbindings ; History of the Book ; &c. 

Hon. Carroll Davidson Wright. 

See the biographical article : Wright, C. D. 

Charles Everitt, M.A., F.C.S., F.G.S., F.R.A.S. 
Formerly Scholar of Magdalen College, Oxford. 

C. E. Akers. 

Formerly The Times Correspondent in Buenos Aires. 
America, 1854-1904. 

Sir Charles Norton Edgcumbe Eliot, K.C.M.G., C.B., M.A., LL.D., D.C.L. f 

Vice-Chancellor of Sheffield University. Formerly Fellow of Trinity College, Oxford. . . . 

H.M.'s Commissioner and Commander-in-Chief for the British East Africa Pro- 1 Bokhara (in part). 
tectorate ; Agent and Consul-General at Zanzibar ; and Consul-General for German 
East Africa, 1900-1904. Author of Turkey in Europe; Letters from the FarEast;&c. '- 

Hon. Charles Emory Smith. 

See the biographical article: Smith, Charles Emory. 

Charles Hose, D.Sc. 

Formerly Divisional Resident and Member of the Supreme Council of Sarawak. . 
Author of A Descriptive Account of the Mammals of Borneo, and numerous papers in 
scientific journals. L 

Cllment King Shorter. f 

Editor of the Sphere. Author of Charlotte Bronte and her Circle; The Brontes : "j Bronte, C, E. and A. 

Life and Letters; &c. L 

Charles Lethbridge Kingsford, M.A., F.R.Hist.S., F.S.A. 

Assistant Secretary to the Board of Education. Author of Life of Henry V. Editor - 

of Chronicles of London and Stow's Survey of London. 

Christian Pfister, D. is. L. 



("Building Societies: United 

\ States. 

\ Bone: Industrial. 



Author of A History of South A Brazil: History (in part). 



Blaine. 



Brunei. 



Buckingham, 2nd Duke of. 



Professor at the Sorbonne, Paris. Chevalier of the Legion of Honour. Author of J u rnn i. sm« 
Atude sur le regne de Robert le Pieux; Le Duche merovingien d' Alsace et la legende de\ Brunnllaa ' 
Saint-Odile. I 



Charles Scott Sherrington, D.Sc, M.D., M.A., LL.D., F.R.S. 1 

Professor of Physiology, University of Liverpool. Foreign Member of Academies J 
of Rome, Vienna, Brussels, Gottingen, &c. Author of The Integrative Action of the] 
Nervous System. 

Major-General Sir Charles William Wilson, K.C.B., K.C.M.G., F.R.S., R.E. 

(1836-1897). 
Secretary to the North American Boundary Commission, 1858-1862. British, 
Commissioner on the Servian Boundary Commission. Director-General of the 
Ordnance Survey, 1886-1894. Director-General of Military Education, 1895- 
1898. Author of From Korti to Khartum; Life of Lord Clive; &c. 

Duncan Black Macdonald, M.A., D.D. 

Professor of Semitic Languages, Hartford Theological Seminary, U.S.A. Author of _ 
Development of Muslim Theology, Jurisprudence and Constitutional Theory ; Selections 
from Ibn Khaldun; Religious Altitude and Life in Islam; &c. 

Demetrius Charles Boulger. 

Author of History of Belgium.; England and Russia in Central Asia; History of - 
China ; Life of Gordon ; India in the 19th Century ; &c. 

David Croal Thomson. 

Formerly Editor of the Art Journal. Author of Tlie Brothers Maris; The Barbizon- 
School of Painters; Life of " Phiz " ; Life of Bewick ; &c. 

Donald Francis Tovey. 

Balrfol College, Oxford. Author of Essays in Musical Analysis: comprising The . 
Classical Concerts, The Goldberg Variations, and analyses of many other classical 
works. 

David Hannay. 

Formerly British Vice-Consul at Barcelona. 
J3iy-i6S8; Life of Emilia Castelar; &c. 



Author of Short History of Royal Navy, 



Brain: Physiology. 



Caesarea Mazaca (in part). 



Bukhara; 
Cadi. 

Bruges; 
Brussels. 

Browne, Hablot Knight. 



Boccherini; 
Bruckner. 

Bouvet; Brenton; 
Brigandage; Buccaneers; 
. Byng; Calderon, Rodrigo. 



INITIALS AND HEADINGS OF ARTICLES 



vu 



D. LI. T. 

D. Mn. 
E.Br. 

E. Ca. 
E. C. B. 



E. 


Es 




E. 


G. 




E. 


H. 


C. 


E. 


H. 


B. 


E. 


H. 


M, 


E. 


K. 





E. L. B. 

E. Ma. 

E. 0.* 
E. Pr. 

E.Wa. 

E. W. B. 

F. By. 

F. D. A. 
F. G. P. 

F.H. 
F. J. C, 



Daniel Lleufer Thomas. 

Stipendiary Magistrate for Pontypridd and Rhondda. Formerly Assistant Com- 
missioner to the Labour Commission and Secretary to the Welsh Land Commission. 

Rev. Dugald Macfadyen, M.A. 

Minister of South Grove Congregational Church, Highgate. Director of the London 
Missionary Society. Author of Constructive Congregational Ideals. 

Ernest Barker, M.A. 

Fellow of, and Lecturer in Modern History at, St John's College, Oxford. 
Fellow and Tutor of Merton College. Craven Scholar, 1895. 

Egerton Castle, M.A., F.S.A. 

Trinity College, Cambridge. Author of English Book Plates ; Bibliotheca Dimicatcria ; 
&c. 

Right Rev. Edward Cuthbert Butler, O.S.B., D.Litt. 
Abbot of Downside Abbey, Bath. 

Edmond Esmonin. 

Edmund Gosse, LL.D. 

See the biographical article : Gosse, Edmund 

Ernest Hartley Coleridge, M.A. 

Balliol College, Oxford. Editor of Byron's Poems; Letters of Samuel Taylor Cole- 
ridge; &c. 

Sir Edward H. Bunbury, Bart., M.A., F.R.G.S. (d. 1895). 

M.P. for Bury St Edmunds, 1847-1852. Author of A History of Ancient Geography; 
&c. 



Brecon; 
Caerphilly. 

("Blaikie; Boston, Thomas; 
1 Bruce, Alexander Balmain; 
L Cairns, John. 



Formerly i Bohemund. 



Book Plates. 



|" Bridgittines; 

■\ Brothers of Common Life; 
•-Bruno, Saint. 

fBombelles, Marc Marie, 
I Marquis de. 
("Bjornson; Blank Verse; 
■j Bouts-Rimes; Bucolics; 
L Busken-Huet. 



Byron. 



H Bithynia (in pari). 



Ellis Hovell Minns, M.A. j" B 0sporus cimmerius* 

Lecturer and Assistant Librarian, and formerly Fellow of Pembroke College, 1 RiifKni ' 

Cambridge. University Lecturer in Palaeography. I BUdlm. 



Bleaching. 



■J Brook Farm. 



Head Master of Eton i Boat. 



Edmund Knecht, Ph.D., F.I.C. 

Professor of Technological Chemistry, Manchester University. Head of Chemical 
Department, Municipal School of Technology, Manchester. Examiner in Dyeing, 
City and Guilds of London Institute. Author of A Manual of Dyeing; &c. Editor 
of Journal of the Society of Dyers and Colourists. 

Edward Livermore Burlingame, A.M., Ph.D. 

Editor of Scribner's Magazine. Formerly on Staff of New York Tribune. 

Edward Manson. 

Barrister-at-Law, Middle Temple. Joint-editor with Sir John Macdonell, C.B., i Bond. 
of the Journal of Comparative Legislation. Author of Law of Trading Companies ; &c. 

Edmund Owen, M.B., F.R.C.S., LL.D., D.Sc. f 

Consulting Surgeon to St Mary's Hospital, London, and to the Children's Hospital, J Bladder and Prostate Diseases; 
Great Ormond Street. Late Examiner in Surgery at the Universities of Cam- 1 Bone: Medical. 
bridge, Durham and London. Author of A Manual of Anatomy for Senior Students. <- 

Edgar Prestage. f 

Special Lecturer in Portuguese Literature in the University of Manchester. Com- J 
mendador, Portuguese Order of S. Thiago. Corresponding Member of Lisbon Royal | Bocage. 
Academy of Sciences, Lisbon Geographical Society, &c. Examiner in Portuguese 
in the University of London, Manchester, &c. *- 

Rev. Edmond Warre, M.A., D.D., D.C.L., C.B., C.V.O. 

Provost of Eton. Hon. Fellow of Balliol College, Oxford. 
College, 1884-1905. Author of Grammar of Rowing; &c. 

Sir Edward William Brabrook, C.B. 

Barrister-at-Law, Lincoln's Inn. Chief Registrar of Friendly Societies, 1891-1904. J Building Societies: 
Author of Building Societies; Provident Societies and Industrial Welfare; Institutions 1 United Kingdom, 
for Thrift ; &c. I 

Frank Brinkley. f 

Captain R.N. Foreign Adviser to Nippon Yusen Kaisha, Tokyo. Correspondent of J p._; n T c i nrl r1 c 
The Times in Japan. Editor of the Japan Mail. Formerly Professor of Mathe- com " «««*nua. 
matics at Imperial Engineering College, Tokyo. Author of Japan ; &c. I 

Frank Dawson Adams, D.Sc, Ph.D., F.R.S., F.G.S. [ 

Dean of the Faculty of Applied Science, and Logan Professor of Geology, McGill { British Columbia (in part). 
University, Montreal. President of Canadian Mining Institute. I 

Frederick Gymer Parsons, F.R.C.S., F.Z.S., F.R.Anthrop.Inst. 

Vice-President, Anatomical Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Lecturer on 
Anatomy at St Thomas's Hospital and the London School of Medicine for Women. -! Brain: Anatomy. 
Formerly Examiner in the Universities of Cambridge, Aberdeen, London and Bir- 
mingham; and Hunterian Professor at the Royal College of Surgeons. 

Francis Hueffer, Ph.D. (1845-1899). 

Formerly Musical Critic of The Times.- Author of The Troubadours: a History of ^ 
Provencal Life and Literature in the Middle Ages; Richard Wagner and the Music of' 
the Future. Editor of Great Musicians. 

Sir Francis J. Campbell, LL.D., F.R.G.S., F.S.A. 

Principal, Royal Normal College for the Blind, Norwood, London. 
Papers on the Education of the Blind. 



Boccaccio. 



Author oi\ Blindness. 



Vlll 

F. J* M. 
F. LI. G. 



INITIALS AND HEADINGS OF ARTICLES 



F. 


L. 


L. 


F. 


R. 


C. 


F. 


R. 


M. 


F. 


We. 


F. 


W 


Ha 


F. 


W 


M. 


G. 


A. 


B. 



G. E. 

G. F. Z. 
G. G. P.* 
G. L. G. 

G. M. D. 



G. 


T. G. 


G. 


W. Ca. 


G. 


W. T. 


H. 


Br. 


H. 


Ch. 


H. 


CI. 



H. De. 
H. Fr. 
H. H. J. 
H. M. C. 



Francis John Haverfield, M.A., LL.D., F.S.A. 

Camden Professor of Ancient History in the University of Oxford. Fellow of 
Brasenose College. Fellow of the British Academy. Formerly Censor, Student, 
Tutor and Librarian of Christ Church, Oxford. Ford's Lecturer, 1906-1907. Author 
of Monographs on Roman History, especially Roman Britain ; &c. 

Francis Llewelyn Griffith, M.A., Ph.D., F.S.A. 

Reader in Egyptology, Oxford University. Editor of the Archaeological Survey and 
Archaeological Reports of the Egypt Exploration Fund. Hon. Member of ^Imperial 
German Archaeological Institute, the Societe Asiatique, and the Institut Egyptien, 
Cairo. Author of Stones of the High Priests of Memphis; Catalogue of the Demotic 
Papyri in the Rylands Collection, Manchester ; &c. 

Lady Lugard. 

See the biographical article: Lugard, Sir F. J. D. 

Frank R. Cana. 

Author of South Africa from the Great Trek to the Union. 

Francis Richard Maunsell, C.M.G. 

Lieut. -Col. R.A. Military Vice-Consul, Sivas, Trebizond, Van (Kurdistan), 1897- 
1898. Military Attache, British Embassy, Constantinople, 1901-1905. Author of 
Central Kurdistan ; &c. 

Frederick Wedmore. 

See the biographical article : Wedmore, F. 

Frederick William Hasluck, M.A. 

Assistant Director, British School of Archaeology, 
College, Cambridge. Browne's Medallist, 1901. 

Frederick William Maitland, LL.D. 

See the biographical article: Maitland, F. W. 

George A. Boulenger, D.Sc, Ph.D., F.R.S. 

In charge of the Collections of Reptiles and Fishes, Department of Zoology, British ' 
Museum. Vice-President of the Zoological Society of London. 

Rev. George Edmundson, M.A., F.R.Hist.S. [Bolivia: History {in part)] 

Formerly Fellow and Tutor of Brasenose College, Oxford. Ford's Lecturer, 1909- J Brabant: Duchy 
1910. Employed by British Government in preparation of the British Case in the | D ra7 :i. it- < /• h ,\ 



Boadicea; 

Britain: Pre- Roman and 

Roman; 
Caerleon; Caledonia. 



Bubastis; 

Busiris; 

Buto. 



J Bornu; 

I British Empire. 

4 British East Africa. 



Bitlis. 



Boudin. 



Athens. Fellow of King's -j Bithynia (in part). 

{' 



Bracton. 



Caecilia. 



{ 



Bread. 



Burial and Burial Acts. 



Blood: Pathology of the. 



British Columbia (in part). 



British Guiana-Venezuelan and British Guiana-Brazilian boundary arbitrations. 

G. F. Zimmer, A.M.Inst.CE., F.Z.S. 

Author of Mechanical Handling of Material. 

George Grenville Phillimore, M.A., B.C.L. 

Christ Church, Oxford. Barrister-at-Law, Middle Temple. 

George Lovell Gulland, M.A., M.D., F.R.C.P. (Edin.). 

Assistant Physician to the Royal Infirmary, Edinburgh. Lecturer on Medicine at 
Surgeons' Hall, Edinburgh. 

George Mercer Dawson, LL.D., F.R.S. 

Formerly Director of the Geological Survey of Canada. Geologist and Naturalist 
to H.M. North American Boundary Commission, 1873-1875; one of H.M. Bering 
Sea Commissioners, 1891. Author of numerous scientific and technical reports 
printed by the Canadian Government. 

Sir George D. Taubman Goldie. 

See the biographical article: Goldie, Sir G. D. T. 

George Washington Cable. 

See the biographical article: Cable, G. W. 

Rev. Griffithes Wheeler Thatcher, M.A., B.D. r 

Warden of Camden College, Sydney, N.S.W. Formerly Tutor in Hebrew and J Buhturl; 
Old Testament History at Mansfield College, Oxford. 1 Buslrl. 

Henry Bradley, M.A., Ph.D. r 

Joint-editor of the New English Dictionary (Oxford). Fellow of the British Academy. J Caedmon. 
Author of The Story of the Goths; The Making of English; &c. 1 

Hugh Chisholm, M.A. r Boulanger 

Formerly Scholar of Corpus Christi College, Oxford. Editor of the nth Edition of -j oriJomtn ' T aura n 
the Encyclopaedia Britannica. Co-editor of the 10th edition. I BrlQ S man > Liaura U. 



-T 



Brazza, Count de. 



\ Bryant, William Cullen. 



Sir Hugh Charles Clifford, K. C.M.G. 

Colonial Secretary, Ceylon. Fellow of the Royal Colonial Institute. Formerly 
Resident, Pahang. Colonial Secretary, Trinidad and Tobago, 1903-1907. Author- 
of Studies in Brown Humanity; Further India; &c. Joint-author of A Dictionary 
of the Malay Language. 

Rev. Hippolyte Delehaye, S.J. 

Bollandist. Joint-editor of the Acta Sanctorum. 



Borneo. 



Henri Frantz. 

Art Critic, Gazette des Beaux Arts (Paris). 

Sir Henry Hamilton Johnston, K.C.B., G.C.M.G. 
See the biographical article: Johnston, Sir H. H. 

Hector Munro Chad wick, M.A. 

Fellow and Librarian of Clare College Cambridge. 
Saxon Institutions. 



j Bollandists. 

J Bocklin; 
LBonheur, Rosa. 

\ British Central Africa. 



Author of Studies on Anglo- 



\ Britain: 

1 



Anglo-Saxon. 



H. 


. P. B. 


H. 


S.J. 


H. 


W. C. D, 


H. 


W. S. 


J. 


A. F. M. 



J. 


, G. 


C. A, 


J. 


G. 


H. 


J. 


G. 


Sc. 


J. 


H. 


R. 


J. 


HI 


. R. 


J. 


J.* 


J. 


M. 


M. 


J. 


Mo. 






* 


J. 


N. 




J. 


P.- 


B. 


J. 


P. 


Pe. 



INITIALS AND HEADINGS OF ARTICLES ix 

Henry Percival Biggar. - J 

Author of The Voyages of the Cabots to Greenland. \ Cabot, John. 

Henry Stuart Jones, M.A. r 

Formerly Fellow and Tutor of Trinity College, Oxford, and Director of the British J p ae . np t..v 
School at Rome. Member of the German Imperial Archaeological Institute. 1 oaesar > JuuUS. 
Author of The Roman Empire ; &c. I 

Henry William Carless Davis, M.A. f Bohun; 

Fellow and Tutor of Balliol College, Oxford. Fellow of All Souls' College, Oxford, < Breaute, Falkes de; 
1895-1902. Author of Charlemagne; England under the Normans and Angevins; &c. Burgh Hubert de. 

H. Wickham Steed. f 

Correspondent of The Times at Rome (1897-1902) and Vienna. 1 Bonghi, RuggerO. 

John Alexander Fuller Maitland, M.A., F.S.A. f 

Musical Critic of The Times. Author of Life of Schumann; The Musician's Pilgrim- 
age; Masters of German Music; English Music in the Nineteenth Century; The Age\ Brahms. 
of Bach and Handel. Editor of the new edition of Grove's Dictionary of Music 
and Musicians; &c. "-- 

J. A. H. John Allen Howe, B.Sc. ■ J Bunter; 

Curator and Librarian, Museum of Practical Geology, London. 1 Cainozoic. 

J. A. M. James Alexander Manson. r 

Formerly Literary Editor of the Daily Chronicle. Author of The Bowler's Handbook ; -I Bowls. 
&c. [ 

J. B.* Joseph Burton. J" uric* (in part). 

Partner in Pilkington's Tile and Pottery Co., Clifton Junction, Manchester. 1 

J. Bt. James Bartlett. f „ . . . 

Lecturer on Construction, Architecture, Sanitation, Quantities, &c, King's College, J BrlCKWOrK, 
London. Member of Society of Architects, Institute of Junior Engineers, Quantity 1 Building. 
Surveyors' Association. Author of Quantities. I 

J.C.C. J. W Comyns-Carr. J Blak wmiam> 

Author of Essays on Art; &c. [. 

J. D. B. James David Bourchier, M.A., F.R.G.S. r 

Correspondent of The Times in South-Eastern Europe. Commander of the Orders J _ , 

of Prince Danilo of Montenegro and of the Saviour of Greece, and Officer of the ] Bulgaria. 

Order of St Alexander of Bulgaria. I 

J. E. H. Julius Eggeling, Ph.D. [nrahman. n-ohmano. 

Professor of Sanskrit and Comparative Philology, Edinburgh University. Formerly -I ° ra J| man » Branmana, 
Secretary and Librarian to Royal Asiatic Society. (_ Branmanism. 

3. F.-K. James Fitzmaurice-Kelly, Litt.D., F.R.Hist.S. (" 

Gilmour Professor of Spanish Language and Literature, Liverpool University. I Breton de lOS HerrerOS; 

Norman MacColl Lecturer, Cambridge University. Fellow of the British Academy. 1 Caballero; 

Knight Commander of the Order of Alphonso XII. Author of A History of Spanish Calderon de la Barca 

Literature; &c. *- 

John George Clark Anderson, M.A. f 

Censor and Tutor of Christ Church, Oxford. Formerly Fellow of Lincoln College, -j Caesarea Mazaca (in part). 
Craven Fellow (Oxford), 1896. Conington Prizeman, 1893. L 

Joseph G. Horner, A.M.I.Mech.E. J Boiler; Boiler-making; 

Author of Plating and Boiler Making; Practical Metal Turning; &c. 1 Brazing and Soldering. 

Sir James George Scott, K.C.I. E. f 

Superintendent and Political Officer, Southern Shan States. Author of Burma ; 1 Burma. 
The Upper Burma Gazetteer. 

John Horace Round, M.A., LL.D. (Edin.). J 

Author of Feudal England; Studies in Peerage and Family History; Peerage and] Burgh. 
Pedigree; &c. [_ 

John Holland Rose, M.A., Litt.D. r 

Christ's College, Cambridge. Lecturer on Modern History to the Cambridge Uni- J Bonaparte: Family (in part). 
versity Local Lectures Syndicate. Author of Life of Napoleon I. ; Napoleonic 1 Bourrienne 
Studies; The Development of the European Nations; The Life of Pitt; &c. [ 

Joseph Jefferson. r . 

See the biographical article: Jefferson, J. \ Booth, Edwin. 

John Malcolm Mitchell. ^Boule* 

Sometime Scholar of Queen's College, Oxford. Lecturer in Classics, East London i ' . 

College (University of London). Joint-editor of Grote's History of Greece. I Br««0, Giordano (in part). 

Viscount Morley of Blackburn. J T> llr fc rj mlln j 

See the biographical article: Morley, Viscount. \ BurKe > MmBMl 

John Nichol. { n „_ c „„. , 

See the biographical article: Nichol, John. ^ Burns, KODeri. 

James George Joseph Penderel-Brodhurst. ("Bookcase; Boulle; 

Editor of the Guardian (London). \ Cabinet: Furniture. 

Rev. John Punnett Peters, Ph.D., D.D. f 

Canon Residentiary, Cathedral of New York. Formerly Professor of Hebrew in j Bismya; 
the University of Pennsylvania. Director of the University Expedition to Baby- "j Borsippa; 
Ionia, 1888-1895. Author of Nippur, or Explorations and Adventures on the Calah. 
Euphrates; Scriptures. Hebrew and Christian. ' <■ 



X 

J. S. F. 

J. T. M. 

J. T. S.* 
J. W. D. 

J. W. He. 

K. G. J. 

K. J. 

K. S. 
L. 

L. B. 
L. D.* 
L. F. S. 
L. F. V.-H. 

L. G. 
L. J. S. 

L. R. D. 

L. S. 
L. V.* 



INITIALS AND HEADINGS OF ARTICLES 



M. 




M. 


Bat. 


M. 


Br. 


M. 


G. 



John Smith Flett, D.Sc, F.G.S. 

Petrographer to the Geological Survey. Formerly Lecturer on Petrology in . 
Edinburgh University. Neill Medallist of the Royal Society of Edinburgh* Bigsby 
Medallist of the Geological Society of London. 

James Tayler Milton, M.I.C.E. 

Chief Engineer Surveyor to Lloyd's Registry of Shipping. Vice-President, Institute 
-of Naval Architects. Member of Council, Institute of Marine Engineers. Author 
of many papers on Marine Engineering subjects. 

James Thomson Shotwell, Ph.D. 

Professor of History in Columbia University, New York City. 

Captain J. Whitly Dixon, R.N. 

Nautical Assessor to Court of Appeal since 1906. Formerly Staff Commander, 
Medway Fleet Reserve. 

James Wycliffe Headlam, M.A. 

Staff Inspector of Secondary Schools under the Board of Education. Formerly 
Fellow of King's College, Cambridge. Professor of Greek and Ancient History at 
Queen's College, London. Author of Bismarck and the Foundation of the German 
Empire; &c. 

Kingsley Garland Jayne. 

Sometime Scholar of Wadham College, Oxford. 
Author of Vasco da Gama and his Successors. 



J Borolanite; 
1 Breccia. 

' Boiler. 



Boniface, Saint. 

Buoy; 
Cable. 



Matthew Arnold Prizeman, 1903, 



A. Keith Johnston. 

See the biographical article: Johnston, A. K. 

Kathleen Schlesinger. 

Author of The Instruments of the Orchestra ; &c. 

Count Lutzow, Litt.D. (Oxon.), Ph.D. (Prague), F.R.G.S. 

Chamberlain of H.M. the Emperor of Austria, King of Bohemia. Hon. Member 
of the Royal Society of Literature. Member of the Bohemian Academy, &c. 
Author of Bohemia: An Historical Sketch; The Historians of Bohemia (Ilchester 
Lecture, Oxford, 1904) ; The Life and Times of John Hus; &c. 

Laurence Binyon. 

See the biographical article : Binyon, L. 

Louis Duchesne. 

See the biographical article: Duchesne, L. M. O. 

Leslie Frederic Scott, K.C., M.A. 

New College, Oxford. Joint Hon. Secretary of International Maritime Committee. 

Leveson Francis Vernon-Harcourt, M.A., M.Inst.CE. (1839-1907). f 

Professor of Civil Engineering at University College, London, 1882-1905. British J Breakwater; 
Member of Jury for Civil Engineering, Paris Exhibition, 1900. Author of Rivers I Caisson. 
and Canals; Harbours and Docks; Civil Engineering as Applied in Construction; &c. *- 



Bismarck; 
Bucher, Lothar. 

/Bosnia and Herzegovina; 
1 British Honduras. 

-j Brazil: History (in part). 

Bombardon; Bow; 
Buccina; Bugle; 
Bumbulum. 

Bohemia: History and Litero 
lure. 



Burne-Jones, Sir E. B. 
Boniface (Popes I.-VII.). 
Broker. 



Laurence Ginnell, M.P. 

Barrister, Middle Temple and Irish Bar. Author of Brehon Laws; Land and Liberty; ' 
&c. M.P. for North Westmeath since 1906. 

Leonard James Spencer, M.A. 

Assistant in Department of Mineralogy, Natural History Museum, South Kensington. 
Formerly Scholar of Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, and Harkness Scholar. - 
Editor of the Mineralogical Magazine. Author of English translations of M. Bauer's 
Precious Stones and R. Brauns's Mineral Kingdom. 

Lawrence Robert Dicksee, M.Com. (Birmingham), F.C.A. 

Lecturer, London School of Economics and Political Science. Formerly Professor 
of Accounting at Birmingham University. Author of Auditing; Advanced Account-' 
ing; Book-keeping; &c. 

Sir Leslie Stephen, K.C.B. 

See the biographical article: Stephen, Sir L. 

Luigi Villari. 

Italian Foreign Office (Emigration Department). Formerly Newspaper Corre- 
spondent in East of Europe. Italian Vice-Consul in New Orleans, 1906; Phil-, 
adelphia, 1907; and Boston, U.S.A., 1907-1910. Author of Italian Life in Town 
and Country ; Giovanni Segantini ; Russia under the Great Shadow ; Fire and Sword 
in the Caucasus ; &c. 

Lord Macaulay. 

See the biographical article: Macaulay, T. B. M., Baron. 

Miss Mary Bateson (1865-1906). 

Formerly Fellow of Newnham College, Cambridge. Author of Medieval England; 
Borough Customs; &c. 

Miss Margaret Bryant. 

Moses Gaster, Ph.D. (Leipzig). 

Chief Rabbi of the Sephardic Communities of England. Vice-President, Zionist 
Congress, 1898, 1899, 1900. Ilchester Lecturer at Oxford on Slavonic and By- 
zantine Literature, 1886 and 1891. President, Folklore Society of England. 
Vice-President, Anglo-Jewish Association. Author of History of Rumanian 
Popular Literature; A New Hebrew Fragment of Ben-Sira; The Hebrew Version of 
the Secretum Secretorum of Aristotle. 



Brehon Laws. 

Bismuthite; Blende; 
Boracite; Bournonite; 
Brochantite; Bromlite; 
Bronzite; Brookite; 
Brucite; Bytownite; 
Calamine; Calcite. 

Book-keeping. 



Browning, Robert. 



Borgia, Cesare; 
Borgia, Lucrezia; 
Cagliostro. 



j Bunyan, John. 



Borough: English. 
■I Caesar: Medieval Legends. 



Bogomils; 
Brancovan. 



INITIALS AND HEADINGS OF ARTICLES 



XI 



M.P.* 



M. St J. 
N. W. T. 



0.8a. 

O.Br. 
0. H. 

P. A. K. 
P. C. M. 



P. C. Y. 
P. Si. 

P. G. K. 
P.S. 

P. W. C. 



R. 


A.* 




R. Ad. 




R. 


A. S. 


M 


R. 


G. 




R. 


LP. 




R. 


J.M. 




R. 


L.* 




R. 


N. 8. 





Leon Jacques Maxime Prinet. r 

Formerly Archivist to the French National Archives. Auxiliary of the Institute of T> r : _„ i. rJiSfoon. 
France (Academy of Moral and Political Sciences). Author of V Industrie du sel en\ » r |enne-ie-onaieaU, 
Franche-Comte; Les Armoiries ecarteles des conjoints; Francois I et le comte de Bour- Wrissac, Dukes Of. 
gogne. L 

Molyneux St John. -J British Columbia: {in part). 

Northcote Whitbridge Thomas, M.A. C 

Government Anthropologist to Southern Nigeria. Corresponding Member of the | Tj nnmBr _ 
Societe d' Anthropologic de Paris. Author of Thought Transference ; Kinship and "1 -Boomerang. 
Marriage in A ustralia ; &c. 



Oswald Barron, F.S.A. 

Hon. Genealogist to Standing Council of the Honourable Society of the Baronetage. 
Editor of the Ancestor, 1902-1905. 

Oscar Briliant. 

Olaus Magnus Friedrich Henrici, Ph.D., LL.D., F.R.S. 

Professor of Mechanics and Mathematics in the Central Technical College of the City . 
and Guilds of London Institute. Author of Vectors and Rotors; Congruent Figures; 
&c. 

Prince Peter Alexeivitch Kropotkin. 

See the biographical article : Kropotkin, P. A. 

Peter Chalmers Mitchell, M.A., D.Sc, LL.D., F.R.S. 

Secretary to the Zoological Society of London. University Demonstrator in Com- 
parative Anatomy and Assistant to Linacre Professor at Oxford, 1888-1891. 
Lecturer on Biology at Charing Cross Hospital, 1892-1894; at London Hospital, 
1894. Examiner in Biology to the Royal College of Physicians, 1892-1896, 1901- 
1903. Examiner in Zoology to the University of London, 1903. 



Philip Chesney Yorke, M.A. 
Magdalen College, Oxford. 



Peter Giles, M.A., LL.D., Litt.D. 

Fellow and Classical Lecturer of Emmanuel College, Cambridge, and University 
Reader in Comparative Philology. Late Secretary of the Cambridge Philological 
Society. Author of Manual of Comparative Philology; &c. 

Paul G. Konody. 

Art Critic of the Observer and the Daily Mail. Formerly Editor of the Artist. • 
Author of The Art of Walter Crane; Velasquez, Life and Work; &c. 

Philip Schidrowitz, Ph.D., F.C.S. 

Member of Council, Institute of Brewing. Member of Committee of Society of '_ 
Chemical Industry. Author of numerous articles on the Chemistry and Technology 
of Brewing, Distilling, &c. 

Peter William Clayden (d. 1902). 

Formerly President, Institute of Journalists, London. Literary Editor of the 
Daily News. Author of Scientific Men and Religious Teachers; England under Lord- 
Beaconsfield; Early Life of Samuel Rogers; Rogers and his Contemporaries; England 
under the Coalition; &c. 



Butler: Family. 



J Bohemia: Geography and 
I Statistics; Budapest. 

Calculating Machines. 

("Bokhara: (in part); 
\ Bulgaria: Eastern. 



Breeds and Breeding. 



Boleyn, Anne; Bolingbroke; 

Bothwell; 

Bristol, 1st and 2nd Earls of; 

Buckingham, 1st Duke of 

(in part) ; 
Buckingham, 2nd Duke of. 



Bordone. 



Brandy; 
Brewing. 



Bright, John. 



Robert Anchel. 

Archivist to the Department de l'Eure. 

Robert Adamson, LL.D. 

See the biographical article : Adamson, R. 

Robert Alexander Stewart Macalister, M.A., F.S.A. 

St John's College, Cambridge. Director of Excavations for the Palestine 
tion Fund. 

Richard Garnett, LL.D. 

See the biographical article: Garnett, R. 

R. I. Pocock, F.Z.S. 

Superintendent of the Zoological Gardens, London. 

Ronald John McNeill, M.A. r 

Christ Church, Oxford. Barrister-at-Law. Formerly Editor of St James's Gazette, -\ Bunker Hill. 
London. 



fBoissy D' Anglais, Francois 
1 Antoine de. 

f Bonaventura, Saint; 
-j Bruno, Giordano (in part) ; 
I Butler, Bishop (in part). 
(" Bozrah; 
Explora- j Caesarea Palaestina; 
L Caesarea Philippi. 



{ 



Burton, John Hill. 



f Book-Scorpion; 

I Caddis-Fly and Caddis- Worm. 



Richard Lydekker, F.R.S., F.L.S. 

Member of Staff of Geological Survey of India, 1874-1882. Author of Catalogues of' 
Fossil Mammals, Reptiles and Birds in British Museum ; &c. 

Robert Nisbet Bain (d. 1909). 

Assistant Librarian, British Museum, 1883-1909. Author of Scandinavia: the 
Political History of Denmark, Norway and Sweden, 15 13-1900; The First Romanovs, < 
16 1 j to 1725; Slavonic Europe: the Political History of Poland and Russia from 1469 
to 1796; &c. 



Bison; 

Bovidae; 

Buffalo. 

Bocskay, Stephen; 
Boris Fedorovich Godunov; 
Boyar; Brahe, Per; 
Buslaev, Fedor Ivanovich. 



Xll 
R. P.* 
R. Po. 

S. A. C. 



S. C. 
StC. 
S. H. V.* 

S. L.-P. 



S. R. G. 



T. AS. 



T. Ba. 

T. G. Br. 
T. H. H.* 

T. Se. 

T. W.-D. 
T. W. R. D. 



W. A. B. C. 

W. A. P. 
W. B.* 
W. B. S.* 



Cain; 
Caleb. 



INITIALS AND HEADINGS OF ARTICLES 

Robert Peele. /Blasting; 

Professor of Mining in Columbia University, New York. \ Boring. 

Rene Poupardin, D. es L. r 

Secretary to the Ecole des Chartes. Honorary Librarian to the Bibliotheque J 
Nationale. Author of Le Royaume de Bourgogne; Le Royaume de Provence sous les\ Burgundy, 
Carolingiens ; &c. [_ 

Stanley Arthur Cook, M.A. 

Lecturer in Hebrew and Syriac, and formerly Fellow, Gonville and Caius College, 
Cambridge. Editor for Palestine Exploration Fund. Examiner in Hebrew 
and Aramaic, London University, 1904-1908. Council of Royal Asiatic Society, 
1904-1905. Author of Glossary of Aramaic Inscriptions; The Laws of Moses and 
the Code of Hammurabi; Critical Notes on Old Testament History; Religion of Ancient 
Palestine; &c. 

Sidney Colvin, M.A., Litt.D. 

See the biographical article: Colvin, Sidney. 

Viscount St Cyres. 

See the biographical article: Iddesleigh: ist Earl of. 

Sydney Howard Vines, M.A., D.Sc, F.R.S., F.L.S. 

Sherardian Professor of Botany, Oxford University. Fellow of Magdalen College. 
Author of Lectures on the Physiology of Plants ; Text-Book of Botany ; &c. 

Stanley Lane-Poole, M.A., Litt.D. 

Formerly Professor of Arabic, Dublin University, and Examiner in the University 
of Wales. Corresponding Member of the Imperial Russian Archaeological Society. 
Member of the Khedivial Commission for the Preservation of the Monuments of 1 
Arab Art, &c. Author of Life of Lord Stratford de Redcliffe; Life of Sir Harry I 
Parkes ; Cairo ; Turkey ; &c. Editor of The Koran ; The Thousand and One Nights ; &c. [ 



Botticelli. 



Bossuet. 



{Brongniart, Adolphe 
Theodore. 



Burton, Sir Richard Francis. 



Samuel Rawson Gardiner, LL.D., D.C.L. 

See the biographical article: Gardiner, S. R. 



Thomas Ashby, M.A., D.Litt. (Oxon.). 

Director of British School of Archaeology at Rome. Member of the Imperial 
German Archaeological Institute. Formerly Scholar of Christ Church, Oxford. 
Craven Fellow, 1897. Conington Prizeman, 1906. Author of The Classical 
Topography of the Roman Campagna. 



Sir Thomas Barclay, M.P. 

Member of the Institute of International Law. Member of the Supreme Council 
of the Congo Free State. Officer of the Legion of Honour. Author of Problems of 
International Practice and Diplomacy; &c. M.P. for Blackburn, 1910. 



Author of Essentials 



Thomas Gregor Brodie, M.D., F.R.S. 

Professor of Physiology in the University of Toronto. 
Experimental Physiology. 

Sir Thomas Hungerford Holdich, K.C.M.G., K.C.I. E., D.Sc. 

Superintendent, Frontier Surveys, India, 1892-1898. Gold Medallist, R.G.S., 
London, 1887. Author of The Indian Borderland; The Countries of the King's 
Award; India; Tibet; &c. 



f Buckingham, 1st Duke of (it, 
I part). 

Bologna; Bolsena; Bononia; 

Borgo San Donnino; 

Bovianum; Bovillae; 

Bracciano; Brescia; 

Brindisi; Brundisium; 

Bruttli; Caere; Cagli; 

Cagliari; Caietae Portus; 
I Calabria. 

Blockade. 



Anatomy and 
Physiology. 



f Blood 



Bolan Pass; 
Brahmaputra. 



Thomas Seccombe, M.A. r 

Lecturer in History, East London and Birkbeck Colleges, University of London. ) Boswell. 
Stanhope Prizeman, Oxford, 1887. . Assistant Editor of Dictionary of National"] 
Biography, 1891-1901. Author of The Age of Johnson; &c. I 

Theodore Watts-Dunton. 



See the biographical article: Watts-Dunton, T. 

T. W. Rhys Davids, LL.D., Ph.D. 

Professor of Comparative Religion, Manchester University. President of the Pali 
Text Society. Fellow of the British Academy. Secretary and Librarian of Royal . 
Asiatic Society, 1885-1902. Author of Buddhism; Sacred Books of the Buddhists 
Early Buddhism; Buddhist India; Dialogues of the Buddha; &c. 



Rev. William Augustus Brevoort Coolidge, M.A., F.R.G.S., Ph.D. (Bern). 
Fellow of Magdalen College, Oxford. Professor of English History, ,St David's 
College, Lampeter, 1880-1881. Author of Guide du Haul Dauphine; The Range of i 
the Todi; Guide to Grindelwald ; Guide to Switzerland; The Alps in Nature and in 
History; &c. Editor of the Alpine Journal, 1880-1889, &c. 



Borrow. 



Buddha; 

Buddhaghosa; 

Buddhism. 

Bitzius; Blane, Mont; 
Bonstetten; Botzen; 
Bourrit; Bregenz; 
Brenner Pass; Briancon; 
Brieg; Brienz, Lake of; 
Brignoles; Brixen; 
Burckhardt, Jakob; Burgdofi 

Bishop; 
Brunhild. 



Walter Alison Phillips, M.A. 

Formerly Exhibitioner of Merton College and Senior Scholar of St John's College, . 
Oxford. Author of Modern Europe; &c. 

William Burton, M.A., F.C.S. r 

Chairman, Joint Committee of Pottery Manufacturers of Great Britain. Author of J Brick (in part). 
English Stoneware and Earthenware ; &c. [ 

William Barclay Squire, M.A., F.S.A., F.R.G.S. r 

Assistant in charge of Printed Music, British Museum. Hon. Secretary of the J g vr fl 
Purcell Society. Formerly Musical Critic of Westminster Gazette, Saturday Review 1 * * 
and Globe. Editor of Byrd's Masses. L 



INITIALS AND HEADINGS OF ARTICLES 



X1U 



w 


c. 


S. 


w 


c. 


U. 


w. 


Hd. 


w. 


H. 


L. 


w. 


H. 


W.* 


w. 


J. 


H.* 


w. 


L. 




w. 


L. 


6. 


w. 


L. 


R. C. 


w. 


M. 


R. 


w. 


R. 


L. 


w. 


S. 


J. 


w. 


Wr. 


w. 


W 


F.* 


w. 


W 


R.* 



William Charles Smith, K.C., M.A., LL.D. 

Formerly Sheriff of Ross, Cromarty and Sutherland. Editor of Judicial Review, - 
1889-1900. 

William Cawthorne Unwin, LL.D., F.R.S., M.Inst.C.E., M.Inst.M.E., 
A.R.I B.A. . 

Emeritus Professor of Engineering, Central Technical College, City and Guilds of 
London Institute. Author of Wrought Iron Bridges and Roofs ; Treatise on Hydraulics. I 

Wilfranc Hubbard. f_ ,. . TT . 1 ,. ^ A 

Correspondent of The Times in Rome. j Bolivia: History (in part). 

William H. Lang, D.Sc. f 

Barker Professor of Cryptogamic Botany, University of Manchester. Author of . 
Papers on Botanical Subjects, including Morphology and life history of Bryophyta, 
Pteridophyta and Gymnosperms, in scientific journals. 

William Henry Whitfeld, M.A. 

Trinity College, Cambridge. Card Editor of the Field. 

W. J. Hughan. 

Past Senior Grand Deacon of Freemasons of England, 1874. Hon. Senior Warden - 
of Grand Lodges of Egypt, Quebec and Iona, &c. 

Right Rev. William Lawrence, D.D., LL.D. 

Bishop of Massachusetts. Author of Study of Phillips Brooks; Life of Roger - 
Wolcotl; &c. 

William Lawson Grant, M.A. f 

Professor of Colonial History, Queen's University, Kingston, Canada. Formerly J ' 
Beit Lecturer in Colonial History, Oxford University. Editor of Acts of the Privy 1 1 
Council (Canadian Series). I 

William Liest Readwin Cates (1821-1895). 

Editor of Dictionary of General Biography. Author of A History of England from 
the Death of Edward the Confessor to the Death of King John. Part author of Encyclo- 
paedia of Chronology. 

William Michael Rossetti. 

See the biographical article: Rossetti, Dante Gabriel. 



Borough: Irish and Scottish. 



Bridges. 



Bryophyta. 
Bridge: Game. 
Builders' Rites. 



Brooks, Phillips. 



Brock, Sir Isaac; 
Brown, George. 



Boscovich. 



W. R. Lethaby, F.S.A. 

Principal of the Central School of Arts and Crafts under the London County Council. 
Author of Architecture, Mysticism and Myth; &c. 

William Stanley Jevons. LL.D. 

See the biographical article: Jevons, William Stanley. 

Williston Walker, Ph.D., D.D. 

Professor of Church History, Yale University. Author of History of the Congrega- 
tional Churches in the United States; The Reformation; John Calvin; &c. [_ 

William Warde Fowler, M.A. f 

Fellow of Lincoln College, Oxford. Sub-Rector, 1881-1904. Gifford Lecturer, J Bona Dea. 
Edinburgh University, 1908. Author of The City-State of the Greeks and Romans; 1 
The Roman Festivals of the Republican Period ; &c. I 

William Walker Rockwell, Lie. Theol. J" ij on jf aee (p n e s VIII.-IX.). 

Assistant Professor of Church History, Union Theological Seminary, New York. \ "' 



Brown, Ford Madox. 

Byzantine Art. 

Boole. 

Bushnell, Horace. 



PRINCIPAL UNSIGNED ARTICLES 



Bismuth. 

Bizet, Georges. 

Black Sea. 

Blackstone. 

Blake, Robert. 

Blanc, Louis. 

Blasphemy. 

Blenheim. 

Blowpipe. 

Blucher. 

Bliintschli. 

Bockh. 

Boehme. 

Boeotia. 

Boetius. 

Boileau-Despreaux. 

Bolivar. 

Bombay. 

Bonn. 

Bonnet, Charles. 

Bookselling. 

Bopp. 

Boraginaceae. 

Bordeaux. 

Borders, The. 



Boric Acid. 

Boron. 

Borromeo. 

Boston. 

Bptocudos. 

Bottomry. 

Bouguereau. 

Bourbon. 

Bourges. 

Bourget. 

Bow-Leg. 

Bowling. 

Bowring, Sir John. 

Boxing. 

Boyle, Robert. 

Bracelet. 

Brackley. 

Bradford. 

Bradlaugh, Charles. 

Brahma Samaj. 

Brake. 

Brandes. 

Brassey. 

Breadalbane. 

Bread-Fruit. 



Breconshire. 

Bremen. 

Breslau. 

Brest. 

Bretschneider. 

Breviary. 

Brewster, Sir David. 

Bribery. 

Brisbane. 

Bristol. 

Brittany. 

Broglie, de. 

Bromine. 

Bronchitis. 

Bronze. 

Brooke, Fulke Greville. 

Brooke, Sir James. 

Brooklyn. 

Brougham. 

Brown, John. 

Browne, Sir Thomas. 

Brunei. 

Brunswick. 

Brush. 

Brutus. 



Bryan, William J. 
Buchanan, George. 
Buchanan, James. 
Bucharest. 
Buckingham, Earls, 

Marquesses and 

Dukes of. 
Buckinghamshire. 
Buckle. 
Budget. 

Buffalo, U.S.A. 
Buffon, G. L. E., Comte 

de. 
Bull-Fighting. 
Bull Run. 
Bttlow, Prince von. 
Bunsen, C. C. J., Baron 

von. 
Bunsen, Robert Wilhelm 

von. 
iurdett-Coutts, 

Baroness. 
Burglary. 
Burgos. 
Burmese Wars. 



Burnet, Gilbert. 

Burney, Charles. 

Burr, Aaron. 

Bushmen. 

Bute. 

Butler, Benjamin 

Franklin. 
Butler, Samuel. 
Button. 
Buxton. 

Buxtorf, Johannes. 
Byzantium. 
Cab. 

Cabbage. 

Cabinet (Political). 
Cactus. 

Cairnes, Prof. Elliot. 
Cairns, 1st Earl. 
Cairo. 

Caisson Disease. 
Caithness. 
Calabar Bean. 
Calcium. 
Calcutta. 



ENCYCLOPEDIA BRITANNICA 



ELEVENTH EDITION 



VOLUME IV 



BISH&RlN (the anc. Ichthyophagi), a nomad tribe of African 
" Arabs," of Hamitic origin, dwelling in the eastern part of the 
Nubian desert. In the middle ages they were known as Beja 
{q.v.), and they are the most characteristic of the Nubian 
" Arabs." With the Ababda and Hadendoa they represent the 
Blemmyes of classical writers. Linguistically and geographically 
the Bisharln form a connecting link between the Hamitic popula- 
tions and the Egyptians. Nominally they are Mahommedans. 
They, however, preserve some non-Islamic religious practices, 
and exhibit traces of animal-worship in their rule of never 
killing the serpent or the partridge, which are regarded as 
sacred. 

BISHOP, SIR HENRY ROWLEY (1786-1855), English musical 
composer, was born in London on the 18th of November 1786. 
He received his artistic training from Francisco Bianchi, and in 
1804 wrote the music to a piece called Angelina, which was 
performed at Margate. His next composition was the music to 
the ballet of Tamerlan et Bajazet, produced in 1806 at the King's 
theatre. This proved successful, and was followed within two 
years by several others, of which Caractacus, a pantomimic 
ballet, written for Drury Lane, may be named. In 1809 his first 
opera, The Circassian's Bride, was produced at Drury Lane; 
but unfortunately the theatre was burned down after one per- 
formance, and the score of the work perished in the flames. His 
next work of importance, the opera of The Maniac, written for 
the Lyceum in 1810, established his reputation, and probably 
secured for him an appointment for three years as composer for 
Covent Garden theatre. The numerous works — operas, burlettas, 
cantatas, incidental music to Shakespeare's plays, &c. — which 
he composed while in this position, are in great part forgotten. 
The most successful were — The Virgin of the Sun (181 2), The 
Miller and his Men (1813), Guy Mannering and The Slave (1816), 
Maid Marian and Clari, introducing the well-known air of 
" Home, Sweet Home " (1822). In 1825 Bishop was induced 
by Elliston to transfer his services from Covent Garden to the 
rival house in Drury Lane, for which he wrote with unusual care 
the opera of Aladdin, intended to compete with Weber's Oberon, 
commissioned by the other house. The result was a failure, and 
with Aladdin Bishop's career as an operatic composer may be 
said to close. On the formation of the Philharmonic Society 
(1813) Bishop was appointed one of the directors, and he took 
his turn as conductor of its concerts during the period when that 
office was held by different musicians in rotation. In 1 830 he was 
appointed musical director at Vauxhall; and it was in the course 
of this engagement that he wrote the popular song " My Pretty 
Jane." His sacred cantata, The Seventh Day, was written for the 
Philharmonic Society and performed in 1833. In 1839 he was 
made bachelor in music at Oxford. In 1841 he was appointed 
to the Reid chair of music in the university of Edinburgh, but 

IV. 1 



he resigned the office in 1843. He was knighted in 1842, being the 
first musician who ever received that honour. In 1848 he suc- 
ceeded Dr Crotch in the chair of music at Oxford. The music 
for the ode on the occasion of the installation of Lord Derby as 
chancellor of the university (1853) proved to be his last work. 
He died on the 30th of April 1855 in impoverished circumstances, 
though few composers ever made more by their labours. Bishop 
was twice married: to Miss Lyon and Miss Anne Riviere. Both 
he and his wives were singers. His name lives in connexion with 
his numerous glees, songs and smaller compositions. His 
melodies are clear, flowing, appropriate and often charming; and 
his harmony is always pure, simple and sweet. 

BISHOP, ISABELLA (1832-1904), English traveller and author, 
daughter of the Rev. Edward Bird, rector of Tattenhall, Cheshire, 
was born in Yorkshire on the 15th of October 1832. Isabella 
Bird began to travel when she was twenty-two. Her first book, 
The Englishwoman in A merica (1856), consisted of her correspond- 
ence during a visit to Canada undertaken for her health. She 
visited the Rocky Mountains, the South Pacific, Australia and« 
New Zealand, producing some brightly written books of travel. 
But her reputation was made by the records of her extensive 
travels in Asia: Unbeaten Tracks in Japan (2 vols., 1880), 
Journeys in Persia and Kurdistan (2 vols., 1891), Among the 
Tibetans (1894), Korea and her Neighbours (2 vols., 1898), The 
Yangtze Valley and Beyond (1899), Chinese Pictures (1900). 
She married in 1881 Dr John Bishop, an Edinburgh physician, 
and was left a widow in 1886. In 1892 she became the first lady 
fellow of the Royal Geographical Society, and in 1901 she rode a 
thousand miles in Morocco and the Atlas Mountains. She died in 
Edinburgh on the 7th of October 1904. 

See Anna M. Stoddart, The Life of Isabella Bird (1906). 

BISHOP (A.S. bisceop, from Lat. episcopus, Gr. kirlaKcnros, 
" overlooker " or " overseer "), in certain branches of the 
Christian Church, an ecclesiastic consecrated or set apart to 
perform certain spiritual functions, and to exercise oversight over 
the lower clergy (priests or presbyters, deacons, &c). In the 
Catholic Church bishops take rank at the head of the sacerdotal 
hierarchy, and have certain spiritual powers peculiar to their 
office, but opinion has long been divided as to whether they 
constitute a separate order or form merely a higher degree of 
the order of priests (ordo sacerdotium) . 

In the Roman Catholic Church the bishop belongs to the 
highest order of the hierarchy, and in this respect is the peer even 
of the pope, who addresses him as "venerable brother." 
By the decree of the council of Trent he must be thirty catholic. 
years of age, of legitimate birth, and of approved 
learning and virtue. The method of his selection varies 
in different countries. In France, under the Concordat, the 
sovereign — and under the republic the president — had the right 

11 



BISHOP 



of nomination. The same is true of Austria (except four sees), 
Bavaria, Spain and Portugal. In some countries the bishop 
is elected by the cathedral chapter (as in Wurttemberg), or by the 
bishops of the provinces (as in Ireland). In others, as in Great 
Britain, the United States of America and Belgium, the pope 
selects one out of a list submitted by the chapter. In all cases 
the nomination or election is subject to confirmation by the 
Holy See. Before this is granted the candidate is submitted to 
a double examination as to his fitness, first by a papal delegate 
at his place of residence {processus informativus in parjibus 
electi), and afterwards by the Roman Congregation of Cardinals 
assigned for this purpose {processus electionis definitivus in curia). 
In the event of both processes proving satisfactory, the bishop- 
elect is confirmed, preconized, and so far promoted that he is 
allowed to exercise the rights of jurisdiction in his see. He can- 
not, however, exercise the functions proper to the episcopal order 
{potestas ordinis) until his consecration, which ordinarily takes 
place within three months of his confirmation. The bishop is con- 
secrated, after taking the oath of fidelity to the Holy See, 
and subscribing the profession of faith, by a bishop appointed 
by the pope for the purpose, assisted by at least two other bishops 
or prelates, the main features of the act being the laying on of 
hands, the anointing with oil, and the delivery of the pastoral staff 
and other symbols of the office. After consecration the new bishop 
is solemnly enthroned and blesses the assembled congregation. 

The potestas ordinis of the bishop is not peculiar to the Roman 
Church, and, in general, is claimed by all bishops, whether 
Oriental or Anglican, belonging to churches which have retained 
the Catholic tradition in this respect. Besides the full functions 
of the presbyterate, or priesthood, bishops have the sole right 
(i) to confer holy orders, (2) to administer confirmation, (3) to 
prepare the holy oil, or chrism, (4) to consecrate sacred places 
or utensils (churches, churchyards, altars, &c), (5) to give the 
benediction to abbots and abbesses, (6) to anoint kings. In 
the matter of their rights of jurisdiction, however, Roman 
Catholic bishops differ from others in their peculiar responsibility 
to the Holy See. Some of their powers of legislation and admini- 
stration they possess motu proprio in virtue of their position as 
diocesan bishops, others they enjoy under special faculties 
granted by the Holy See; but all bishops are bound, by an oath 
taken at the time of their consecration, to go to Rome at fixed 
'intervals {visitare sacra lintina apostolorum) to report in person, 
and in writing, on the state of their dioceses. 

The Roman bishop ranks immediately after the cardinals; 
he is styled reverendissimus, sanctissimus or bealissimus. In 
English the style is " Right Reverend "; the bishop being 
addressed as " my lord bishop." 

The insignia {pontificalia or pontificals) of the Roman Catholic 
bishop are (1) a ring with a jewel, symbolizing fidelity to the 
church, (2) the pastoral staff, (3) the pectoral cross, (4) the 
vestments, consisting of the caligae, stockings and sandals, the 
tunicle, and purple gloves, (5) the mitre, symbol of the royal 
priesthood, (6) the throne {cathedra), surmounted by a baldachin 
or canopy, on the gospel side of the choir in the cathedral church. 

The spiritual function and character of the Anglican bishops, 
allowing for the doctrinal changes effected at the Reformation, 
are similar to those of the Roman. They alone can 
' administer the rite of confirmation, ordain priests 
and deacons, and exercise a certain dispensing power. In the 
established Church of England the appointment of bishops 
is vested effectively in the crown, though the old form of election 
by the cathedral chapter is retained. They must be learned 
presbyters at least thirty years of age, born in lawful wedlock, 
and of good life and behaviour. The mode of appointment is 
regulated by 25 Henry VIII. c. 20, re-enacted in 1 Elizabeth 
c. 1 (Act of Supremacy 1558). On a vacancy occurring, the 
dean and chapter notify the king thereof in chancery, and pray 
leave to make election. A licence under the Great Seal to proceed 
to the election of a bishop, known as the conge d'eslire, together 
with a letter missive containing the name of the king's nominee, 
is thereupon sent to the dean and chapter, who are bound under 
the penalties of Praemunire to proceed within twelve days to 



the election of the person named in it. In the event of their 
refusing obedience or neglecting to elect, the bishop may be 
appointed by letters patent under the Great Seal without the 
form of election. Upon the election being reported to the crown, 
a mandate issues from the crown to the archbishop and metro- 
politan, requesting him and commanding him to confirm the 
election, and to invest and consecrate the bishop-elect. There- 
upon the archbishop issues a commission to his vicar-general to 
examine formally the process of the election of the bishop, and 
to supply by his authority all defects in matters of form, and 
to administer to the bishop-elect the oaths of allegiance, of 
supremacy and of canonical obedience (see Confirmation op 
Bishops). In the disestablished and daughter Churches the 
election is by the synod of the Church, as in Ireland, or by a 
diocesan convention, as in the United States of America. 

In the Church of England the potestas ordinis is conferred by 
consecration. This is usually carried out by an archbishop, 
who is assisted by two or more bishops. The essential " form " 
of the consecration is in the simultaneous " laying on of hands " 
by the consecrating prelates. After this the new bishop, who 
has so far been vested only in a rochet, retires and puts on the 
rest of the episcopal habit, viz. the chimere. After consecration 
the bishop is competent to exercise all the spiritual functions of 
his office; but a bishopric in the Established Church, being a 
barony, is under the guardianship of the crown during a vacancy, 
and has to be conferred afresh on each new holder. A bishop, 
then, cannot enter into the enjoyment of the temporalities of his 
see, including his rights of presentation to benefices, before doing 
homage to the king. This is done in the ancient feudal form, 
surviving elsewhere only in the conferring of the M.A. degree at 
Cambridge. The bishop kneels before the king, places his hands 
between his, and recites an oath of temporal allegiance; he 
then kisses hands. 

Besides the functions exercised in virtue of their order, bishops 
are also empowered by law to exercise a certain jurisdiction over 
all consecrated places and over all ordained persons. This 
jurisdiction they exercise for the most part through their con- 
sistorial courts, or through commissioners appointed under the 
Church Discipline Act of 1840. By the Clergy Discipline Act 
of 1892 it was decreed that the trial of clerks accused of unfitness 
to exercise the cure of souls should be before the consistory court 
with five assessors. Under the Public Worship Regulation Act 
of 1874, which gave to churchwardens and aggrieved parishioners 
the right to institute proceedings against the clergy for breaches 
of the law in the conduct of divine service, a discretionary right 
was reserved to the bishop to stay proceedings. 

The bishops also exercise a certain jurisdiction over marriages, 
inasmuch as they have by the canons of the Church of England 
a power of dispensing with the proclamation of banns before 
marriage. These dispensations are termed marriage licences, 
and their legal validity is recognised by the Marriage Act of 1823. 
The bishops had formerly jurisdiction over all questions touching 
the validity of marriages and the status of married persons, but 
this jurisdiction has been transferred from the consistorial 
courts of the bishops to a court of the crown by the Matri- 
monial Causes Act of 1857, They have in a similar manner 
been relieved of their jurisdiction in testamentary matters, and 
in matters of defamation and of brawling in churches; and the 
only jurisdiction which they continue to exercise over the 
general laity is with regard to their use of the churches and 
churchyards. The churchwardens, who are representative 
officers of the parishes, are also executive officers of the bishops 
in all matters touching the decency and order of the churches 
and of the churchyards, and they are responsible to the bishops 
for the due discharge of their duties; but the abolition of church 
rates has relieved the churchwardens of the most onerous part 
of their duties, which was connected with the stewardship of the 
church funds of their parishes. 

The bishops are still authorized by law to dedicate and set 
apart buildings for the solemnization of divine service, and 
grounds for the performance of burials, according to the rites 
and ceremonies of the Church of England; and such buildings 



BISHOP 



and grounds, after they have been duly consecrated according 
to law, cannot be diverted to any secular purpose except under 
the authority of an act of parliament. 

The bishops of England have also jurisdiction to examine 
clerks who may be presented to benefices within their respective 
dioceses, and they are bound in each case by the 95th canon of 
1604 to inquire and inform themselves of the sufficiency of each 
clerk within twenty-eight days, after which time, if they have 
not rejected him as insufficiently qualified, they are bound to 
institute him, or to license him, as the case may be; to the 
benefice, and thereupon to send their mandate to the archdeacon 
to induct him into the temporalities of the benefice. Where 
the bishop himself is patron of a benefice within his own diocese 
he is empowered to collate a clerk to it, — in other words, to confer 
it on the clerk without the latter being presented to him. Where 
the clerk himself is patron of the living, the bishop may institute 
him on his own petition. (See Benefice.) 

As spiritual peers, bishops of the Church of England have 
(subject to the limitations stated below) seats in the House of 
Lords, though whether as barons or in their spiritual character 
has been a matter of dispute. The latter, however, would seem 
to be the case, since a bishop was entitled to his writ of summons 
after confirmation and before doing homage for his barony. 
Doubts having been raised whether a bishop of the Church of 
England, being a lord of parliament, could resign his seat in the 
Upper House, although several precedents to that effect are on 
record, a statute of the realm, which was confined to the case 
of the bishops of London and Durham, was passed in 1856, 
declaring that on the resignation of their sees being accepted by 
their respective metropolitans, those bishops should cease to sit 
as lords of parliament, and their sees should be filled up in the 
manner provided by law in the case of the avoidance of a 
bishopric. In 1869 the Bishops' Resignation Act was passed. 
It provided that, on any bishop desiring to retire on account of 
age or incapacity, the sovereign should be empowered to declare 
the see void by an order in council, the retiring bishop or arch- 
bishop to be secured the use of the episcopal residence for life 
and a pension of one-third of the revenues of the see, or £2000, 
whichever sum should prove the larger. Other sections defined 
the proceedings for proving, in case of need, the incapacity of a 
bishop, provided for the appointment of coadjutors and defined 
their status (Phillimore i. 82). 

In view of the necessity for increasing the episcopate in the 
19th century and the objection to the consequent increase of 
the spiritual peers in the Upper House, it was finally enacted by 
the Bishoprics Act of 1878 that only the archbishops and the 
bishops of London, Winchester and Durham should be always 
entitled to writs summoning them to the House of Lords. The 
rest of the twenty-five seats are filled up, as a vacancy occurs, 
according to seniority of consecration. 

■ Bishops of the Church of England rank in order of precedency 
immediately above barons. They may marry, but their wives as 
such enjoy no title or precedence. Bishops are addressed as 
"■ Right Reverend " and have legally the style of " Lord," 
which, as in the case of Roman Catholic bishops in England, 
is extended to all, whether suffragans or holders of colonial 
bishoprics, by courtesy. 

The insignia of the Anglican bishop are the rochet and the 
chimere, and the episcopal throne on the gospel side of the 
chancel of the cathedral church. The use of the mitre, pastoral 
staff and pectoral cross, which had fallen into complete disuse 
by the end of the 18th century, has been now very commonly, 
though not universally, revived; and, in some cases, the inter- 
pretation put upon the " Ornaments rubric " by the modern 
High Church school has led to a more complete revival of the 
pre-Reformation vestments. 

In the Orthodox Church of the East and the various com- 
munions springing from it, the potestas ordinis of the bishop is 
the same as in the Western Church. Among his 
Eastern* qualifications the most peculiar is that he must be 
unmarried, which, since the secular priests are com- 
pelled to marry, entails his belonging to the " black clergy " or 



monks. The insignia of an oriental bishop, with considerable 
t variation in form, are essentially the same as those of the 
Catholic West. 

Besides bishops presiding over definite sees, there have been 
from time immemorial in the Christian Church bishops holding 
their jurisdiction in subordination to the bishop of the 
diocese. (1) The oldest of these were the chorepiscopi Sab " 
(rrjs x&pas kiriffKoroi.), i.e. country bishops, who were bishops. 
delegated by the bishops of the cities in the early 
church to exercise jurisdiction in the remote towns and villages 
as these were converted from paganism. Their functions varied 
in different times and places, and by some it has been held that 
they were originally only presbyters. In any case, this class of 
bishops, which had been greatly curtailed in the East in A.D. 343 
by the council of Laodicea, was practically extinct everywhere 
by the 10th century. It survived longest in Ireland, where in 
1152 a synod, presided over by the papal legate, decreed that, 
after the death of the existing holders of the office, no more 
should be consecrated. Their place was taken by arch-presbyterr 
and rural deans. (2) The Episcopi regionarii, or gentium, were 
simply missionary bishops without definite sees. Such were, 
at the outset, Boniface, the apostle of Germany, and Willibrord, 
the apostle of the Frisians. (3) Bishops in partibus infidelium 
were originally those who had been expelled from their sees by 
the pagans, and, while retaining their titles, were appointed to 
assist diocesan bishops in their work. In later times the custom 
arose of consecrating bishops for this purpose, or merely as an 
honorary distinction, with a title derived from some place once 
included within, but now beyond the bounds of Christendom. 
(4) Coadjutor bishops are such as are appointed to assist the 
bishop of the diocese when incapacitated by infirmity or by other 
causes from fulfilling his functions alone. Coadjutors in the early 
church were appointed with a view to their succeeding to the 
see; but this, though common in practice, is no longer the rule. 
In the Church of England the appointment and rights of co- 
adjutor bishops were regulated by the Bishops' Resignation Act 
of 1869. . Under this act the coadjutor bishop has the right of 
succession to the see, or in the case of the archiepiscopal sees 
and those of London, Winchester and Durham, to the "see 
vacated by the bishop, translated from another diocese to fill 
the vacancy. (5) Suffragan bishops {episcopi suffraganei or 
auxiliares) are those appointed to assist diocesan bishops in their 
pontifical functions when hindered by infirmity, public affairs 
or other causes. In the Roman Church the appointment of the 
suffragan rests with, the pope, on the petition of the bishop, 
who must £>rove that such is the custom of the see, name a suitable 
priest and guarantee his maintenance. The suffragan is given a 
title in partibus, but never that of archbishop, and the same 
title is never given to two suffragans in succession. In the 
Church of England the status of suffragan bishops was regulated 
by the Act 26 Henry VIII. c. 14. Under this statute, which, 
after long remaining inoperative, was amended and again put 
into force by the Suffragans' Nomination Act of 1888, every, 
archbishop and bishop, being disposed to have a suffragan to 
assist him, may name two honest and discreet spiritual persons 
for the crown to give to one of them the title, name, style and 
dignity of a bishop of any one of twenty-six sees enumerated 
in the statute, as the crown may think convenient. The crown, 
having made choice of one of such persons, is empowered to 
present him by letters patent under the great seal to the metro- 
politan, requiring him to consecrate him to the same name, 
title, style and dignity of a bishop; and the person so conse- 
crated is thereupon entitled to exercise, under a commission 
from the bishop who has nominated him, such authority and 
jurisdiction, within the diocese of such bishop, as shall be given 
to him by the commission, and no other. 

The title of bishop survived the Reformation in certain of the 
Lutheran churches of the continent, in Denmark, Norway, 
Finland, Sweden and Transylvania; it was tern- 
porarily restored in Prussia in 1701, for the coronation churches. 
of King Frederick I., again between 1816 and 1840 by 
Frederick William III., and in Nassau in 181 8. In these latter 



BISHOP AUCKLAND— BISKRA 



cases, however, the title bishop is, equivalent to that of " super- 
intendent," the form most generally employed. The Lutheran 
bishops, as a rule, do not possess or claim unbroken "apostolic 
succession"; those of Finland and Sweden are, however, an 
exception. The Lutheran bishops of Transylvania sit, with the 
Roman and Orthodox bishops, in the Hungarian Upper House. 
In some cases the secularization of. episcopal principalities 
at the Reformation led to the survival of the title of bishop as a 
purely secular distinction. Thus the see of Osnabruck (Osna- 
burgh) was occupied, from the peace of Westphalia to 1802, 
alternately by a Catholic and a Protestant prince. From 1762 
to 1802 it was held by Frederick, duke of York, the last prince- 
bishop. Similarly, the bishopric of Schwerin survived as a 
Protestant prince-bishopric until 1648, when it was finally 
secularized and annexed to Mecklenburg; and'the See of Liibeck 
was held by Protestant " bishops " from 1530 till its annexation 
to Oldenburg in 1803. 1 

In other Protestant communities, e.g. the Moravians, the 
Methodist Episcopal Church and the Mormons, the office and 
title of bishop have survived, or been created. Their functions 
and status will be found described in the accounts of the several 
churches. 

See Wetzer and Welte, Kirchenlexikon, s. "Bischof" and "Weihen" ; 
Hinschius, Kirchenrecht, vol. ii. ; Herzog-Hauck, Realencyklopadie, 
s. " Bischof " (the author rather arbitrarily classes Anglican with 
Lutheran bishops as not bishops in any proper sense at all) ; 
Phillimore's Ecclesiastical Law, the articles Order, Holy; Vest- 
ments; Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; Episcopacy. (W. A. P.) 

BISHOP AUCKLAND, a market town in the Bishop Auckland 
parliamentary division of Durham, England, 11 m. S.S.W. of the 
city of Durham, the junction of several branches of the North 
Eastern railway. Pop. of urban district (1901) 11,969. It is 
beautifully situated on an eminence near the confluence of the 
Wear and the Gaunless. The parish church is 1 m. distant, at 
Auckland St Andrews, a fine cruciform structure, formerly 
collegiate, in style mainly Early English, but with earlier portions. 
The palace of the bishops of Durham, which stands at the north- 
east end of the town, is a spacious and splendid, though irregular 
pile v The site of the palace was first chosen by Bishop Anthony 
Beck, in the time of Edward I. The present building covers 
about 5 acres, and is surrounded by a park of 800 acres. On the 
Wear i|m. above Bishop Auckland there is a small and very 
ancient church at Escomb, massively built and tapering from the 
bottom upward. It is believed to date from the 7th century, 
and some of the stones are evidently from a Roman building, 
one bearing an inscription. These, no doubt, came from Bin- 
chester, a short distance up stream, where remains of a Roman 
fort ( Vinovia) are traceable. It guarded the great Roman north 
road from York to Hadrian's wall. The industrial population 
of Bishop Auckland is principally employed in the neighbouring 
collieries and iron works. 

BISHOP'S CASTLE, a market town and municipal borough 
in the southern parliamentary division of Shropshire, England; 
the terminus of the Bishop's Castle light railway from Craven 
Arms. Pop. (1901) 1378. It is pleasantly situated in a hilly 
district to the east of Clun Forest, climbing the flank and occupy- 
ing the summit of an eminence. Of the castle of the bishops 
of Hereford, which gave the town its name, there are only the 
slightest fragments remaining. The town has some agricultural 
trade. It is governed by a mayor, 4 aldermen and 1 2 councillors. 
Area, 1867 acres. 

Bishop's Castle was included in the manor of Lydbury; which 
belonged to the church of Hereford before the Conquest., The castle, 
at first called Lydbury Castle, was built by one of the bishops of 
Hereford between 1085 and 1 154, to protect his manor from the 
Welsh, and the town which sprang up round thecastle walls acquired 
the name of Bishop's Castle in the 13th century. In 1292 the bishop 
claimed to have a market every Friday, a fair on the eve, day and 

1 The title prince-bishop, attached in Austria to the sees of Laibach, 
Seckau, Gurk, Brixen, Trent and Lavant, and in Prussia to that of 
Breslau, no longer implies any secular jurisdiction, but is merely a 
title of honour recognized by the state, owing either to the importance 
of the sees pr for reasons purely historical. 



morrow qf the Decollation of St John f and assize of bread and aje 
in Bishop's Castle, which his predecessors had held from time 
: immemorial. Ten years later he received a grant from Richard II. 
of a market every Wednesday and a fair on the 2nd of November 
and two days following. Although the town was evidently a borough 
by the 13th century, since the burgesses are mentioned as early as 
1292, it has no charter earlier than the incorporation charter granted 
by Queen Elizabeth in 1572. This was confirmed by James I. in 
1617 and by James II. in 1688. In 1584 Bishop's Castle returned 
two members to parliament, and was represented until 1832, when 
it was disfranchised. - 

BISHOP STORTFORD, a market town in the Hertford parlia- 
mentary division of Hertfordshire, England; 305 m. N.N.E. 
from London by the Cambridge line of the Great Eastern railway. 
Pop. of urban district (190 1) 7143. It lies on the river Stort, 
close to the county boundary with Essex, and has water-com- 
munication with London through the Lea and Stort Navigation. 
The church of St Michael, standing high above the valley, is a 
fine embattled Perpendicular building with western tower and 
spire. The high school, > formerly the grammar school, was 
founded : in the time of Elizabeth. Here were educated Sir 
Henry Chauncy, an early historian of Hertfordshire (d. 17 19), 
and Cecil Rhodes, who was born at Bishop Stortford in 1853. 
There are a Nonconformist grammar school, a diocesan training 
college for mistresses* and other educational establishments. 
The industries include brewing and malting, coach-building, 
lime-burning and founding, and there are important horse and 
cattle markets. 

Before the Conquest the manor of Bishop Stortford is said to have 
'belonged to Eddeva the Fair, wife of Harold, who sold it to the bishop 
of London, from whom it was taken by William the Conqueror. 
William restored it after a few years, and with it gave the bishop a 
small castle called Waytemore, of which there are scanty remains. 
The dungeon of this castle, called " Bishop's Hole " or " Bishop's 
Prison," was used as an ecclesiastical prison' until the 16th century. 
The town now possesses no early incorporation charters, and although 
both Chauncy and Salmon in their histories of Hertfordshire state 
that it was created a borough by charter of King John in 1206, the 
charter cannot now be found. The first mention of Bishop Stortford 
as a borough occurs in 1311, in which year the burgesses returned 
two members to parliament. The town: was represented from that 
date until 1332, and again in 1335-1336, but the privilege was then 
allowed to lapse and has never been revived. 

BISKRA, a town of Algeria, in the arrondissement of Batna> 
department of Constantine, 150 m. S.W. of the city of Constantine 
and connected with it and with Philippeville by rail. It lies in 
the Sahara 360 ft. above the sea, on the right bank of the Wad 
Biskra, a river which, often nearly dry for many months in the 
year, becomes a mighty torrent after one or two days' rain in 
winter. The name Biskra applies to a union of five or six 
villages of the usual Saharan type, scattered through an oasis 
3 m. in length by less than 1 m. broad, and separated by huge 
gardens full of palm and olive trees. The houses are built of 
hardened mud, with doors and roof of palm wood. The foreign 
settlement is on the .north of the oasis; it consists of a broad 
main street, the rue Berthe (from which a few side streets branch 
at right angles), lined with European houses, the whole in the 
style of a typical French winter resort, a beautiful public garden, 
with the church in the centre, an arcade, a pretentious mairie 
in pseudo-Moorish style with entrance guarded by terra-cotta 
lions, some good shops, a number of excellent hotels and cafes, 
a casino, clubs, and, near by, a street of dancing and singing 
girls of the tribe qf Walad-Nail. East of the public garden is 
Fort St Germain, named after an officer killed in the insurrection 
of the Zaatcha in 1849; it is capable of resisting any attack of 
the Arabs, and extensive enough to shelter the whole of the 
civil population, who took refuge therein during the rebellion of 
1871. It contains barracks, hospital and government offices. 
To the south-east lies the Villa Landon with magnificent gardens 
filled with tropical plants. The population (1906) of the chief 
settlement was 4218, of the whole oasis 10,413. 

From November to April the climate of Biskra is delightful. 
Nowhere in Algeria can be found- more genial temperature or 
clearer skies, and while in summer the thermometer often 
registers 110° F. in the shade, and 90 at night, the pure dryness 
of the air in this practically rainless region makes the heat 



BISLEY— -BISMARCK 



endurable. The only drawback to the climate is the prevalence 
of high cold winds in winter. These winds cause temperatures 
as low as 36 , but the mean reading, on an average of ten years, 

is 73°- 

In the oasis are some 200,000 fruit trees, of which about 
150,000 are date-palms, the rest being olives, pomegranates and 
apricots. In the centre of the oasis is the old kasbah or citadel. 

In 1844 the due d'Aumale occupied this fort, and here, on the 
night of the 12th of May of that year, the 68 men who formed 
the French garrison were, with one exception, massacred by 
Arabs. In the fort are a few fragments of Roman work — all that 
remains of the Roman post Ad Piscinam. 

Biskra is the capital of the Ziban (plural of Zab), a race of 
mixed Berber and Arab origin, whose villages extend from the 
southern slopes of the Aures to the Shat Melrir. These villages, 
built in oases dotted over the desert, nestle in groves of date- 
palms and fruit trees and waving fields of barley. The most 
interesting village is that of Sidi Okba, 12 m. south-east of Biskra. 
It is built of houses of one story made of sun-dried bricks. The 
mosque is square, with a flat roof supported on clay columns, and 
crowned by a minaret. In the north-west corner of the mosque 
is the tomb of Sidi Okba, the leader of the Arabs who. in the 1st 
century of the Hegira conquered Africa for Islam from Egypt 
to Tangier. Sidi Okba was killed by the Berbers near this place 
in a.d. 682. On his tomb is the inscription in Cufic characters, 
" This is the tomb of Okba, son of Nafi. May God have mercy 
upon him." No older Arabic inscription is known to exist in 
Africa. 

BISLEY, a village of Surrey, England, 3J m. N.W. of Woking. 
The ranges of the National Rifle Association were transferred 
from Wimbledon here in 1890. (See Rifle.) 

BISMARCK, OTTO EDUARD LEOPOLD VON, Prince, 
duke of Lauenburg (1815-1898), German statesman, was born 
on the 1st of April 1815, at the manor-house of Schonhausen, 
his father's seat in the mark of Brandenburg. The family has, 
since the 14th century, belonged to the landed gentry, and many 
members had held high office in the kingdom of Prussia. His 
father (d. 1845), of whom he always spoke with much affection, 
was a quiet, unassuming man, who retired from the army in 
early life with the rank of captain of cavalry {Rittmeister) . His 
mother, a daughter of Mencken, cabinet secretary to the king, 
was a woman of strong character and ability, who had been 
brought up at Berlin under the "Aufklarung." Her ambition 
was centred in her sons, but Bismarck in his recollections 6f his 
childhood missed the influences of maternal tenderness. There 
were several children of the marriage, which took place in 1806, 
but all died in childhood except Bernhard (1810-1893), Otto, 
and one sister, Malvina (b. 1827), who married in 1845 Oscar 
von Arnim. Young Bismarck was educated in BerHn, first at a 
private school, then at the gymnasium of the Graue Kloster 
(Grey Friars). At the age of seventeen he went to the university 
of Gottingen, where he spent a little over a year; he joined the 
corps of the Hannoverana and took a leading part in the social 
life of the students. He completed his studies at Berlin, and in 
1835 passed the examinations which admitted him to the public 
service. He was intended for the diplomatic service, but spent 
some months at ■ Aix-la-Chapelle in administrative work, and 
then was transferred to Potsdam and the judicial side. He soon 
retired from the public service; he conceived a great distaste 
for it, and had shown himself defective in discipline and regu- 
larity. In 1839, after his mother's death, he undertook, with 
his brother, the management of the family estates in Pomerania; 
at this time most of the estate attached to Schonhausen had 
to be sold. In 1844, after the marriage of his sister, he went to 
live with his father at Schonhausen. He and his brother took 
an active part in local affairs, and in 1846 he was appointed 
Deichhauptmann, an office in which he was responsible for the 
care of the dykes by which the country, in the neighbourhood 
of the Elbe, was preserved from inundation. During these years 
he travelled in England, France and Switzerland. The influence 
of his mother, and his own wide reading and critical character, 
made him at one time inclined to hold liberal opinions on govern- 



ment and religion, but he was strongly affected by the religious 
revival of the early years, of the reign of Frederick William IV.; 
his opinions underwent a great change, and under the influence 
of the neighbouring country gentlemen he acquired those strong 
principles in favour of monarchical governmentas the expression 
of the Christian state, of which he was to become the most cele- 
brated exponent. His religious convictions were strengthened 
by his marriage to Johanna von Puttkamer, which took place 
in 1847. ■■•■■. 

In the same year he entered public life, being chosen as 
substitute for the representative of the lower nobility of his 
district in the estates-general, which were in that 
year summoned to Berlin. He took his seat with ParII * m 
the extreme right, and distinguished himself by the CTreer.^ 
vigour and originality with which he defended the 
rights of the king and the Christian monarchy against the 
Liberals. When the revolution broke out in the following year 
he offered to bring the peasants of Schonhausen to Berlin in 
order to : defend the king against the revolutionary party, and in 
the last meeting of the estates voted in a minority of two against 
the address thanking the king for granting a constitution. He 
did not sit in any of the assemblies summoned during the revolu- 
tionary year, but took a very active part in the formation of a 
union of the Conservative party, and was one of the founders of 
the Kreuzzeihmg, which has sinCe then been the organ of the 
Monarchical party in.Prussia. In the new parliament which was 
elected at the beginning of 1849, he sat for Brandenburg, and 
was one of the most frequent and most incisive speakers of what 
was called the Junker party. He took a prominent part in the 
discussions on the new Prussian constitution, always defending 
the power of the king. His speeches of this period show great 
debating skill, combined with strong originality and imagination. 
His constant theme was, that the party disputes were a struggle 
for power between the forces of revolution, which derived their 
strength from the fighters on the barricades, and the Christian 
monarchy, and that between these opposed principles no com- 
promise was possible. He took also a considerable part in the 
debates on the foreign policy of the Prussian government; 
he defended the government for not accepting the Frankfort 
constitution, and opposed the policy of Radowitz, on the ground 
that the Prussian king would be subjected to the control of a 
non-Prussian parliament. The only thing, he said, that had 
come out of the revolutionary year unharmed, and had saved 
Prussia from dissolution and Germany from anarchy, was the 
Prussian army and the Prussian civil service; and in the debates 
on foreign policy he opposed the numerous plans for bringing 
about the union of Germany, by subjecting the crown and 
Prussia to a common German parliament. He had a seat in the 
parliament of Erfurt, but only went there in order to oppose the 
constitution which the parliament had framed. He foresaw 
that the policy of the government would lead it into a position 
when it would have to fight against Austria on behalf of a con- 
stitution by which Prussia itself would be dissolved, and he was, 
therefore, one of the few prominent politicians who defended 
the complete change of front which followed the surrender of 
Olmiitz. 

It was probably his speeches on German policy which induced 
the king to appoint him Prussian representative at the restored 
diet of Frankfort in 185 1. The appointment was a 
bold one, as he was entirely without diplomatic ex- C ^J1T 
perience, but he justified the confidence placed in him. 
During the eight years he spent at Frankfort he acquired an 
unrivalled knowledge of German politics. He was often used 
for important missions, as in 1852, when he was sent to Vienna. 
He was entrusted with the negotiations by which the duke of 
Augustenburg was persuaded to assent to the arrangements by 
which he resigned his claims to Schleswig and Holstein. The 
period he spent at Frankfort, however, was of most importance 
because of the change it brought about in his own political 
opinions. When he went to Frankfort he was still under the 
influence of the extreme Prussian Conservatives, men like the 
Gerlachs, who regarded the maintenance of the principle of the 



BISMARCK 



Christian monarchy against the revolution as the chief duty of 
the Prussian government. He was prepared on this ground for 
a close alliance with Austria. He found, however*, a deliberate 
intention on the part of Austria to humble Prussia, and to 
degrade her from the position of an equal power, and also great 
jealousy of Prussia among the smaller German princes, many 
of whom owed their thrones to the Prussian soldiers, who, as in 
Saxony and Baden, had crushed the insurgents. He therefore 
came to the conclusion that if Prussia was to regain the position 
she had lost she must be prepared for the opposition of Austria, 
and must strengthen herself by alliances with other powers. 
The solidarity of Conservative interests appeared to him now a 
dangerous fiction. At the time of the Crimean War he advocated 
alliance with Russia, and it was to a great extent owing to 
his advice that Prussia did not join the western powers. After- 
wards he urged a good understanding with Napoleon, but his 
advice was met by the insuperable objection of King Frederick 
William IV. to any alliance with a ruler of revolutionary origin. 

The change of ministry which followed the establishment 
of a regency in 1857 made it desirable to appoint a new envoy 
at Frankfort, and in 1858 Bismarck was appointed ambassador 
at St Petersburg, where he remained for four years. During 
this period he acquired some knowledge of Russian, and gained 
the warm regard of the tsar, as well as of the dowager-empress, 
herself a Prussian princess. During the first two years he had 
little influence on the Prussian government; the Liberal minister's 
distrusted his known opinions on parliamentary government, 
and the monarchical feeling of the prince regent was offended 
by Bismarck's avowed readiness for alliance with the Italians 
and his disregard of the rights of other princes. The failure of 
the ministry, and the estrangement between King William and 
the Liberal party, opened to him the way to power. Roon, who 
was appointed minister of war in 1861, was an old friend of his, 
and through him Bismarck was thenceforward kept closely 
informed of the condition of affairs in Berlin. On several 
occasions the prospect of entering the ministry was open to him, 
but nothing came of it, apparently because he required a free 
hand in foreign affairs, and this the king was not prepared to 
give him. When an acute crisis arose out of the refusal of parlia- 
ment, in 1862, to vote the money required for the reorganization 
of the army, which the king and Roon had carried through, 
he was summoned to Berlin; but the king was still unable to 
make up his mind to appoint him, although he felt that Bismarck 
was the only man who had the courage and capacity for con- 
ducting the struggle with parliament. He was, therefore, in 
June, made ambassador at Paris as a temporary expedient. 
There he had the opportunity for renewing the good under- 
standing with Napoleon which had been begun in 1857. He also 
paid a short visit to England, but it does not appear that this 
had any political results. In September the parliament, by a 
large majority, threw out the budget, and the king, having 
nowhere else to turn for help, at Roon's advice summoned 
Bismarck to Berlin and appointed him minister-president and 
foreign minister. 

Bismarck's duty as minister was to carry on the government 
against the wishes of the Lower House, so as to enable the king 
to complete and maintain the reorganized army. The 
opposition of the House was supported by the country 
and by a large party at court, including the queen and crown 
prince. The indignation which his appointment caused was 
intense; he was known only by the reputation which in his 
early years he had won as a violent ultra-Conservative, and the 
apprehensions were increased by his first speech, in which he 
said that the German question could not be settled by speeches 
and parliamentary decrees, but only by blood and iron. His 
early fall was predicted, and it was feared that he might bring 
down the monarchy with him. Standing almost alone he 
succeeded in the task he had undertaken. For four years he 
ruled without a budget, taking advantage of an omission in the 
constitution which did not specify what was to happen in case 
the crown and the two Houses could not agree on a budget. . The 
conflict of the ministers and the House assumed at times the 



Ministry. 



form of bitter personal hostility; in 1863 the ministers refused 
any longer to attend the sittings, and Bismarck challenged 
Virchow, one of his strongest opponents, to a duel, which, 
however, did not take place. In 1852 he had fought a duel with 
pistols against Georg von Vindre, a political opponent. In June 
1863, as soon as parliament had risen, Bismarck published 
ordinances controlling the liberty of the press, which, though in 
accordance with the letter, seemed opposed to the intentions of 
the constitution, and it was on this occasion that the crown 
prince, hitherto a silent opponent, publicly dissociated himself 
from the policy of his father's ministers. Bismarck depended 
for his position solely on the confidence of the king, and the 
necessity for defending himself against the attempts to destroy 
this confidence added greatly to the suspiciousness of his nature. 
He was, however, really indispensable, for his resignation must 
be followed by a Liberal ministry, parliamentary control over 
the army, and probably the abdication of the king. Not only, 
therefore, was he secure in the continuance of the king's support, 
but he had also the complete control of foreign affairs. Thus 
he could afford to ignore the criticism of the House, and the king 
was obliged to acquiesce in the policy of a minister to whom he 
owed so much. 

. He soon gave to the policy of the monarchy a resolution 
which had long been wanting. When the emperor of Austria 
summoned a meeting of the German princes at Frank- 
fort to discuss a reform of the confederation, Bismarck pottcy 
insisted that the king of Prussia must not attend. He 
remained away, and his absence in itself made the congress 
unavailing^ There can be no doubt that from the time he 
entered on office Bismarck was determined to bring to an issue 
the long struggle for supremacy in Germany between the house of 
Habsburg and the house of Hohenzollern. Before he was able 
to complete his preparations for this, two unforeseen occurrences 
completely altered the European situation, and caused the 
conflict to be postponed for three years. The first was the 
outbreak of rebellion in Poland. Bismarck, an inheritor of the 
older Prussian traditions, and recollecting how much of the 
greatness of Prussia had been gained at the expense of the Poles, 
offered his help to the tsar. By this he placed himself in opposi- 
tion to the universal feeling of western Europe; no act of his 
life added so much to the repulsion with which at this time he 
was regarded as an enemy of liberty and right. He won, however, 
the gratitude of the tsar and the support of Russia, which in the 
next years was to be of vital service to him. Even more serious 
were the difficulties arising in Denmark. On the death of King 
Frederick VII. in 1863, Prince Frederick of Augustenburg came 
forward as claimant to the duchies of Schleswig and Holstein, 
which had hitherto been joined to the crown of Denmark. He 
was strongly supported by the whole German nation and by 
many of its princes. Bismarck, however, once more was obliged 
to oppose the current of national feeling, which imperiously 
demanded that the German duchies should be rescued from a 
foreign yoke. Prussia was bound by the treaty of London of 
1852, which guaranteed the integrity of the Danish monarchy; 
to have disregarded this would have been to bring about a 
coalition against Germany similar to that of 1851. Moreover, 
he held that it would be of no advantage to Prussia to create a 
new German state; if Denmark were to lose the duchies, he 
desired that Prussia should acquire them, and to recognize the 
Augustenburg claims would make this impossible. His resist- 
ance to the national desire made him appear a traitor to his 
country. To check the agitation he turned for help to Austria; 
and an alliance of the two powers, so lately at variance, was 
formed. He then falsified all the predictions of the opposition 
by going to war with Denmark, not, as they had required, in 
support of Augustenburg, but on the ground that the king of 
Denmark had violated his promise not to oppress his German 
subjects. Austria continued to act with Prussia, and, after the 
defeat of the Danes, at the peace of Vienna the sovereignty of 
the duchies was surrendered to the two allies — the first step 
towards annexation by Prussia. There is no part of Bismarck's 
diplomatic work which deserves such careful study as these 



BISMARCK 



events. Watched as he was by countless enemies at home and 
airoadj) a. single: false step would have brought ruin and disgrace 
on himself ; the growing national excitement would have burst 
through all restraint, and again, as fifteen years before, Germany 
.divided and unorganized would have had to capitulate to the 
orders of foreign powers (see Schleswig-Holstein Question). 
The peace of Vienna left him once more free to return to his 
plder policy. ; For the next eighteen months he was occupied 
, ., in preparing for war with . Austria. For this war he 

Austria. was a i° ne responsible; he undertook; it deliberately 
as . the only means of securing Prussian ascendancy 
in, Germany. The actual cause of dispute was the disposition 
of the conquered duchies, for Austria now wished to put Augus- 
tenburg in as duke, a plan to which Bismarck would not assent. 
In 1865 a provisional arrangement was made by the treaty of 
pastein, for Bismarck was not yet ready. He would not risk a 
war unless he was certain of success, and for this he required the 
.alliance of Italy and French support; both he secured during 
the next year. In October 1865 he visited Napoleon at Biarritz 
and Paris. No formal treaty was made, but Napoleon promised 
to regard favourably an extension of Prussian power in Germany; 
while Bismarck led the emperor to believe that Prussia would 
help him in extending the frontier of France. A treaty of 
alliance with Italy was arranged in the spring of 1866; and 
jijsmarck then with much difficulty overcame the reluctance 
of the king to embark in a war with his old ally. The results 
of: the war entirely justified his calculations. Prussia, though 
opposed by all the German states except a few principalities 
in the north, completely defeated all her enemies, and at the end 
of a few weeks the whole of Germany lay at her feet. 

The war of 1866 is more than that of 1870 the crisis of modern 
-German history. It finally settled the controversy which had 
begun more than a hundred years before, and left 
<rf/S&& e " Prussia the dominant power in Germany. It deter- 
, - mined that, the unity of Germany should be brought 

about not by revolutionary means as in 1848, not as in 1849 had 
been attempted by voluntary agreement of the princes, not by 
Austria, but by the sword of Prussia. This was the great work 
iof Bismarck's life; he had completed the programme fore- 
shadowed in his early speeches, and finished the work of Frederick 
■the Great.: It is also the. turning-point in Bismarck's own life. 
Having secured the dominance of the crown in Prussia and of 
Prussia, in Germany, he could afford to make a reconciliation 
with the parties which had been his chief opponents, and turn 
to them for help in building up a new Germany. The settlement 
of 1866 was peculiarly his work. We must notice, first, how in 
^arranging the terms of peace he opposed the king and the mili- 
tary party who wished to advance on Vienna and annex part of 
Austrian Silesia; with greater foresight helooked to renewing 
the old friendship with Austria,- and insisted (even with the 
threat of resignation) that no territory should be demanded. The 
southern states he treated with equal moderation, and thereby 
iwas able to arrange an offensive and defensive alliance with 
therm. . On the other hand,in order to secure the complete control 
of North Germany, which was his immediate object, he required 
that the whole of Hanover, Hesse-Cassel, Hesse-Nassau and the 
.city of Frankfort, as well as the Elbe duchies, should be absorbed 
; jn Prussia. He then formed a separate confederation of the North 
German states, but did not attempt to unite the whole of Ger- 
.many, partly because of the internal difficulties which this would 
have produced, partly because it would have brought about a 
,war with France. In the new confederation he became sole 
responsible, minister, with the title Bundes-Kanzler; this position 
he held till 1890, in addition to his former post of premier 
minister. In 187 1 the title was altered to Reichs-Kanzler. 

The reconciliation with the Prussian parliament he effected 
by bringing in a. "bill of indemnity for the money which had been 
spent without leave of parliament. The Radicals still continued 
-their opposition, but he thereby made possible the formation 
,01. a large party of moderate Liberals, who thenceforward 
-supported him in his new Nationalist policy. He also, in the 
! constitution for the new confederation, introduced a parliament 



(Bundestag) elected by universal suffrage. This was the chief 
demand of the revolutionists in 1848; it was one to which in 
his early life he had been strongly opposed. His experience 
at Frankfort had diminished his dislike of popular representation, 
and it was probably to the advice of Lassalle that his adoption 
of universal suffrage was due. He first publicly proposed it 
just before the war; by carrying it out, notwithstanding the 
apprehensions of many Liberal politicians, he placed the new 
constitution on a firmer base than would otherwise have been 
possible. 

Up to 1866 he had always appeared to be an opponent of the 
National party in Germany, now he became their leader. His 
next task was to complete the work which was half-finished, 
and it was this which brought about the second of the great wars 
which he undertook. 

The relations with Napoleon III. form one of the most inter- 
esting but obscurest episodes in Bismarck's career. We have 
seen that he did not share the common prejudice 
against co-operation with France. He found Napoleon an ^" are 
willing to aid Prussia as he had aided Piedmont, and France. 
was ready to accept his assistance. There was this 
difference, that he asked only for neutrality, not armed assist- 
ance, and it is improbable that he ever intended to alienate any 
German territory; he showed himself, however, on more than one 
occasion, ready to discuss plans for extending French territory, 
on the side of Belgium and Switzerland. Napoleon, who had 
not anticipated the rapid success of Prussia, after the battle of 
Koniggratz at the request of Austria came forward as mediator, 
and there were a few days during which it was probable that 
Prussia would have to meet a French attempt to dictate terms 
of peace. Bismarck in this crisis by deferring to the emperor 
in appearance avoided the danger, but he knew that he had 
been deceived, and the cordial understanding was never renewed. 
Immediately after .an armistice had been arranged, Benedetti, at 
the orders of the French government, demanded as recompense 
a large tract of German territory on the left bank of the Rhine. 
This Bismarck peremptorily refused, declaring that he would 
rather have war. Benedetti then made another proposal, 
submitting a draft treaty by which France was to support 
Prussia in adding the South German states to the new con- 
federation, and Germany was to support France in the annexa- 
tion of Luxemburg and Belgium. Bismarck discussed, but did 
not. conclude the treaty; he kept, however, a copy of the draft 
in Benedetti's handwriting, and published it in The Times in 
the summer of 1870 so as to injure the credit of Napoleon in 
England. The failure of the scheme made a contest with France 
inevitable, at least unless the Germans were willing to forgo the 
purpose of completing the work of German unity, and during 
the next four years the two nations were each preparing for the 
struggle, and each watching to take the other at a disadvantage. 

It is necessary, then, to keep in mind the general situation 
in considering Bismarck's conduct in the months immediately 
preceding the war of 1870. In 1 8 6 7 there was a dispute regarding 
the right to garrison Luxemburg. Bismarck then produced the 
secret treaties with the southern states, an act which was, as 
it were, a challenge to France by the whole of Germany. 
During the next three years the Ultramontane party hoped to 
bring about an anti-Prussian revolution, and Napoleon was 
working for an alliance with Austria, where Beust, an old 
opponent of Bismarck's, was chancellor. Bismarck was doubt- 
less well informed as to the progress of the negotiations, for he 
had established intimate relations with the Hungarians. The 
pressure at home for completing the work of German unity was 
so strong that he could with difficulty resist it, and in 1870 he 
was much embarrassed by a request from Baden to be admitted 
to the confederation, which he had to refuse. It is therefore not 
surprising that he eagerly welcomed the opportunity of gaining 
the goodwill of Spain, and supported by all the means in his 
power the offer made by Marshal Prim that Prince Leopold of 
Hohenzollern should be chosen king of that country. It was only 
by his urgent and repeated representations that the prince was 
persuaded against his will to accept. The negotiations were 



8 



BISMARCK 



carried out with the greatest secrecy, but as soon as the accept- 
ance was made known the French government intervened and 
declared that the project was inadmissible. Bismarck was away 
at Varzin, but on his instructions the Prussian foreign office in 
answer to inquiries denied all knowledge or responsibility. This 
was necessary, because it would have caused a bad impression 
in Germany had he gone to war with France in support of the 
prince's candidature. The king, by receiving Benedetti at Ems, 
departed from the policy of reserve Bismarck himself adopted, 
and Bismarck (who had now gone to Berlin) found himself in 
a position of such difficulty that he contemplated resignation. 
The French, however, by changing and extending their demands 
enabled him to find a cause of war of such nature that the 
whole of Germany would be united against French 
telegram, aggression. France asked for a letter of apology, 
and Benedetti personally requested from the king 
a promise that he would never allow the candidature to be 
resumed. Bismarck published the telegram in which this 
information and the refusal of the king were conveyed, but by 
omitting part of the telegram made it appear that the request 
and refusal had both been conveyed in a more abrupt form than 
had really been the case. 1 But even apart from this, the publica- 
tion of the French demand, which could not be complied with, 
must have brought about a war. 

In the campaign of 1870-71 Bismarck accompanied the head- 
quarters of the army, as he had done in 1866. He was present 
at the battle of Gravelotte and at the surrender of Sedan, and 
it was on the morning of the 2nd of September that he had 
his famous meeting with Napoleon after the surrender of the 
emperor. He accompanied the king to Paris, and spent many 
months at Versailles. Here he was occupied chiefly with the 
arrangements for admitting the southern states to the confedera- 
tion, and the establishment of the empire. He also underwent 
much anxiety lest the efforts of Thiers to bring about an inter- 
ference by the neutral powers might be successful. He had to 
carry on the negotiations with the French preliminary to the 
surrender of Paris, and to enforce upon them the German terms 
of peace. 

For Bismarck's political career after 1870 we must refer to 
the article Germany, for he was thenceforward entirely absorbed 
After 1870 * n ^ e ^^^ °f hi s country. The foreign policy he 
controlled absolutely. As chancellor he was responsible 
for the whole internal policy of the empire, and his influence is to 
be seen in every department of state, especially, however, in the 
great change of policy after 1878. During the earlier period the 
estrangement from the Conservatives, which had begun in 1866, 
became very marked, and brought about a violent quarrel with 
many of his old friends, which culminated in the celebrated 
Arnim trial. He incurred much criticism during the struggle 
with the Roman Catholic Church, and in 1873 he was shot at 
and slightly wounded by a youth called Rullmann, who pro- 
fessed to be an adherent of the Clerical party. Once before, in 
1866, just before the outbreak of war, his life had been attempted 
by a young man called Cohen, a native of Wiirttemberg, who 
wished to save Germany from a fratricidal war. In 1872 he 
retired from the presidency of the Prussian ministry, but returned 
after a few months. On several occasions he offered to retire, 
but the emperor always refused his consent, on the last time with 
the word " Never." In 1877 he took a long leave of absence for 
ten months. His health at this time was very bad. In 1878 he 
presided over the congress of Berlin. The following years were 
chiefly occupied, besides foreign affairs, which were always his 
first care, with important commercial reforms, and he held at 
this time also the office of Prussian minister of trade in addition 
to his other posts. During this period his relations with the 

1 It was not till many years later that our knowledge of these 
events (which is still incomplete) was established; in 1894 the 
publication of the memoirs of the king of Rumania showed, what 
had hitherto been denied, that Bismarck had taken a leading part 
in urging the election of the prince of Hohenzollern. It was in 1892 
that the language used by Bismarck himself made it necessary for 
the German government to publish the original form of the Ems 
telegram. 



Reichstag were often very unsatisfactory, and at ho time did he 
resort so freely to prosecutions in the law-courts in order to injure 
his opponents, so that the expression Bismarck-Beleidigung was 
invented. He was engaged at this time in a great struggle with 
the Social-Democrats, whom he tried to crush by exceptional 
penal laws. The death of the emperor William in 1888 made a 
serious difference in his position. He had been bound to him by 
a long term of loyal service, which had been rewarded with equal 
loyalty. For his relations to the emperors Frederick and William 
II., and for the events connected with his dismissal from office in 
March 1890, we must refer to the articles under those names. 

After his retirement he resided at Friedrichsruh, near Hamburg, 
a house on his Lauenburg estates. His criticisms of the govern- 
ment, given sometimes in conversation, sometimes in the 
columns of the Hamburger Nachrichten, caused an open breach 
between him and the emperor; and the new chancellor, Count 
Caprivi, in a circular despatch which was afterwards published, 
warned all German envoys that no real importance must be 
attached to what he said. When he visited Vienna for his son's 
wedding the German ambassador, Prince Reuss, was forbidden 
to take any notice of him. A reconciliation was effected in 1893. 
In 1895 his eightieth birthday was celebrated with great enthusi- 
asm: the Reichstag alone, owing to the opposition of the Clericals 
and the Socialists, refused to vote an address. In 1891 he had 
been elected a member of the Reichstag, but he never took his 
seat. He died at Friedrichsruh on the 31st of July 1898. - 

Bismarck was made a count in 1865; in 187 1 he received the 
rank of Fiirst (prince). On his retirement the emperor created 
him duke of Lauenburg, but he never used the title, which was not 
inherited by his son. In 1866 he received £60,000 as his share of 
the donation voted by the Reichstag for the victorious generals. 
With this he purchased the estate of Varzin in Pomerania, which 
henceforth he used as a country residence in preference to 
Schonhausen. In 1871 the emperor presented him with a large 
part of the domains of the duchy of Lauenburg. On his seventieth 
birthday a large sum of money (£270,000) was raised by public 
subscription, of which half was devoted to repurchasing the 
estate of Schonhausen for him, and the rest was used by him to 
establish a fund for the assistance of schoolmasters. As a young 
man he was an officer in the Landwehr and militia, and in addi- 
tion to his civil honours he was eventually raised to the rank 
of general. Among the numerous orders he received we may 
mention that he was the first Protestant on whom the pope be- 
stowed the order of Christ; this was done after the cessation of 
the Kulturkampf and the reference of the dispute with Spain 
concerning the Caroline Islands to the arbitration of the pope. 

Bismarck's wife died in 1894. He left one daughter and two 
sons. Herbert (1840-1904), the elder, was wounded at Mars-le- 
Tour, afterwards entered the foreign office, and acted as private 
secretary to his father (1871-1881). In 1882 he became councillor 
to the embassy at London, in 1884 was transferred to St Peters- 
burg, and in 1885 became under-secretary of state for foreign 
affairs. In 1884 he had been elected to the Reichstag, but had 
to resign his seat when, in 1886, he was made secretary of state 
for foreign affairs and Prussian minister. He conducted many 
of the negotiations with Great Britain on colonial affairs. He 
retired in 1890 at the same time as his father, and in 1893 was 
again elected to the Reichstag. He married Countess Margarete 
Hoyos in 1892, and died on the 18th of September 1904. He 
left two daughters and three sons, of whom the eldest, Otto 
Christian Archibald (b. 1897), succeeded to the princely title. 
The second son, Wilhelm, who was president of the province of 
Prussia, died in 1901. By his wife, Sybilla von Arnim-Krochlen- 
dorff , he left three daughters and a son, Count Nikolaus (b. 1896). 

Authorities. — The literature on Bismarck's life is very extensive, 
and it is only possible to enumerate a few of the most important 
books. The first place belongs to his own works. These include 
his own memoirs, published after his death, under the title Gedanken 
und Erinnerungen ; there is an English translation, Bismarck: his 
Reflections and Reminiscences (London, 1898). They are incomplete, 
but contain very valuable discussions on particular points. : The 
speeches are of the greatest importance both for his character and for 
political history; of the numerous editions that by Horst Kbhl, in 



BISMARCK— BISMUTH 



12 vols. (Stuttgart, 1892-1894), is the best; there is a cheap edition 
in Reclam's Universalb'ibliothek. Bismarck was an admirable letter- 
writer, and numbers of his private letters have been published; 
a collected edition has been brought out by Horst Kohl. His letters 
to his wife were published by Prince Herbert Bismarck (Stuttgart, 
1900). A translation of a small selection of the private letters was 
published in 1876 by F. Maxse. Of great value for the years 1851- 
1858 is the correspondence with General L. v. Gerlach, which has 
been edited by Horst Kohl (3rd ed., Berlin, 1893). A selection of the 
political letters was also published under the title Politische Briefe 
aus den Jahren 1 849-1 899 (2nd ed., Berlin, 1890). Of far greater 
importance are the collections of despatches and state papers edited 
by Herr v. Poschinger. These include four volumes entitled Preussen 
im Bundestag, 1851-1859 (4 vols., Leipzig, 1882-1885), which contain 
his despatches during the time he was at Frankfort. Next in import- 
ance are two works, Bismarck als Volkswirth and Aktenstiicke zur 
Wirthschaftspolitik des Fiirsten Bismarck, which are part of the collec- 
tion of state papers, Akenstilcke zur Gesckichte der Wirthschaftspolitik 
in Preussen. They contain full information on Bismarck's com- 
mercial policy, including a number of important state papers. A 
useful general collection io that by Ludwig Hahn, Bismarck, sein 
politisches Leben, &c. (5 vols., Berlin, 1878-1891), which includes a 
selection from letters, speeches and newspaper articles. These 
collections have only been possible owing to the extreme generosity 
which Bismarck showed in permitting the publication of documents; 
he always professed to have no secrets. A full account of the diplo- 
matic history from 1863 to 1866 is given by Sybel in Die Begrundung 
des deutschen Reichs (Munich, 1889-1894), written with the help of 
the Prussian archives. The last two volumes, covering 1866-1870, 
are of less value, as he was not able to use the archives for this 
period. Poschinger has also edited a series of works in which 
anecdotes, minutes of interviews and conversations are recorded; 
they are, however, of very unequal value. They are Bismarck und 
die Parlamentarier, Fiirst Bismarck und der Bundesrath, Die An- 
sprache des Filrsten Bismarck, Neue Tischgesprdche, and Bismarck 
und die Diplomaten. Selections from these have been published in 
English by Charles Lowe, The Tabletalk of Prince Bismarck, and by 
Sidney Whitman, Conversations with Bismarck. By far the fullest 
guide to Bismarck's life is Horst Kohl's Fiirst Bismarck, Regesten 
zu einer wissenschaftlichen Biographie (Leipzig, 1891-1892), which 
contains a record of Bismarck's actions on each day, with references 
to and extracts from his letters and speeches. For the works of 
Moritz Busch, which contain graphic pictures of his daily life, see 
the article Busch. Further materials were published periodically in 
the Bismarck- Jahrbuch, edited by Horst Kohl (Berlin, 1894-1896; 
Stuttgart, 1897-1899). Herr v. Poschinger also brought out a 
Bismarck Portfeuille. Of German biographies may be mentioned 
Hans Blum, Bismarck und seine Zeit (6 vols., Munich, 1894-1895), 
with a volume of appendices, &c. (1898); Heyck, Bismarck (Biele- 
feld, 1898); Kreutzer, Otto von Bismarck (2 vols., Leipzig, 1900); 
Klein- Hattingen, Bismarck und seine Welt, 1815-1871, Bd. i. (Berlin, 
1902) ; Lenz, Geschichte Bismarcks (Leipzig, 1902) ; Penzler, Fiirst 
Bismarck nach seiner Entlassung (7 vols., ib. 1897-1898); Liman, 
one volume under the same title (ib. 1901). There are English 
biographies by Charles Lowe, Bismarck, a Political Biography 
(revised edition in 1 vol., 1895), by James Headlam (1899), and by 
F.Stearns (Philadelphia, 1900). A useful bibliography of all works on 
Bismarck up to 1895 is Paul Schulze and Otto Roller's Bismarck- 
Literatur (Leipzig, 1896). . . (J.W. He.) 

BISMARCK, the capital of North Dakota, U.S.A., and the 
county-seat of Burleigh county, on the E. bank of the Missouri 
river, in the S. central part of the state. Pop. (1890) 2186; 
(1900) 3319, of whom 746 were foreign-born; (1905) 4913; (1910) 
5443. It is on the main line of the Northern Pacific, and on the 
Minneapolis, St Paul & Sault Ste Marie railways; and steamboats 
run from here to Mannhaven, Mercer county, and Fort Yates, 
Morton county. The city is about 1650 ft. above sea-level. It 
contains the state capitol, the state penitentiary, a U.S. land 
office, a U.S. surveyor-general's office, a U.S. Indian school and a 
U.S. weather station; about a mile S. of the city is Fort Lincoln, 
a United States army post. Bismarck is the headquarters for 
navigation of the upper Missouri river, is situated in a good 
agricultural region, and has a large wholesale trade, shipping 
grain, hides, furs, wool and coal. It was founded in 1873, and 
was chartered as a city in 1876; from 1883 to 1889 it was the 
capital of Dakota Territory, on the division of which it became 
the capital of North Dakota. 

BISMARCK ARCHIPELAGO, the collective name of a large 
number of islands lying N. and N.E. of New Guinea, between 
i° and 7 S., and 146 and 153° E., belonging to Germany. The 
largest island is New Pomerania, and the archipelago also 
includes New Mecklenburg, New Hanover, with small attendant 
islands, the Admiralty Islands and a chain of islands oS the 



coast of New Guinea, the whole system lying in the form 
of a great amphitheatre of oval shape. The archipelago was 
named in honour of the first chancellor of the German empire, 
after a German protectorate had been declared in 1884. (See 
Admiralty Islands, New Mecklenburg, New Pomerania, 
New Guinea.) 

BISMILLAH, an Arabic exclamation, meaning " in the name 
of God." 

BISMUTH, a metallic chemical element; symbol Bi, atomic 
weight 208-5 (0= 16). It was probably unknown to the Greeks 
and Romans, but during the middle ages it became quite familiar, 
notwithstanding its frequent confusion with other metals. In 
1450 Basil Valentine referred to it by the name " wismut," and 
characterized it as a metal; some years later Paracelsus termed 
it " wissmat," and, in allusion to its brittle nature, affirmed it 
to be a "bastard" or "half-metal"; Georgius Agricola used 
the form " wissmuth," latinized to " bisemutum," and also the 
term " plumbum cineareum." Its elementary nature was 
imperfectly understood; and the impure specimens obtained 
by the early chemists explain, in some measure, its confusion 
with tin, lead, antimony, zinc and other metals; in 1595 
Andreas Libavius confused it with antimony, and in 1675 
Nicolas Lemery with zinc. These obscurities began to be finally 
cleared up with the researches of Johann Heinrich Pott (1692- 
1777), a pupil of Stahl, published in his Exercitationes chemicae 
de Wismutho (1769), and of N. Geoffroy, son of Claude Joseph 
Geoffroy, whose contribution to our knowledge of this metal 
appeared in the Memoir es de I'academie fran$aise for 1753. 
Torbern Olof Bergman reinvestigated its properties and deter- 
mined its reactions; his account, which was published in his 
Opuscula, contains the first fairly accurate description of the 
metal. 

Ores and Minerals. — The principal source of bismuth is 
the native metal, which is occasionally met with as a mineral, 
usually in reticulated and arborescent shapes or as foliated 
and granular masses with a crystalline fracture. Although 
bismuth is readily obtained in fine crystals by artificial 
means, yet natural crystals are rare and usually indistinct: 
they belong to the rhombohedral system and a cube-like 
rhombohedron with interfacial angles of 92 20' is the predomi- 
nating form. There is a perfect cleavage perpendicular to the 
trigonal axis of the crystals: the fact that only two (opposite) 
corners of the cube-like crystals can be truncated by cleavage 
at once distinguishes them from true cubes. When not tarnished, 
the mineral has a silver- white colour with a tinge of red, and the 
lustre is metallic. Hardness 2-2J; specific gravity 9-70-9-83. 
The slight variations in specific gravity are due to the presence 
of small amounts of arsenic, sulphur or tellurium, or to enclosed 
impurities. 

Bismuth occurs in metalliferous veins traversing gneiss or 
clay-slate, and is usually associated with ores of silver and cobalt. 
Well-known localities are Schneeberg in Saxony and Joachims thai 
in Bohemia; at the former it has been found as arborescent 
groups penetrating brown jasper, which material has occasionally 
been cut and polished for small ornaments. The mineral has 
been found in some Cornish mines and is fairly abundant in 
Bolivia (near Sorata, and at Tasna in Potosi). It is the chief 
commercial source of bismuth. 

The oxide, bismuth ochre, Bi 2 3 , and the sulphide, bismuth 
glance or bismuthite, are also of commercial importance. The 
former is found, generally mixed with iron, copper and arsenic 
oxides, in Bohemia, Siberia, Cornwall, France (Meymac) and 
other localities; it also occurs admixed with bismuth carbonate 
and hydrate. The hydrated carbonate, bismutite, is of less 
importance; it occurs in Cornwall, Bolivia, Arizona and else- 
where. 

Of the rarer bismuth minerals we may notice the following: — 
the complex sulphides, copper bismuth glance or wittichenite, 
BiCu 3 S 3 , silver bismuth glance, bismuth cobalt pyrites, bismuth 
nickel pyrites or saynite, needle ore (patrinite or aikinite), 
BiCuPbS 3 , emplectite, CuBiS 2 , and kobellite, BiAsPb 3 S 6 ; the 
sulphotelluride tetradymite; the selenide guanajuatite, Bi 2 Se 3 , 



IO 



BISMUTH 



the basic tellurate montanite, Bi 2 (OH) 4 Te04; the silicates 
eulytite and agricolite, Bi^SiQi^; and the uranyl arsenate 
walpurgite, Bi(U0 2 ) 3 (OH) M (As0 4 )4. 

Metallurgy. — Bismuth is extracted from its ores by dry, wet, 
or electro-metallurgical methods, the choice depending upon the 
composition of the ore and economic conditions. The dry process 
is more frequently practised, for the easy reducibility of the oxide 
and sulphide, together with the low melting-point of the metal, 
renders it possible to effect a ready separation of the metal from 
the gangue and impurities. The extraction from ores in which the 
bismuth is present in the metallic condition may be accomplished 
by a simple liquation, or melting, in which the temperature isvjust 
. sufficient to melt the bismuth, or by a complete fusion of the ore. 
The first process never extracts all the bismuth, as much as one- 
third being retained in the matte or speiss; the second is more 
satisfactory, since the extraction is more complete, and also allows 
the addition of reducing agents to decompose any admixed bismuth 
oxide or sulphide. In the liquation process the ore is heated in 
inclined cylindrical retorts, and the molten metal is tapped at the 
lower end ; the residues being removed from the upper end. The 
fusion process is preferably carried out in crucible furnaces; shaft 
furnaces are unsatisfactory on account of the disintegrating action 
of the molten bismuth on the furnace linings. 

Sulphuretted ores are smelted, either with or without a preliminary 
calcination, with metallic iron; calcined ores may be smelted with 
carbon (coal). The reactions are strictly analogous to those which 
occur in the smelting of galena (see Lead), the carbon reducing any 
oxide, either present originally in the ore or produced in the calcina- 
tion, and the iron combining with the sulphur of the bismuthite. 
A certain amount of bismuth sulphate is always formed during the 
calcination; this is subsequently reduced to the sulphide and 
ultimately to the metal in the fusion. Calcination in reverberatory 
furnaces and a subsequent smelting in the same type of furnace 
with the addition of about_3 % of coal, lime, soda and fluorspar, 
has been adopted for treating the Bolivian, ores, which generally 
contain the sulphides of bismuth, copper, iron, antimony, lead and 
a little silver. The lowest layer of the molten mass is principally 
metallic bismuth, the succeeding layers are a bismuth copper matte, 
which is subsequently worked up, and a slag. Ores containing the 
oxide and carbonate are treated either by smelting with carbon or 
by a wet process. 

In the wet process the ores, in which the bismuth is present as 
oxide or carbonate, are dissolved out with hydrochloric acid, or, 
if the bismuth is to be extracted from a matte or alloy, the solvent 
employed is aqua regia or strong sulphuric acid. The solution of 
metallic chlorides or sulphates so obtained is precipitated by iron, 
the metallic bismuth filtered, washed with water, pressed in canvas 
bags, and finally fused in graphite crucibles, the surface being pro- 
tected by a layer of charcoal. Another process consists in adding 
water to the solution and so precipitating the bismuth as oxy- 
chloride, which is then converted into the metal. 

The crude metal obtained by the preceding processes is generally 
contaminated by arsenic, sulphur, iron, nickel, cobalt and antimony, 
and sometimes with silver or gold. A dry method of purification 
consists in a liquation on a hearth of peculiar construction, which 
occasions the separation of the unreduced bismuth sulphide and the 
bulk of the other impurities. A better process is to remelt the metal 
in crucibles with the addition of certain refining agents. The details of 
this process vary very considerably, being conditioned by the composi- 
tion of the impure metal and the practice of particular works. The 
wet refining process is more tedious and expensive, and is only 
exceptionally employed, as in the case of preparing the pure metal 
or its salts for pharmaceutical or chemical purposes. The basic 
nitrate is the salt generally prepared, and, in general outline, the 
process consists in dissolving the metal in nitric acid, adding water 
to the solution, boiling the precipitated basic nitrate with ah alkali 
to remove the arsenic and lead, dissolving the residue in nitric acid, 
and reprecipitating as basic nitrate with water. J. F. W. Hampe 
prepared chemically pure bismuth by fusing the metal with sodium 
carbonate and sulphur, dissolving the bismuth sulphide so formed 
in nitric acid, precipitating the bismuth as the basic nitrate, re- 
dissolving this salt in nitric acid, and then precipitating with 
ammonia. The bismuth hydroxide so obtained is finally reduced by 
hydrogen. 

Properties. — Bismuth is a very brittle metal with a white crystal- 
line fracture and a characteristic reddish-white colour. It crystal- 
lizes in rhombohedra belonging to the hexagonal system, having 
interfacial angles of 87 ° 40'. According to G. W^ A. Kahlbaum, 
Roth and Siedler (Zeil. Anorg. Chem. 29, p. 294), its specific gravity is 
9-78143; Roberts and Wrightson give the specific gravity of solid 
bismuth as 9-82, and of molten bismuth as 10-055. It therefore 
expands on solidification; and as it retains this property in a 
number of alloys, the metal receives extensive application in forming 
type-metals. Its melting-point is variously given as 268-3° (F- 
Rudberg and A. D. von Riemsdijk) and 270-5° (C. C. Person); 
commercial bismuth melts at 260° (Ledebur), and electrolytic 
bismuth at 264° (Classen). It vaporizes in a vacuum at 292°, and its 
boiling-point, under atmospheric pressure, is between 1090° and 
1450° (T. Carnelley and W. C. Williams). Regnault determined its 



specific heat between 0° and ioo° to be 0-0368 ;' Kahlbaum, RotH 
and Siedler (loc. cit.) give the value 0-03055. Its thermal conductivity 
is the lowest of all metals, being 18'as compared with silver as 10*00; 
its coefficient of expansion between 0° and 100° is 0-001341.. Its 
electrical conductivity is approximately 1-2, silver at 0°' being taken 
as 100; it is the most diamagnetic substance known, and its therrrio- 
electric properties render it especially valuable for the construction 
of thermopiles. ■' ' ■; 

The metal oxidizes very slowly in dry air at ordinary temperatures; 
but somewhat more rapidly in moist air or when heated. ' • Jn the last 
case it becomes coated with a greyish-black layer of ' an oxidfe 
(dioxide (?) ),at a red heat the layer consists of the trioxide (Bi 2 p 3 ); 
and is yellow or green in the case of pure bismuth, 1 and Violet or'blue 
if impure; at a bright red heat it burns with a bluish flame to the 
trioxide. Bismuth combines directly with the halogens, and the' 
elements of the sulphur group. It readily dissolves, in nitric acid, 
aqua regia, and hot sulphuric acid, but tardily in hot hydrochloric 
acid. It is precipitated as the metal from solutions of its salts by 
the metals of the alkalis and alkaline earths, 'zinc; iron, copper, &C; 
In its ;chem»cal affinities it resembles arsenic and antimony; an 
important distinction is that it forms no hydrogen' /compound 
analogous to arsine and stibine. ' '•' , V '.'''' 

Alloys. — -Bismuth readily forms alloys with other metals. Treated 
with sodammonium it yields a bluish-black mass, BiN;a 3 , which takes 
fire in the air and decomposes water. A brittle potassium alloy of 
silver-white colour and lamellar fracture is obtained by calcining 
20 parts of bisfriuth with 16 of crearn'of tartar, a*t a strong red heat. 
When present in other 'metals, even in very Small quantity, bismuth 
renders them brittle and impairs their electrical conductivity.' 
With mercury it forms amalgams. Bismuth is a component of many 
ternary alloys characterized by their "low fusibility and expansion in 
solidification; many ' of them are used in : the arts (see FusiBtE 
Metal),; "' ■■' '■ : ' ' : ' ' ' 

Compounds. — Bismuth forms four oxides, of which the trioxide, 
Bi 2 3 , is the most important. This compound occurs in nature as 
bismuth ochre, and may be prepared artificially by oxidizing the 
metal at a red heat, or by heating the carbonate, nitrate' .or hydrate; 
.Thus obtained it is a' yellow powder, soluble, in' the mineral acids 
to form soluble salts, which are readily precipitated as basic salts 
;When the solution is diluted. It melt? to a reddish-brown liquid, 
, which solidifies to a yellow crystalline mass'ori cooling. The hydrate, 
Bi(OH) 3 , is obtained as a white powder by adding potash to a solution 
of a bismuth salt. Bismuth dioxide, BiO or Bi 2 2 , is said to be 
formed by the limited oxidation of the metal, and as a brown pre- 
cipitate by adding mixed solutions of bismuth and stannous chlorides 
to a solution of caustic potash. Bismuth tetroxide, Bi 2 04, sometimes 
termed bismuth bismuthate, is obtained by melting bismuth ,tfioxide 
with potash, or by igniting bismuth trioxide with potash and potas- 
sium chlorate. It is also formed 'by oxidizing bismuth trioxide 
suspended in caustic potash with chlorine.'thepentoxide being formed 
simultaneously; oxidation and, potassium ferricyanide simply gives 
the tetroxide (Hauser and Vanino, Zeit. Anorg. Chem., 1904,39, p.381). 
The hydrate, Bi 2 Cv2H 2 0, is also known. Bismuth pentoxide, Bi 2 C 6 , 
is obtained by heating bismuthic acid, HBi0 3 ; to 130° C. ; this acid 
(in the form of its salts) being the product of the continued oxidation 
of an alkaline solution of bismuth trioxide. 

Bismuth forms two chlorides : BiCl 2 and BiCl 3 . The dichloride, 
BiCl 2 , is obtained as a brown crystalline powder by fusing the metal 
with the trichloride, or in a current of chlorine, or by heating the 
metal with calomel to 250°. Water decomposes it to metallic 
bismuth and the oxychloride, BiOCl. Bismuth trichloride, BiCl 3 , 
was obtained by Robert Boyle by heating the metal with corrosive 
sublimate. It is the final product of burning bismuth in an excess 
of chlorine. It is a white substance, melting at 225°-230° and 
boiling at 435°-44l°. With excess of water, it gives a white pre- 
cipitate of the oxychloride, BiOCl. Bismuth trichloride forms double 
compounds with hydrochloric acid, the chlorides of the alkaline 
metals, ammonia, nitric oxide and nitrosyl chloride. Bismuth tri- 
fluoride, BiF 3 , a white powder, bismuth tribromide, BiBr 8 , golden 
yellow crystals, bismuth iodide, Bil 3 , greyish-black crystals, are also 
known. These compounds closely resemble the trichloride in their 
methods of preparation and their properties, forming oxyhaloids 
with water, and double compounds with ammonia, &c. 

Carbonates. — The basic carbonate, 2(BiO) 2 C0 3 -H 2 0, obtained as a 
white precipitate when an alkaline carbonate is added to a solution of 
bismuth nitrate, is employed in medicine. Another basic carbonate, 
3(BiO) 2 C0 3 -2Bi(OH) 3 -3H 2 0, constitutes the mineral bismutite. 

Nitrates. — The normal nitrate, Bi(N0 3 ) 3 -5H 2 0, is obtained in 
large transparent asymmetric prisms by evaporating; a solution of 
the metal in nitric acid. The action of water on this solution pro- 
duces a crystalline precipitate of basic nitrate, probably Bi(QH) 2 N0 3 , 
though it varies with the amount of water employed. This pre- 
cipitate constitutes the " magistery of bismuth " or " subnitrate of 
bismuth " of pharmacy, and under the name of pearl white, blanc 
d'Espagne or blanc de fard has long been used as a cosmetic. 

Sulphides. — Bismuth combines directly with ' sulphur to form, a 
disulphide, BisSi, and a trisulphide, Bi 2 S 3 ,, the latter compound 
being formed when the sulphur is in excess. A hydrated disulphide,' 
Bi 2 S 2 -2H 2 0, is obtained by passing sulphuretted hydrogen into a 
solution of bismuth nitrate and stannous chloride. Bismuth 



BISMUTHITE^ISf^N 



ii 



bisulphide is a grey metallic substance, which is decomposed by 
hydrochloric acid with the separation of metallic bismuth and the 
formation of bismuth trichloride. Bismuth trisulphide, Bi 2 S3, 
constitutes, the mineral hismuthite, and may be prepared by direct 
union of its constituents, or as a brown precipitate by passing 
sulphuretted hydrogen into a solution of a bismuth salt. It is, 
easily soluble in nitric acid. When heated to 200° it assumes the 
crystalline form of bismuthite. Bismuth forms several oxysulphides : 
B14O3S constitutes the mineral karelinite found at the Zavodinski 
mine in the Altai ;Bi 6 OaS4, and Bi 2 O s S have been prepared artificially. 
Bismuth also forms the sulphohaloids, BiSCl, BiSBr, BiSI, analogous 
to the oyxhaloids. 

Bismuth sulphate, Bi 2 (S04)s, is obtained as a white powder by 
dissolving the metal or sulphide in concentrated sulphuric acid. 
Water decomposes it, giving a basic salt, Bi 2 (S04)(OH)4, which on 
heating gives (BiO) 2 S04. Other basic salts are known, 
'■ Bismuth forms compounds similar to the trisulphide with the 
elements selenium and tellurium. The tritelluride constitutes the 
mineral tetradymite, Bi 2 Te3. ' 

4»<z/yw.-^Traces of bismuth may be detected by treating the- 
solution with excess of tartaric acid, potash and stannous chloride,, 
a precipitate or dark colpration of bismuth oxide being formed' even 
when only one part of bismuth is present in 20,000 of water. The: 
blackish brown sulphide precipitated from bismuth salts by sulphur- 
etted hydrogen is insoluble in ammonium sulphide, but is readily 
dissolved by nitric acid, The metal can be reduced by magnesium, 
2inc, cadmium, iron, tin, copper and substances like hypo-' 
phosphorous acid- from acid solutions or froffi alkaline ones by : 
formaldehyde. In quantitative estimations, it is generally weighed 
as: oxide, after precipitation as sulphide or carbonate, or in the; 
metallic form, reduced as above. 

; Pharmacology. — The salts of bismuth are feebly antiseptic. 
Taken 'internally the subnitrate, coming into contact with water, 
tends to decompose, gradually liberating nitric acid, one of the most, 
powerful antiseptics. The physical properties of the powder 
also give it a mild astringent action. There are no remote 
actions. 

Tfkrapcutics.— -The subnitrate of bismuth is invaluable in certain 
cases of dyspepsia, and still more notably so in diarrhoea. It owes 
its value to the decomposition described above, by means of which 
a powerful antiseptic action is safely and continuously exerted. 
There is hardly a safer drug. It may be given in drachm doses with 
impunity. It colours the faeces black owing to the formation of 
sulphide. 

BISMUTHITE, a somewhat rare mineral, consisting of bismuth 
trisulphide, Bi 2 S3. It crystallizes in the orthorhombic system 
and is ispmorphous with stibnite (Sb2S 3 ) , which it closely resembles 
in appearance. It forms loose interlacing aggregates of acicular 
crystals without terminal faces (only in a single instance has a 
terminated crystal been observed), or as masses with a foliated 
or fibrous structure. An important character is the perfect: 
cleavage in one direction parallel to the length of the needles.: 
The colour is lead-grey inclining to tin-white and often with a 
yellowish or iridescent tarnish. The hardness is 2; specific; 
grayity 6/4-6'S- Bismuthite occurs at several localities in, 
Cornwall and Bolivia, often in association with native bismuth: 
and tin-ores. Other localities are known; for instance, Brandy 
Gill in Caldbeck Fells, Cumberland, where with molybdenite and 
apatite it is embedded in white quartz. The mineral was known 
to A. Cronstedt in 1758, and was named bismuthine by F. S. 
Beudant in 1832. This name, which is also used in the forms 
Bismuthite and bismuthinite, is rather unfortunate, since it is : 
readily confused with bismite (bismuth oxide) and bismutitc 
(basic bismuth carbonate), especially as the latter has also been; 
used in the form bismuthite. The name bismuth-glance or, 
bismutholamprite for the species under consideration is free from 
this objection. (L. J.S.) 

BISMYA, a group of ruin mounds, about 1 m. long and 5 m. 
wide, consisting of a number of low ridges, nowhere exceeding 40 
ft. in height, lying in the Jezireh, somewhat nearer to the Tigris 
than the Euphrates, about a day's journey to the south-east of 
Nippur, a little below 32° N. and about 45° 40' E. Excavations 
conducted here for six months, 'from Christmas of 1903 to June 
1904, for the university of Chicago, by Dr Edgar J. Banks, 
proved that these' mounds covered the site of the ancient city of 
Adab (Ud-Nun), hitherto known only from a brief mention of its 
name in the introduction. to the Khammurabi code (e. 2250 B.C.). 
The city was divided into two parts by a canal, on an island in 
■which stood the temple, E-mach, with a ziggurat, or stage tower. 
It was evidently once a city of considerable importance, but 



deserted at a very early peripd, since the ruins found close to the 
surface of the mounds belong to Dungi and Ur Gur, kings of Ur 
in the earlier part of the third millennium B.C. Immediately 
below these, as at Nippur, were found the remains of Naram-Sin 
and Sar-gpn, c. 3000 B.C. Below these there were still 35 ft. 
of stratified remains, constituting seven-eighths of the total 
depth of the ruins. Besides the remains of buildings, walls, 
graves, &c, Dr Banks discovered a large number of inscribed 
clay tablets of a very early period, bronze and stone tablets, 
bronze implements and the like. But the two most nptable 
discoveries were a complete statue in white marble, apparently 
the most ancient yet found in Babylonia (now in the museum in 
Cpnstantinpple), bearing the inscription—" E-mach, King 
Da-uclu, King of, Ud-Nun "; and a temple refuse heap, 
consisting of great quantities of fragments of vases in marble, 
alabaster, onyx, porphyry and granite, some of which were 
inscribed, and others engraved and inlaid with ivory and precious 
stones. ' (J. P. Pe.) 

' BISON, the name of the one existing species of European wild 
ox, Bos (Bison) bonasus, known in Russian as zubr. Together 
with the nearly allied New World animal known in Europe as 
the (North) American bison, but in its own country as " buffalo," 
and scientifically as Bos (Bison) bison, the bison represents a 
group of the ox tribe distinguished from other species by the 
greater breadth and convexity of the forehead, superior length 
of limb, and the longer spinal processes of the dorsal vertebrae, 
which, with the powerful muscles attached for the support of the 
massive head, form a protuberance or hump on the shoulders. 
The bisons have also fourteen pairs of ribs, while the common ox 
has only thirteen. The forehead and neck of both species are 
covered with long, shaggy hair of a dark brown colour; and in 
winter the whole of the neck, shoulders and hump are similarly 
clothed, so as to form a curly, felted mane. This mane in the 
European species disappears in summer; but in the American 
bison it is to a considerable extent persistent. 

The bison is now the largest European quadruped, measuring 
about 10 ft. long, exclusive of the tail, and standing nearly 6 ft. 
high. Formerly it was abundant throughout Europe, as is 
proved by the fossil remains of this or a closely allied form found 
on the continent and in . England, associated with those of the 
extinct mammoth and rhinoceros. Caesar mentions the bison 
as abounding, along with the extinct aurochs or wild ox, in the 
forests of Germany and Belgium, where it appears to have been 
occasionally captured and afterwards exhibited alive in the 
Roman amphitheatres. At that period, and long after, it seems 
to have been common throughout central Europe, as we learn 
from the evidence of Herberstein in the 16th century. Nowadays 
bison are found in a truly wild condition only in the forests of the 
Caucasus, where they are specially protected by the Russian 
government. There is, however, a herd, somewhat in the 
condition of park-animals, in the forest of Byelovitsa, in Lithu- 
ania, where it is protected by the tsar, but nevertheless is 
gradually dying out. In 1862 the Lithuanian bisons numbered 
over 1200, but by 1872 they had diminished to 528, and in 1892 
there were only 491. The prince of Pless has a small herd at 
Promnitz, his Silesian estate, founded by the gift of a bull and 
three cows by Alexander II. in 1855, his herd being the source 
of the menagerie supply. 

Bison feed on a coarse aromatic grass, and browse on the 
leaves, shoots, bark and twigs of trees; 

The American bison is distinguished from its European cousin 
by the following among other features: The hind-quarters are 
weaker and fall away more suddenly, while the withers are 
proportionately higher. Especially characteristic is the great 
mass of brown or blackish brown hair clothing the head, neck 
and forepart of the body. The shape of the skull and horns is 
also different; the horns themselves being shorter, thicker, 
blunter and more sharply curved, while the forehead of the 
skull is more convex and the sockets of the eyes are more 
distinctly tubular. This species formerly ranged over a third of 
North America in countless numbers, but is now practically 
extinct. The great herd was separated into a northern and 



12 



BISQUE— BITHYNIA 



southern division by the completion of the Union Pacific railway, 
and the annual rate of destruction from 1870 to 1875 has been 
estimated at 2,500,000 head. In 1880 the completion of the 
Northern Pacific railway led to an attack upon the northern herd. 
The last of the Dakota bisons were destroyed by Indians in 1883, 
leaving then less than 1000 wild individuals in the United 
States. 

A count which was concluded at the end of February 1903, 
put the number of captive bisons at 11 19, of which 969 were in 
parks and zoological gardens in the United States, 41 in Canada 
and 109 in Europe. At the same time it was estimated that 
there were 34 wild bison in the United States and 600 in Canada. 

In England small herds are kept by the duke of Bedford at 
Woburn Abbey, Bedfordshire, and by Mr C. J. Leyland at 
Haggerston Castle, Northumberland. 

Two races of the American bison have been distinguished — 
the typical prairie form, and the woodland race, B. bison 
athabascae; but the two are very similar. (R. L.*) 

BISQUE (a French word of unknown origin, formerly spelt in 
English "bisk"), a term for odds given in the games of tennis, 
lawn tennis, croquet and golf; in the two former a bisque is one 
point to be taken at any time during a " set " at the choice of 
the receiver of the odds, while in croquet and golf it is one extra 
stroke to be taken similarly during a game. The name is given, 
in cookery, to a thick soup, made particularly of crayfish or 
lobsters. 

BISSELL, GEOBGE EDWIN (1839- ), American sculptor, 
son of a quarryman and marble-cutter, was born at New Preston, 
Connecticut, on the 16th of February 1839. During the Civil 
War he served as a private in the 23rd Connecticut volunteers 
in the Department of the Gulf (1862-1863), and on being 
mustered out became acting assistant paymaster in the South 
Atlantic squadron. At the close of the war he joined his father 
in business. He studied the art of sculpture abroad in 1875-1876, 
and lived much in Paris during the years 1883-1896, with 
occasional visits to America. Among his more important works 
are the soldiers' and sailers' monument, and a statue of Colonel 
Chatfield, at Waterbury, Connecticut; and statues of General 
Gates at Saratoga, New York, of Chancellor John Watts in 
Trinity churchyard, New York City; of Colonel Abraham de 
Peyster in Bowling Green, New York City; of Abraham Lincoln 
at Edinburgh; of Burns and "Highland Mary," in Ayr, 
Scotland; of Chancellor James Kent, in the Congressional 
library, Washington; and of President Arthur in Madison 
Square, New York City. 

BISSEXT, or Bissextus (Lat. Ms, twice; sextus, sixth), the 
day intercalated by the Julian calendar in the February of every 
fourth year to make up the six hours by which the solar year was 
computed to exceed the year of 365 days. The day was inserted 
after the 24th of February, i.e. the 6th day before the calends 
(1st) of March; there was consequently, besides the sextus, or 
sixth before the calends, the bis-sextus or " second sixth," our 
25th of February. In modern usage, with the exception of 
ecclesiastical calendars, the intercalary day is added for con- 
venience at the end of the month, and years in which February 
has 29 days are called " bissextile," or leap-years. 

BISTRE, the French name of a brown paint made from the 
soot of wood, now largely superseded by Indian ink. 

BIT (from the verb " to bite," either in the sense of a piece 
bitten off, or an act of biting, or a thing that bites or is bitten), 
generally, a piece of anything; the word is, however, used in 
various special senses, all derivable from its origin, either literally 
or metaphorically. The most common of these are (1) its use 
as the name of various tools, e.g. centre-bit; (2) a horse's " bit," 
or the metal mouth-piece of the bridle; (3) in money, a small 
sum of money of varying value (e.g. threepenny-bit), especially 
in the West Indies and southern United States: 

BITHUR, a town in the Cawnpore district of the United 
Provinces of India, 12 m. N.W. of Cawnpore city. Pop. (1901) 
7173. It is chiefly notable for its connexion with the mutiny of 
1857. The last of the peshwas, B a ji Rao, was banished to Bithur, 
and his adopted son, the Nana Sahib, made the town his head- 



quarters. It was captured by Hayelock on the 19th of July 
1857, when the Nana's palaces were destroyed. 

BITHYNIA (Bidvvla), an ancient district in the N.W. of 
Asia Minor, adjoining the Propontis, the Thracian Bosporus 
and the Euxine. According to Strabo it was bounded on the 
. E. by the river Sangarius; but the more commonly received 
division extended it to the Parthenius, which separated it from 
Paphlagonia, thus comprising the district inhabited by the 
Mariandyni. On the W. and S.W. it was separated from Mysia 
by the river Rhyndacus; and on the S. it adjoined Phrygia 
Epictetus and Galatia. It is in great part occupied by moun- 
tains and forests, but has valleys and districts near the sea-coast 
of great fertility. The most important mountain range is the 
(so-called) " Mysian " Olympus (7600 ft.), which towers above 
Brusaandis clearly visible as far away as Constantinople (70 m.). 
Its summits are covered with snow for a great part of the year. 
East of this the range now called Ala-Dagh extends for above 
100 m. from the Sangarius to Paphlagonia. Both of these ranges 
belong to that border of mountains which bounds the great table- 
land of Asia Minor. The country between them and the coast, 
covered with forests and traversed by few lines of route, is still 
imperfectly known. But the broad tract which projects towards 
the west as far as the shores of the Bosporus, though hilly and 
covered with forests — the Turkish Aghatch Denizi, or "The 
Ocean of Trees " — is not traversed by any mountain chain. The 
west coast is indented by two deep inlets, (1) the northernmost, 
the Gulf of Ismid (anc. Gulf of Astacus), penetrating between 
40 and 50 m. into the interior as far as Ismid (anc. Nicomedia), 
separated by an isthmus of only about 25 m. from the Black 
Sea; (2) the Gulf of Mudania or Gemlik (Gulf of Cius), about 
25 m. long. At its extremity is situated the small town of 
Gemlik (anc. Cius) at the mouth of a valley, communicating 
with the lake of Isnik, on which was situated Nicaea. 

The principal rivers are the Sangarius (mod. Sakaria), which 
traverses the province from south to north; the Rhyndacus, which 
separated it from Mysia; and the Billaeus (Filiyas), which rises 
in the Ala-Dagh, about 50 m. from the sea, and after flowing 
by Boli (anc. ClaudiopoHs) falls into the Euxine, close to the 
ruins of the ancient Tium, about 40 m. north-east of Heraclea, 
having a course of more than 100 m. The Parthenius (mod. 
Bartan), the boundary of the province towards the east, is a 
much less considerable stream. 

Thenaturalresources of Bi thynia are still imperfectly developed. 
Its vast forests would furnish an almost inexhaustible supply 
of timber, if rendered accessible by roads. Coal also is known 
to exist near Eregli (Heraclea). The valleys towards the Black 
Sea abound in fruit trees of all kinds, while the valley of the 
Sangarius and the plains near Brusa and Isnik (Nicaea) are 
fertile and well cultivated. Extensive plantations of mulberry 
trees supply the silk for which Brusa has long been celebrated, 
and which is manufactured there on a large scale. 

According to ancient authors (Herodotus, Xenophon, Strabo, 
&c), the Bithynians were an immigrant Thracian tribe. The 
existence of a tribe called Thyni in Thrace is well attested, and 
the two cognate tribes of the Thyni and Bithyni appear to have 
settled simultaneously in the adjoining parts of Asia, where they 
expelled or subdued the Mysians, Caucones, and other petty 
tribes, the Mariandyni alone maintaining themselves in the north- 
east. Herodotus mentions the Thyni and Bithyni as existing side 
by side; but ultimately the latter must have become the more 
important, as they gave their name to the country. They were 
incorporated by Croesus with the Lydian monarchy, with which 
they fell under the dominion of Persia (546 B.C.), and were 
included in the satrapy of Phrygia, which comprised all the 
countries up to the Hellespont and Bosporus. But even before 
the conquest by Alexander the Bithynians appear to have 
asserted their independence, and successfully maintained it 
under two native princes, Bas and Zipoetes, the last of whom 
transmitted his power to his son Nicomedes I., the first to 
assume the title of king. This monarch founded Nicomedia, 
which soon rose to great prosperity, and during his long reign 
(278-250 B.C.), as well as those of his successors, Prusias I., 



BITLIS— BITTERLING 



13 



Prusias II, and Nicomedes II. (149-91 B.C.), the kingdom of 
Bithynia held a considerable place among the minor monarchies 
of Asia. But the last king, Nicomedes III., was unable to 
maintain himself against Mithradates of Pontus, and, after being 
restored to his throne by the Roman senate, he bequeathed his 
kingdom by will to the Romans (74 B.C.). Bithynia now became 
a Roman province. Its limits were frequently varied, and it 
>yas commonly united for administrative purposes with the 
province of Pontus. This was the state of things in the time of 
Trajan, when the younger Pliny was appointed governor of 
the combined provinces (103-105 a.d.), a circumstance to 
which we are indebted for valuable information concerning the 
Roman provincial administration. Under the Byzantine empire 
Bithynia was again divided into two provinces, separated by the 
Sangarius, to the west of which the name of Bithynia was 
restricted. 

The most important cities were Nicomedia and Nicaea, which 
disputed with one another the rank of capital. Both of these 
were founded after Alexander the Great; but at a much earlier 
period the Greeks had established on the coast the colonies of 
Cius (afterwards Prusias, mod. Gemlik) ; Chalcedon, at the 
entrance of the Bosporus, nearly opposite Constantinople; and 
Heraclea Pontica, on the Euxine, about 120 m. east of the Bos- 
porus. All these rose to be flourishing places of trade, as also 
Prusa at the foot of M. Olympus (see Brusa). The only other 
places of importance at the present day are Ismid (Nicomedia) 
and Scutari. 

. See C. Texier, Asie Mineure (Paris, 1839); G. Perrot, Galatie et 
Bithynie (Paris, 1862); W. von Diest in Petermanns Mittheilungen, 
Erganzungsheft, 116 (Gotha, 1895). (E. H. B.; F. W. Ha.) 

BITLIS, or Betlis (Arm. Paghesh), the chief town of a vilayet 
of the same name in Asiatic Turkey, situated at an altitude of 
4700 ft., in the deep, narrow valley of the Bitlis Chai, a tributary 
of the Tigris. The main part of the town and the bazaars are 
crowded alongside the stream, while suburbs with scattered 
houses among orchards and gardens extend up two tributary 
streams. The houses are massive and well built of a soft volcanic 
tufa, and with their courtyards and gardens climbing up the 
hillsides afford a striking picture. At the junction of two 
streams in the centre of the town is a fine old castle, partly 
ruined, which, according to local tradition, occupies the site 
of a fortress built by Alexander the Great. It is apparently 
an Arab building, as Arabic inscriptions appear on the walls, but 
as the town stands on the principal highway between the Van 
plateau and the Mesopotamian plain it must always have been 
of strategic importance. The bazaars are crowded, covered 
across with branches in summer, and typical of a Kurdish town. 
The population numbers 35,000, of whom about 12,000 are 
Armenians and the remainder are Kurds or of Kurdish descent. 

Kurdish beys and sheiks have much influence in the town 
and wild mountain districts adjoining, while the Sasun moun- 
tains, the scene of successive Armenian revolutions of late years, 
are not far off to the west. The town was ruled by a semi- 
independent Kurdish bey as late as 1836. There are some fine 
old mosques and medresses (colleges), and the Armenians have a 
large monastery and churches. There are British, French and 
Russian consuls in the town, and a branch of the American 
Mission with schools is established also. The climate is healthy 
and the thermometer rarely falls below o° Fahr., but there is a 
heavy snowfall and the narrow streets are blocked for some five 
months in the year. 

A good road runs southward down the pass, passing after a 
few miles some large chalybeate and sulphur springs. Roads 
also lead north to Mush and Erzerum and along the lake to Van. 
Postal communication is through Erzerum with Trebizond. 
Tobacco of an inferior quality is largely grown, and the chief 
industry is the weaving of a coarse red cloth. Manna and gum 
tragacanth are also collected. Fruit is also plentiful, and there 
are many vineyards close by. 

The Bitlis vilayet comprises a very varied section of Asiatic 
Turkey, as it includes the Mush plain and the plateau country 
west of Lake Van, as well as a large extent of wild mountain 



districts inhabited by turbulent Kurds and Armenians on either 
side of the central town of Bitlis, also some of the lower country 
about Sairt along the left bank of the main stream of the Tigris. 
The mountains have been little explored, but are believed to 
be rich in minerals, iron, lead, copper, traces of gold and many 
mineral springs are known to exist. (F. R. M.) 

BITONTO (anc. Butunti), a town and episcopal see of Apulia, 
Italy, in the province of Bari, 10 m. west by steam tramway 
fromBari. Pop. (1901) 30,617. It was a place of no importance 
in classical times. Its medieval walls are still preserved. Its 
cathedral is one of the finest examples of the Romanesque archi- 
tecture of Apulia, and has escaped damage from later restorations. 
The palazzo Sylos-Labini has a fine Renaissance court of 1502. 

BITSCH (Fr. Bitche), a town of Germany, in Alsace-Lorraine, 
on the Horn, at the foot of the northern slope of the Vosges 
between Hagenau and Saargemiind. Pop. (1905) 4000. There 
are a Roman Catholic and a Protestant church, a classical school 
and an academy of forestry. The industries include shoe-making 
and watch-making, and there is some trade in grain and timber. 
The town of Bitsch, which was formed cfut of the villages of 
Rohr and Kaltenhausen in the 17th century, derives its name 
from the old stronghold (mentioned in n 72 as Bytis Castrum) 
standing on a rock some 250 ft. above the town. This had long 
given its name to the countship of Bitsch, which was originally 
in the possession of the dukes of Lorraine. In 1297 it passed by 
marriage to Eberhard I. of Zweibriicken, whose line became 
extinct in 1569, when the countship reverted to Lorraine. It 
passed with that duchy to France in 1766. After that date the 
town rapidly increased in population. The citadel, which had 
been constructed by Vauban on the site of the old castle after 
the capture of Bitsch by the French in 1624, had been destroyed 
when it was restored to Lorraine in 1698. This was restored 
and strengthened in 1740 into a fortress that proved impregnable 
in all succeeding wars. The attack upon it by the Prussians 
in 1793 was repulsed; in 181 5 they had to be content with 
blockading it; and in 1870, though it was closely invested by 
the Germans after the battle of Worth, it held out until the end 
of the war. A large part of the fortification is excavated in the 
red sandstone rock, and rendered bomb-proof; a supply of 
water is secured to the garrison by a deep well in the interior. 

BITTER, KARL THEODORE FRANCIS (1867- ), American 
sculptor, was born in Vienna on the 6th of December 1867. 
After studying art there, in 1889 he removed to the United 
States, where he became naturalized. In America he gained 
great popularity as a sculptor, and in 1906-1907 was presi- 
dent of the National Sculpture Society, New York. Among 
his principal works are: the Astor memorial gates, Trinity 
church, New York; " Elements Controlled and Uncontrolled," 
on the Administration Building at the Chicago Exposition; 
a large relief, " Triumph of Civilization," in the waiting-room 
of the Broad Street station of the Pennsylvania railway in 
Philadelphia; decorations for the Dewey Naval Arch in New 
York City; the " Standard Bearers," at the Pan-American 
Exposition grounds; a sitting statue and a bust of Dr Pepper, 
provost of the University of Pennsylvania; and the Villard 
and Hubbard memorials in the New York chamber of commerce. 

BITTERFELD, a town of Germany, in the Prussian province 
of Saxony, 26 m. N. from Leipzig by rail, on the river Mulde, 
and an important junction of railways from Leipzig and Halle 
to Berlin. Pop. (1900) 11,839. It manufactures drain-pipes, 
paper-roofing and machinery, and has saw-mills. Several 
coal-mines are in the vicinity. The town was built by a colony 
of Flemish immigrants in n 53. It was captured by the land- 
grave of Meissen in 1476, and belonged thenceforth to Saxony, 
until it was ceded to Prussia in 18 15. Owing to its pleasant 
situation and accessibility, it has become a favourite residence 
of business men of Leipzig and Halle. 

BITTERLING {Rhodeus amarus), a little carp-like fish of 
central Europe, belonging to the Cyprinid family. In it we 
have a remarkable instance of symbiosis. The genital papilla 
of the female acquires a great development during the breeding 
season and becomes produced into a tube nearlv as long as the 



14 



BITTERN— BITUMEN 



fish itself; this acts as an ovipositor by means of which the 
comparatively few and large eggs (3 millimetres in diameter) 
are introduced through the gaping valves between the branchiae 
of pond mussels (Unio and Anodonta), where, after being in- 
seminated, they undergo their development, the fry leaving 
their host about a month later. The mollusc reciprocates by 
throwing off its embryos on the parent fish, in the skin of which 
they remain encysted for some time, the period of reproduction 
of the fish and mussel coinciding. 

BITTERN, a genus of wading birds, belonging to the family 
Ardeidae, comprising several species closely allied to the herons, 
from which they differ chiefly in their shorter neck, the back of 
which is covered with down, and the front with long feathers', 
which can be raised at pleasure. They are solitary birds, frequent- 
ing countries possessing extensive swamps, and marshy grounds, 
remaining at rest by day, concealed among the reeds and bushes 
of their haunts, and seeking their food, which consists of fish, 
reptiles, insects and small quadrupeds, in the twilight. The 
<c ommon bittern ( Botaurus stellaris) is nearly as large as the heron, 
mid is widely distributed over the eastern hemisphere. Formerly 
it was common in Britain, but extensive drainage and persecution 




Bittern. 

have greatly diminished its numbers and it is now only an un- 
certain visitor. Not a winter passes without its appearing in 
some numbers, when its uncommon aspect, its large size, and 
beautifully pencilled plumage cause it to be regarded as a great 
prize by the lucky gun-bearer to whom it falls a victim. Its 
value as a delicacy for the table, once so highly esteemed, has 
long vanished. The old fable of this bird inserting its beak into 
a reed or plunging it into the ground, and so causing the booming 
sound with which its name will be always associated, is also 
exploded, and nowadays indeed so few people in Britain have 
ever heard its loud and awful voice, which seems to be uttered 
only in the breeding-season, and is therefore unknown in a country 
where it no longer breeds, that incredulity as to its booming at 
all has in some quarters succeeded the old belief in this as in 
other reputed peculiarites of the species. The bittern in the 
days of falconry was strictly preserved, and afforded excellent 
sport. It sits crouching on the ground during the day, with its 
bill pointing in the air, a position from which it is not easily 
roused, and even when it takes wing, it's flight is neither swift 
nor long sustained. When wounded it requires to be approached 
with caution, as it will then attack either man or dog with its 
long sharp bill and its acute claws. It builds a rude nest among 
the reeds and flags, out Of the materials which surround it, and 



the female lays four or five* eggs* bf'a brOWhish olive, ' During 
the breeding season it utters a booming- noise, front which it 
probably derives its generic name, Botaurus, and . which has 
made it in many places an object of superstitious , dreadi Its 
plumage for the'most partis of a pale buff colour, rayed anc[ 
speckled with black and reddish brown. The American bittern 
{Botaurus lentigifiosus) i'.is somewhat smaller, than the European 
species, and is found throughout the central and southern 
portions Of North America. It also occurs' in' Britain as an 
occasional straggler. It is distinguishable by its uniform greyish- 
brown primaries, which want the tawny bars that characterize^ 
B. stellaris. Both species are good eating. . 

BITTERN (from " bitter "), the mother liquor obtained ftom 
sea-water or brines after the separation of the. sodium chloride 
(common salt) by Crystallization. It contains various mag- 
nesium salts (sulphate, chloride, bromide and iodide) and, is 
employed; commercially for the manufacture of Epsom salts 
(magnesium sulphate) and bromine. The same term is applied 
to a mixture of quassia, iron sulphate, cocculus indicus, liquorice. 
&c, used in adulterating beer. 

BITTERS, the name given to aromatized (generally alcoholic) 
beverages containing a bitter substance ,'pr Substances, used as 
tonics, appetizers or digestives. The bitterness is imparted by 
such substances as bitter orange rind, gentian, rhubarb, quassia, 
cascarilla, angostura, quinine and cinchona. Juniper, cinnamon", 
carraway, camomile, cloves and other flavouring agents are also 
employed in conjunction with the bitter principles, alcohol and 
sugar. Sorne bitters are prepared by simple maceration and 
subsequent filtration (see Liqueurs), others by the more conv 
plicated distillation process. Those prepared by the latter 
process are the finer commercial articles.' Bitters are usually 
Sold under the name of the substance which has been used to 
give them the predominant flavour, siich as orange, angostura 
or peach bitters, &c. The alcoholic strength of bitters varies, 
but is generally in the neighbourhood of 46% of alcohol. Some 
bitters, although possessing tonic properties; may be regarded 
as beverages pure and simple, notwithstanding the fact that they 
are seldom consumed in an undiluted" state; others again, are 
obviously medicinal preparations and should be treated as such! 

BITUMEN, the name applied by the Romans to the various 
descriptions of natural hydrocarbons, the yard petroleum not 
being used in classical Latin. In its widest sense it embraces the 
whole range of these substances, including natural gas, the more 
or less liquid descriptions of petroleum, and' the solid forms of 
asphalt, albertite, gilsonite or uintahite, elaterite, ozokerite and 
hatchettite. To distinguish bitumen intermediate in consistency 
between asphalt and the more liquid kinds of crude petroleum, 
the term maltha (Latin) is frequently employed. The bitumens 
of chief commercial importance may be grouped under the three 
headings of (1) natural gas, (2) petroleum, arid (3) asphalt, and 
will be found fully described under these titles. In the scriptures 
there are numerous references to bitumen, arnong which the 
following may be quoted: — In Genesis ix. 3, we are told that in 
the building of the tower of Babel " slime had they for mortar," 
and iii Genesis xiv. 10, that the vale of Siddim " was full of 
slime-pits," the word slime in the latter quotation from our 
version appearing as bitumen in the Vulgate. Herodotus alludes 
to the use of the bitumen brought down by the Is, a tributary 
of the Euphrates, as mortar in building the walls of Babylon; 
Diodorus, Curtius, 'Josephus, Bochart and others make similar 
mention of this use of bitumen, and Vitruvius tells us that it 
was employed inadmixture with clay. 

In its various forms, bitumen is one of the most widely dis- 
tributed of substances. It occurs, though sometimes only in 
small quantity, in aliriost every part of the globe, and 'through- 
out the whole range of geological strata, from the Laurentian 
rocks to the most recent members of the Quaternary period. 
Although the gaseous and liquid forms of bitumen may be' re- 
garded as having been formed in the strata in which, they are 
found or as having been received into such strata shortly after 
forrnation, the semi-solid and solid varieties may be considered 
to have been produced by the' oxidation and evaporation of 



BITURIGES^BIXIO 



IS 



liquid petroleum escaping from underlying or better preserved 
deposits into other strata, or into fissures where atmospheric 
action and loss of the more volatile constituents can take place. 
It should, however, be stated that there is some difference of 
opinion as to the precise manner of production of some of the 
solid forms of bitumen, and especially of ozokerite. (B. R.) 

BITURIGES, a Celtic people, according to Livy (v. 34) the 
most powerful in Gaul in the time of Tarquinius Priscus. At 
some period unknown they split up into two branches — Bituriges 
Cubi and Bituriges Vivisci. The name is supposed to mean 
either " rulers of the world " or " perpetual kings." 

The Bituriges Cubi, called simply Bituriges by Caesar, in 
whose time they acknowledged the supremacy of the Aedui, 
inhabited the modern diocese of Bourges, including the depart-' 
ments of Cher and Indre, and partly that of Allier. Their chief 
towns were Avaricum (Bourges), Argentomagus (Argenton-sur- 
Creuse), Neriomagus (Neris-les-Bains), Noviodunum (perhaps 
Villate). At the time of the rebellion of Vercingetorix (52 B.C.), 
Avaricum, after a desperate resistance, was taken by assault, 
and the inhabitants put to the sword. In the following year, 
the Bituriges submitted to Caesar, and under Augustus they 
were incorporated (in 28 B.C.) in Aquitania. Pliny (Nat. Hist. 
iv. iog) speaks of them as liberi, which points to their enjoying 
a certain amount of independence under Roman government. 
The district contained a number of iron works, and Caesar says 
they were skilled in driving galleries and mining queries,

The Bituriges Vivisci occupied the strip of land between the 
sea and the left bank of the Garonne, comprising the greater 
part of the modern department of Gironde. Their capital was 
Burdigala (Bordeaux), even then a place of considerable import- 
ance and a wine-growing centre. Like the Cubi, they also are 
called liberi by Pliny. 

See A. Desjardiris, Geographie historique de la Gaule romaine,^ ii. 
(1876-1893) ; A. Longnon, Geographie de la Gaule au VI' siecle 
(1878); A. Holder, Alt-celtischer Sprachschatz; T. R. Holmesi 
Caesar's Conquest of Gaul (1899). 

BITZIUS, ALBRECHT (1797-1854), Swiss novelist, best known 
by his pen name of "Jeremias Gotthelf," was born on the 4th 
of October 1797 at Morat, where his father was pastor. In 1804 
the home was moved to Utzenstorf, a village in the Bernese 
Emmenthal. Here young Bitzius grew up, receiving his early 
education and consorting with the boys of the village, as well as 
helping his father to cultivate his glebe. In 181 2 he went to 
complete his education at Bern, and in 1820 was received as a 
pastor. In 1821 he visited the university of Gottingen, but 
returned home in 1822 to act as his father's assistant. On his 
father's death (1824) he went in the same capacity to Herzogen- 
buchsee, and later to Bern (1829). Early in 1831 he went as 
assistant to the aged pastor of the village of Liitzelfliih, in the 
Upper Emmenthal (between Langnau and Burgdorf), being soon 
elected his successor (1832) and marrying one of his grand- 
daughters (1833). He spent the rest of his life there, dying on 
the 22nd of October 1854, and leaving three children (the son was 
a pastor, the two daughters married pastors). His first work, 
the Bauernspiegel, appeared in 1837. It purported to be the life 
of Jeremias Gotthelf, narrated by himself, and this name was 
later adopted by the author as his pen name. It is a living 
picture of Bernese (or, strictly speaking, Emmenthal) village 
life, true to nature, and not attempting to gloss over its defects 
and failings. It is written (like the rest of his works) in the 
Bernese dialect of the Emmenthal, though it must be remembered 
that Bitzius was not (like Auerbach) a peasant by birth, but 
belonged to the educated classes, so that he reproduces what he 
had seen and learnt, and not what he had himself personally 
experienced. The book was a great success, as it was a picture 
of real life, and not of fancifully beribboned 18th-century 
villagers. Among his later tales are the Leiden und Freuden 
eines Schulmeisters (1838-1839), Uli der Knecht (1841), with its 
continuation, Uli der Pachter (1849), Anne Bdbi Jowiiger (1843- 
1844), Kathi die Grossmulter (1847), Die Kdserei in der Vehfreude 
(1850), and the Erlebnisse eines Schiddenbauers (1854). He 
published also several volumes of shorter tales. One slight 



drawback to some of his writings is the echo of local political 
controversies, for Bitzius was a Whig and strongly opposed U> 
the Radical party in the canton, which carried the day in 184& 

Lives by C. Manuel, in the Berlin edition of Bitzius's works 
(Berlin, 1861); and by J. Ammann in vol. i. (Bern, 1884) of the 
Sammlung Bernischer Biographien. His works were issued in 
24 vols, at Berlin, 1856-1861, while 10 vols., giving the original 
text of each story, were issued at Bern, 1898-1900 (edition not to be 
completed). (W. A. B. C.) 

BIVOUAC (a French word generally said to have been intro- 
duced during the Thirty Years' War, perhaps derived from 
Beiwacht, extra guard), originally, a night-watch by a whole 
army under arms to prevent surprise. In modern military par- 
lance the word is used to mean a temporary encampment in 
the open field without tents, as opposed to " billets " or " canton- 
ment " on the one hand and " camp " on the other. The use 
of bivouacs permits an army to remain closely concentrated 
for all emergencies, and avoids the necessity for numerous 
wagons carrying tents. Constant bivouacs, however, are trying 
to the health of men and horses, and this method of quartering 
is never employed except when the military situation demands 
concentration and readiness. Thus the outposts would often: 
have to bivouac while the main body of the army lay in billets. 

BIWA, a lake in the province of Omi, Japan. It measures 
36 m. in length by 12 m. in extreme breadth, has an area of 180 
sq. m., is about 330 ft. above sea-level, and has an extreme 
depth of some 300 ft. There are a few small islands in the lake, 
the principal being Chikubu-shima at the northern end. 

Tradition alleges that Lake Biwa and the mountain of Fuji 
were produced simultaneously by an earthquake in 286 B.C. 
On the west of the lake the mountains Hiei-zan and Hira-yama 
slope down almost to its margin, and on the east a wide plain 
extends towards the boundaries of the province of Mino. It is 
drained by a river flowing out of its southern end, and taking 
its course into the sea at Osaka. This river bears in succession 
the names Of Seta-gawa, Uji-gawa and Yodo-gawa. The lake 
abounds with fish, and the beauty of its scenery is remarkable. 
Small steamboats ply constantly to the points of chief interest, 
and around its shores are to be viewed the Omi-no-hakkei, or 
" eight landscapes of Omi "; namely, the lake 'silvering under 
an autumn moon as one looks down from Ishi-yama; the snow 
at eve on Hira-yama; the glow of sunset at Seta; the groves 
and classic temple of Mii-dera as, the evening bell sounds; boats 
sailing home from Yabase; cloudless peaks at Awazu; rain at 
nightfall over Karasaki; and wild geese sweeping down to 
Katata. The lake is connected with Kyoto by a canal constructed 
in 1890, and is thus brought into water communication with 
Osaka. ' 

BIXIO, NINO (1821-1873), Italian soldier, was born on the 
2nd of October 182 1. While still a boy he was compelled by 
his parents to embrace a maritime career. After numerous 
adventures he returned to Italy in 1846, joined the Giovine Italia, 
and, on 4th November 1847, made himself conspicuous at Genoa 
by seizing the bridle of Charles Albert's horse and crying, " Pass 
the Ticino, Sire, and we are all with you." He fought through 
the campaign of 1848, became captain under Garibaldi at Rome 
in 1849, taking prisoners an entire French battalion, and gaining 
the gold medal for military valour. In 1859 he commanded a 
Garibaldian battalion, and gained the military cross of Savoy. 
Joining the Marsala expedition in i860, he turned the day in 
favour of Garibaldi at Calatafimi, was wounded at Palermo, but 
recovered in time to besiege Reggio in Calabria (21st of August 
i860), and, though again wounded, took part in the battle of 
Volturno, where his leg was broken. Elected deputy in 1861, 
he endeavoured to reconcile Cavour and Garibaldi. In 1866, at 
the head of the seventh division, he covered the Italian retreat 
from Custozza, ignoring the Austrian summons to surrender. 
Created senator in February 1870, he was in the following 
September given command of a division during the movement 
against Rome, took Civita. Vecchia, and participated in the 
general attack upon Rome (20th September 1870). He died of 
cholera at Achin Bay in Sumatra en roule for Batavia, whither he 



i6 



BIZERTA— BIZET 



had gone in command of a commercial expedition (16th December 

BIZERTA (properly pronounced Ben Zert; Fr. Bizerte), a 
seaport of Tunisia, in 37 17' N., o° 50' E. Pop. about 12,000. 
Next to Toulon, Bizerta is the most important naval port of 
France in the Mediterranean. It occupies a commanding 
strategical position in the narrowest part of the sea, being 714 m. 
E. of Gibraltar, 1168 m. W.N.W. of Port Said, 240 m. N.W. of 
Malta, and 420 m. S. by E. of Toulon. It is 60 m. by rail N.N.W. 
of Tunis. The town is built on the shores of the Mediterranean 
at the point where the. Lake of Bizerta enters the sea through a 
natural channel, the mouth of which has been canalized. The 
modern town lies almost entirely on the north side of the canal. 
A little farther north are the ancient citadel, the walled " Arab " 
town and the old harbour (disused). The present outer harbour 
covers about 300 acres and is formed by two converging jetties 
and a breakwater. The north jetty is 4000 ft. long, the east 
jetty 3300 ft., and the breakwater— which protects the port from 
the prevalent north-east winds — 2300 ft. long. The entrance to 
the canal is in the centre of the outer harbour. The canal is 
2600 ft. long and 787 ft. wide on the surface. Its banks are 
lined with quays, and ships drawing 26 ft. of water can moor 
alongside. At the end of the canal is a large commercial 
harbour, beyond which the channel opens into the lake— in 
reality an arm of the sea— roughly circular in form and covering 
about 50 sq. m., two-thirds of its waters having a depth of 30 
to 40 ft. The lake, which merchant vessels are not allowed 
to enter, contains the naval port and arsenal. There is a 
torpedo and submarine boat station on the north side of the 
channel at the entrance to the lake, but the principal naval 
works are at Sidi Abdallah at the south-west corner of the 
lake and 10 m. from the open sea. Here is an enclosed basin 
covering 123 acres with ample quayage, dry docks and every- 
thing necessary to the accommodation, repair, revictualling and 
coaling of a numerous fleet. Barracks, hospitals and water- 
works have been built, the military town, called Ferryville, 
being self-contained. 

Fortifications have been built for the protection of the port. 
They comprise (a) the older works surrounding the town; (b) a 
group of coast batteries on the high ground of Cape Bizerta or 
Guardia, 4 m. north-north-west of the town; these are grouped 
round a powerful fort called JebelKebir, and have a command 
of 300 to 800 ft. above sea-level; (c) another group of batteries 
on the narrow ground between the sea and the lake to the east 
of the town; the highest of these is the Jebel Tuila battery 
265 ft. above sea-level. 

The Lake of Bizerta, called Tinja by the Arabs, abounds in 
excellent fish, especially mullets, the, dried roe of which, called 
botargo, is largely exported, and the fishing industry employs a 
large proportion of the inhabitants. The western shore of the 
lake is low, and in many places is covered with olive trees to the 
water's edge. The south-eastern shores are hilly and wooded, 
and behind them rises a range of picturesque hills. A narrow 
and shallow channel leads from the western side of the lake into 
another sheet of water, the Lake of Ishkul, so called from Jebel 
Ishkul, a hill on its southern bank 1740 ft. high. The Lake of 
Ishkul is nearly as large as the first lake, but is very shallow. Its 
waters are generally sweet. 

Bizerta occupies the site of the ancient Tyrian colony, Hippo 
Zarytus or Diarrhytus, the harbour of which, by means of a 
spacious pier, protecting it from the north-east wind, was 
rendered one of the safest and finest on this coast. The town 
became a Roman colony, and was conquered by the Arabs in the 
7th century. The place thereafter was subject either to the 
rulers of Tunis or of Constantine, but the citizens were noted for 
their frequent revolts. They threw in their lot (c. 1 530) with the 
pirate Khair-ed-Din, and subsequently received a Turkish 
garrison. Bizerta was captured by the Spaniards in 153 s, but 
not long afterwards came under the Tunisian government. 
Centuries of neglect followed, and the ancient port was almost 
choked up, though the value of the fisheries saved the town from 
utter decay. Its strategical importance was one of. the causes 



which led. to the occupation of Tunisia by the French in 1881. 
In 1890 a concession for a new canal and harbour was granted 
to a company, and five years later the new port was formally 
opened. Since then the canal has been widened and deepened, 
and the naval port at Sidi Abdallah created. 

BIZET [Alexandre Cesar. Leopold] GEORGES (1838-1875), 
French musical composer, was born at Bougival, near Paris, on 
the 25th of October 1838, the son of a singing-master. He 
displayed musical ability at an early age, and was sent to the 
Paris Conservatoire, where he studied under Halevy and speedily 
distinguished himself, carrying off prizes for organ and fugue, 
and finally in 1857, after an ineffectual attempt in the previous 
year, the Grand Prix de Rome for a cantata called Cloris et 
Clotilde. A success of a different kind also befell him at this time. 
Offenbach, then manager of the Theatre des Bouffes-Parisiens, 
had organized a competition for an operetta, in which young 
Bizet was awarded the first prize in conjunction with Charles 
Leeocq, each of them writing an operetta called Docteur Miracle. 
After the three years spent in Rome, an obligation imposed by 
the French government on the winners of the first prize at the 
Conservatoire, Bizet returned to Paris, where he achieved a 
reputation as a pianist and accompanist. On the 23rd of 
September 1863 his first opera, Les Pecheurs de perles, was 
brought out at the Theatre Lyrique, but owing possibly to the' 
somewhat uninteresting nature of the story, the opera did not 
enjoy a very long run. The qualities displayed by the composer, 
however, were amply recognized, although the music was stated, 
by some critics, to exhibit traces of Wagnerian influence. 
Wagnerism at that period was a sort of spectre that haunted the 
imagination of many leading members of the musical press. It 
sufficed for a work to be at all out of the common for the epithet 
" Wagnerian "to be applied to it. The term, it may be said, 
was intended to be condemnatory, and it was applied with little 
understanding as to its real meaning. The score of the Pecheurs 
de perles contains several charming numbers; its dreamy 
melodies are well adapted to fit a story laid in Eastern climes, 
and the music reveals a decided dramatic temperament. Some 
of its dances are now usually introduced into the fourth act of 
Carmen. • 

On the 3rd of June 1865 Bizet married a daughter of his old 
master, Halevy. His second opera, La Jolie Fille de Perth, 
produced at the Theatre Lyrique on 26th December 1867, was 
scarcely a step in advance. The libretto was founded on Sir 
Walter Scott's novel, but the opera lacks unity of style, and its 
pages are marred by concessions to the vocalist. One number 
has survived, the characteristic Bohemian dance which has been 
interpolated into the fourth act of Carmen. In his third opera 
Bizet returned to an oriental subject. Djamileh, a one-act opera, 
given at the Opera Comique on the 22nd of May 1872, is certainly 
one of his most individual efforts. Again were accusations of 
Wagnerism hurled at the composer's head, and Djamileh did not 
achieve the success it undoubtedly deserved. The composer was 
more fortunate with the incidental music he wrote to Alphonse 
Daudet's drama, L' Arlesienne, produced in October 1872. 
Different numbers from this, arranged in the form of suites, 
have often been heard in the concert-room. Rarely have poetry 
and imagination been so well allied as in these exquisite pages,, 
which seem to reflect the sunny skies of Provence. 

Bizet's masterpiece, Carmen, was brought out at the Opera 
Comique on the 3rd of March 187 5. It was based on a version by 
Meilhac and Halevy of a study by Prosper Merimee— in which 
the dramatic element was obscured by much descriptive writing. 
The detection of the drama underlying this psychological 
narrative was in itself a brilliant discovery, and in reconstructing 
the story in dramatic form the authors produced one of the most 
famous libretti in the whole range of opera. Still more striking 
than the libretto was the music composed by Bizet, in which the 
peculiar use of the flute and of the lowest notes of the harp 
deserves particular attention. 

On the 3rd of June, three months after the production of 
Carmen in Paris, the genial composer expired after a few hours' 
illness from a heart affection. Before dying he had the satisfaction 



BJORNEBORG-^BLACHFORD 



of knowing that Carmen had been accepted for production at 
Vienna. After the Austrian capital came Brussels, Berlin and, 
in 1878, London, when Carmen was brought out at Her Majesty's 
theatre with immense success. The influence exercised by 
Bizet on dramatic music has been very great, and may be 
discerned in the realistic works of the young Italian school, as 
well as in those of his own countrymen. 

BJORNEBORG (Finnish, Port), a district town of Finland, 
province of Abo-Bjorneborg, on the E. coast of the Gulf of 
Bothnia, at the mouth of the Kumo. Lat. 5 1° 8' N., long. 46° o' E. 
Pop. (1904) 16,053, mostly Swedes. Large vessels cannot enter 
its roadstead, and stop at Rafso. The town has shipbuilding 
wharves, machine works, and several tanneries and brick-works, 
and has a total trade of over 16,000,000 marks, the chief export 
being timber. 

BJORNSON, BJORNSTJERNE (1832-1010), Norwegian poet, 
novelist and dramatist, was born on the 8th of December 1832 
at the farmstead of Bjorgen, in Kvikne, in Osterdal, Norway. 
In 1837 his father, who had been pastor of Kvikne, was trans- 
ferred to the parish of Noesset, in Romsdal; in this romantic 
district the childhood of Bjornson was spent. After some 
teaching at the neighbouring town of Molde, he was sent at the 
age of seventeen to a well-known school in Christiania to study 
for the university; his instinct for poetry was already awakened, 
and indeed he had written verses from his eleventh year; He 
matriculated at the university of Christiania in 1852, and soon 
began to work as a journalist, especially as a dramatic critic. In 
1857 appeared Synnove Solbakken, the first of Bjornson's peasant- 
novels; in 1858 this was followed by Arne, in i860 by A Happy 
Boy, and in 1868 by The Fisher Maiden. These are the most 
important specimens of his bonde-fortaellinger or peasant-tales — 
a section of his literary work which has made a profound im- 
pression in his own country, and has made him popular through- 
out the world. Two of the tales, Arne and Synnove Solbakken, 
offer perhaps finer examples of the pure peasant-story than are 
to be found elsewhere in literature. 

Bjornson was anxious " to create a new saga in the light of the 
peasant," as he put it, and he thought this should be done, not 
merely in prose fiction, but in national dramas or folke-stykker . 
The earliest of these was a one-act piece the scene of which is laid 
in the 12th century, Between the Battles, written in 1855, but not 
produced until 1857. He was especially influenced at this time 
by the study of Baggesen and Oehlenschlager, during a visit to 
Copenhagen 1856-1857. Between the Battles was followed by 
Lame Hulda in 1858, and King Sverre in 1861. All these efforts, 
however, were far excelled by the splendid trilogy of Sigurd the 
Bastard, which Bjornson issued in 1862. This raised him to the 
front rank among the younger poets of Europe. His Sigurd the 
Crusader should be added to the category of these heroic plays, 
although it was not printed until 1872. 

At the close of 1857 Bjornson had been appointed director of 
the theatre at Bergen, a post which he held, with much journal- 
istic work, for two years, when he returned to the capital. From 
i860 to 1863 he travelled widely throughout Europe. Early in 
1865 he undertook the management of the Christiania theatre, 
and brought out his popular comedy of The Newly Married and 
his romantic tragedy of Mary Stuart in Scotland. Although 
Bjornson has introduced into his novels and plays songs of 
extraordinary beauty, he was never a very copious writer of 
verse; in 1870 he published his Poems and Songs and the epic 
cycle called Arnljot Gelline; the latter volume contains the 
magnificent ode called "Bergliot," Bjornson's finest contribution 
to lyrical poetry. Between 1864 and 1874, in the very prime of 
life, Bjornson displayed a slackening of the intellectual forces 
very remarkable in a man of his energy; he was indeed during 
these years mainly occupied with politics, and with his business 
as a theatrical manager. This was the period of Bjornson's most 
fiery propaganda as a radical agitator. In 18 71 he began to 
supplement his journalistic work in this direction by delivering 
lectures over the length and breadth of the northern countries. 
He possessed to a surprising degree the arts of the orator, com- 
bined with a magnificent physical prestige. From 1873 to 1876 



■ J 7 

Bjornson was ahsent from Norway, and in the peace of voluntary 
exile he recovered his imaginative powers. His new departure as 
a dramatic author began with A Bankruptcy 'and The Editor in 
1874, social dramas of an extremely modern and realistic cast. 

The poet now settled on his estate of Aulestad in Gausdal. 
In- 1877 he : published another ; novel, ' Magnhild — an imperfect 
production, in which his ideas on social questions were seen to be 
in a state of fermentation, and gave expression to his republican 
sentiments in the polemical play called The King, to a later 
edition of which he prefixed an essay on " Intellectual Freedom," 
in further explanation of his position. Captain Mansana, an 
episode of the war of Italian independence, belongs to 1878. 
Extremely anxious to obtain a full success on the stage, Bjornson 
concentrated his powers on a drama of social life, Leonardo 
(1879), which raised a violent controversy. A satirical play, The 
New System, was produced a few weeks later. Although these 
plays of Bjornson's second period were greatly discussed, none of 
them (except A Bankruptcy) pleased on the boards. When once 
more he produced a social drama, A .Gauntlet, in 1883, he was 
unable to persuade any manager to stage it, except in a modified 
form, though this play gives the full measure of his power as a 
dramatist. In the autumn of the same year, Bjornson published 
a mystical or symbolic drama Beyond our Powers, dealing with 
the abnormal features of religious excitement with extraordinary 
force; this was not acted until 1899, when it achieved a great 
success. 

Meanwhile, Bjornson's political attitude had brought upon 
him a charge of high treason, and he took refuge for a time in 
Germany, returning to Norway in 1882. Convinced that the 
theatre was practically closed to him, he turned back to the 
novel, and published in 1884, Flags are Flying in Town and Port, 
embodying his theories on heredity and education. In 1889 he 
printed another long and still more remarkable novel, In God's 
Way, which is chiefly concerned with the same problems. The 
same year saw the publication of a comedy, Geography and Love, 
which continues to be played with success. A number of short 
stories, of a more or less didactic character, dealing with startling 
points of emotional experience, were collected in 1894; among 
them those which produced the greatest sensation were Dust, 
Mother's Hands, and Absalom's Hair. Later plays were a 
political tragedy called Paul Lange and Tor a Parsberg (1898), a 
second part of Beyond our Powers (1895), Laboremus (1901), At 
Storhove (1902), and Daglannct (1904). In 1899, at the opening 
of the National theatre, Bjornson received an ovation, and his 
saga-drama of Sigurd the Crusader was performed. 

A subject which interested him greatly, and on which he 
occupied his indefatigable pen, was the question of the bonde- 
maal, the adopting of a national language for Norway distinct 
from the dansk-norsk (Dano-Norwegian), in which her literature 
has hitherto been written. Bjpmson's strong and sometimes 
rather narrow patriotism did not blind him to the fatal folly of 
such a proposal, and his lectures and pamphlets against the maal- 
straev in its extreme form did more than anything else to save the 
language in this dangerous moment. Bjornson was one of the 
original members of the Nobel committee, and was re-elected in 
1900. In 1903 he was awarded the Nobel prize for literature. 
Bjornson had done as much as any other man to rouse Norwegian 
national feeling, but in 1903, on the verge of the rupture between 
Norway and Sweden, he preached conciliation and moderation 
to the Norwegians. He was an eloquent advocate of Pan- 
Germanism, and, writing to the Figaro in 190S, he outlined a 
Pan-Germanic alliance of northern Europe and North America. 
He died on the 26th of April 1910. 

See Bjornson's Samlede Vaerker (Copenhagen, 1900-1902, 1 1 vols.) ; 
The Novels of Bjornstjerne Bjornson (1894, & c -)< edited by Edmund 
Gosse; G. Brandes, Critical Studies (1899); E. Tissot, Le drame 
norvegien (1893); C. D. 'af Wirsen, Kritiker (1901) ; Chr. Collin, 
Bjornstjerne Bjornson (2 vols., German ed., 1903), the most complete 
biography and criticism at present available; and B. Halvorsen, 
Norsk Formatter Lexikon (1885). (E.G.) 

BLACHFORD, FREDERIC ROGERS, Baron (1811-1889), 
British civil servant, eldest son of Sir Frederick Leman Rogers, 
7th Bart, (whom he succeeded in the baronetcy in 1851), was 



i8 



* BLACK, : A.~^BDACK^ J. 



born in London on the 31st of January 181 1. He was educated 
at Eton and Oriel College, Oxford, where he had a brilliant 
career, winning the Craven University scholarship, and taking 
a double first-class in classics and mathematics. He became 
a fellow of Oriel (1833), and won the Vinerian scholarship (1834), 
and fellowship (1840). He was called to the bar in 1837, but 
never practised. At school and at Oxford he was a contemporary 
of W. E. Gladstone, and at Oxford he began a lifelong friendship 
with J. H. Newman and R. W. Church; his classical and literary 
tastes, and his combination of liberalism in politics with High 
Church views in religion, together with his good social position 
and interesting character, made him an admired member of their 
circles. For two or three years (1841-1844) he wrote for The 
Times, and he helped to found The Guardian in 1846; he also 
did a good deal to assist the Tractarian movement. But he 
eventually settled down to the life of a government official. He 
began in 1844 as registrar of joint-stock companies, and in 1846 
became commissioner of lands and emigration. Between 1857 
and 1859 he was engaged in government missions abroad, con- 
nected with colonial questions, and in i860 he was appointed 
permanent under-secretary of state for the colonies. Sir Frederic 
Rogers was the guiding spirit of the colonial office under six 
successive secretaries of state, and on his retirement in 1871 
was raised to the peerage as Baron Blachford of Wisdome, a 
title taken from his place in Devonshire. He died on the 21st 
of November 1889. 

A volume of his letters, edited by G. E. Marindin (1896), contains 
an interesting Life, partly autobiographical. 

BLACK, ADAM (1784-1874), Scottish publisher, founder of 
the firm of A. & C. Black, the son of a builder, was born in 
Edinburgh on the 20th of February 1784. After serving his 
apprenticeship to the bookselling trade in Edinburgh and 
London, he began business for himself in Edinburgh in 1808. 
By 1826 he was recognized as one of the principal booksellers 
in the city; and a few years later he was joined in business by 
his nephew Charles. The two most important events connected 
with the history of the firm were the publication of the 7th, 8th 
and 9th editions of the Encyclopaedia Britannica, and the 
purchase of the stock and copyright of the Waverley Novels. 
The copyright of the Encyclopaedia passed into the hands of 
Adam Black and a few friends in 1827. Ini85i the firm bought 
the copyright of the Waverley Novels for £27,000; and in 1861 
they became the proprietors of De Quincey's works. Adam 
Black was twice lord provost of Edinburgh, and represented 
the city in parliament from 1856 to 1865. He retired from 
business in 1865, and died on the 24th of January 1874. He was 
succeeded by his sons, who removed their business in 1895 to 
London. There is a bronze statue of Adam Black in East 
Princes Street Gardens, Edinburgh. 

See Memoirs of Adam Black, edited by Alexander Nicholson 
(2nd ed., Edinburgh, 1885). 

BLACK, JEREMIAH SULLIVAN (1810-1883), American 
lawyer and statesman, was born in Stony Creek township, 
Somerset county, Pennsylvania, on the 10th of January 1810. 
He was largely self-educated, and before he was of age was 
admitted to the Pennsylvania bar. He gradually became one 
of the leading American lawyers, and in 1851-1857 was a member 
of the supreme court of Pennsylvania (chief-justice 1851-1854). 
In 1857 he entered President Buchanan's cabinet as attorney- 
general of the United States. In this capacity he successfully 
contested the validity of the " California land claims " — claims 
to about 19,000 sq. m. of land, fraudulently alleged to have 
been granted to land-grabbers and others by the Mexican govern- 
ment prior to the close of the Mexican War. From the 17 th of 
December i860 to the 4th of March 1861 he was secretary of 
state. Perhaps the most influential of President Buchanan's 
official advisers, he denied the constitutionality of secession, 
and urged that Fort Sumter be properly reinforced and defended. 
" For . . . the vigorous assertion at last in word and in deed 
that the United States is a nation," says James Ford Rhodes, 
" for pointing out the way in which the authority of the Federal 
government might be exercised without infringing on the rights _ 



of the states, the gratitude of the American people is due to 
Jeremiah S. Black." He became reporter to the Supreme Court 
of the United States in 1861, but after publishing the reports 
for the years 1861 and 1862 he resigned, and devoted himself 
almost exclusively to his private practice, appearing in such 
important cases before the Supreme Court as the one known as 
Ex-Parte Milligan, in which he ably defended the right of trial 
by jury, the McCardle case and the United States v. Blyew et 
al. After the Civil War he vigorously opposed the Congressional 
plan of reconstructing the late Confederate states, and himself 
drafted the message qi President Johnson, vetoing the Recon- 
struction Act of the 2nd of March 1867. Black was also for a 
short time counsel for President Andrew Johnson, in his trial 
on the article of impeachment, before the United States Senate, 
and for William W. Belknap (1829-1890), secretary of war from 
1869 to 1876, who in 1876 was impeached on a charge of cor- 
ruption; and with others he represented Samuel J. Tilden 
during the contest for the presidency between Tilden and 
Hayes (see Electoral Commission). He died at Brockie, Penn- 
sylvania, on the 19th of August 1883. 

See Essays and Speeches of Jeremiah S. Black, with a Biographical 
Sketch (New York, 1885), by his son, C. F. Black. 

BLACK, JOSEPH (1728-1799), Scottish chemist and physicist, 
was born in 1728 at Bordeaux, where his father — a native of 
Belfast but of Scottish descent — was engaged in the wine trade. 
At the age of twelve he was sent to a grammar school in Belfast, 
whence he removed in 1746 to study medicine in Glasgow. 
There he had William Cullen for his instructor in chemistry, and 
the relation between the two soon became that of professor and 
assistant rather than of master and pupil. The action of lithon- 
triptic medicines, especially lime-water, was one of the questions 
of the day, and through his investigations of this subject Black 
was led to the chemical discoveries associated with his name. 
The causticity of alkaline bodies was explained at that time as 
depending on the presence in them of the principle of fire, 
"phlogiston"; quicklime, for instance, was chalk which had 
taken up phlogiston, and when mild alkalis such as sodium or 
potassium carbonate were causticized by its aid, the phlogiston 
was supposed to pass from it to them. Black showed that on 
the contrary causticization meant the loss of something, as 
proved by loss of weight; and this something he found to be an 
" air," which, because it was fixed in the substance before it was 
causticized, he spoke of as " fixed air." Taking magnesia alba, 
which he distinguished from limestone with which it had pre- 
viously been confused, he showed that on being heated it lost 
weight owing to the escape of this fixed air (named carbonic acid 
by Lavoisier in 1 781), and that the weight was regained when 
the calcined product was made to reabsorb the fixed air with 
which it had parted. These investigations, by which Black not 
only gave a great impetus to the chemistry of gases by clearly 
indicating the existence of a gas distinct from common air, but 
also anticipated Lavoisier and modern chemistry by his appeal 
to the balance, were described in the thesis De humore acido a 
cibis orto, et magnesia alba, which he presented for his doctor's 
degree in 1754; and a fuller account of them was read before 
the Medical Society of Edinburgh in June 1755, and published 
in the following year as Experiments upon magnesia, quicklime 
and some other alkaline substances. 

It is curious that Black left to others the detailed study of this 
" fixed air " he had discovered. Probably the explanation is 
pressure of other work. In 1756 he succeeded Cullen as lecturer 
in chemistry at Glasgow, and was also appointed professor of 
anatomy, though that post he was glad to exchange for the chair 
of medicine. The preparation of lectures thus took up much of 
his time, and he was also gaining an extensive practice as a 
physician. Moreover, his attention was engaged on studies which 
ultimately led to his doctrine of latent heat. He noticed that 
when ice melts it takes up a quantity of heat without undergoing 
any change of temperature, and he argued that this heat, which 
as was usual in his time he looked upon as a subtle fluid, must 
have combined with the particles of ice and thus become latent 
in its substance. This hypothesis he verified quantitatively 



BLACK, W.— BLACKBIRD 



19 



by experiments, performed at the end of 176 1. In 1764, with the 
aid of his assistant, William Irvine (1743-1787), he further 
measured the latent heat of steam, though not very accurately. 
This doctrine of latent heat he taught in his lectures from 1761 
onwards, and in April 1762 he described his work to a literary 
society in Glasgow. But he never published any detailed account 
of it, so that others, such as J. A. Deluc, were able to claim the 
credit of his results. In the course. of his inquiries he also noticed 
that different bodies in equal masses require different amounts 
of heat to raise them to the same temperature, and so founded 
the doctrine of specific heats; he also showed that equal additions 
or abstractions of heat produced equal variations of bulk in the 
liquid of his thermometers. In 1766 he succeeded Cullen in the 
chair of chemistry in Edinburgh, where he devoted practically 
all his time to the preparation of his lectures. Never very 
robust, his health gradually became weaker and ultimately he 
was reduced to the condition of a valetudinarian. In 1795 he 
received the aid of a coadjutor in his professorship, and two years 
later he lectured for the last time. He died in Edinburgh on the 
6th of December 1799 (not on the 26th of November as stated 
in Robison's life). 

As a scientific investigator, Black was conspicuous for the 
carefulness of his work and his caution in drawing conclusions. 
Holding that chemistry had not attained the rank of a science — 
his lectures dealt with the "effects of heat and mixture" — he had 
an almost morbid horror of hasty generalization or of anything 
that had the pretensions of a fully fledged system. This mental 
attitude, combined with a certain lack of initiative and the 
weakness of his health, probably prevented him from doing full 
justice to his splendid powers of experimental research. Apart 
from the work already mentioned he published only two papers 
during his life-time — "The supposed effect of boiling on water, 
in disposing it to freeze more readily " {Phil. Trans., 1775), and 
" An analysis of the waters of the hot springs in Iceland " 
{Trans. Roy. Soc. Ed., 1794). 

After his death his lectures were written out from his own notes, 
supplemented by those of some of his pupils, and published with a 
biographical preface by his friend and colleague, Professor John 
Robison (1 739-1805), in 1803, as Lectures on the Elements of Chemistry ; 
delivered in the University of Edinburgh. 

BLACK, WILLIAM (1841-1898), British novelist, was born 
at Glasgow on the 9th of November 1841. His early ambition 
was to be a painter, but he made no way, and soon had recourse 
to journalism for a living. He was at first employed in newspaper 
offices in Glasgow, but obtained a post on the Morning Star in 
London, and at once proved himself a descriptive writer of 
exceptional vivacity. During the war between Prussia and- 
Austria in 1866 he represented the Morning Star at the front, 
and was taken prisoner. This paper shortly afterwards failed, 
and Black joined the editorial staff of the Daily News. He also 
edited the Examiner, at a time when that periodical was already 
moribund. After his first success in fiction, he gave up journal- 
ism, and devoted himself entirely to the production of novels. 
For nearly thirty years he was successful in retaining the popular 
favour. He died at Brighton on the 10th of December 1898, 
without having experienced any of that reaction of the public 
taste which so often follows upon conspicuous successes in fiction. 
Black's first novel, James Merle, published in 1864, was a com- 
plete failure; his second, Love or Marriage (1868), attracted 
but very slight attention. In Silk Attire (1869) and Kilmeny 
(1870) marked a great advance on his first work, but in 1871 A 
Daughter of Heth suddenly raised him to the height of popularity, 
and he followed up this success by a string of favourites. Among 
the best of his books are The Strange Adventures of a Phaeton 
(1872); A Princess of Thule (1874); Madcap Violet (1876); 
Macleod of Dare (1878); White Wings (1880); Sunrise (1880); 
Shandon Bells (1883); Judith Shakespeare (1884); White Heather 
(1885) ; Donald Ross of Heimra (1891) ; Highland Cousins (1894) ; 
and Wild Eelin (1898). Black was a thoroughgoing sportsman, 
particularly fond of fishing and yachting, and his best stories 
are those which are laid amid the breezy mountains of his native 
land, or upon the deck of a yacht at sea off its wild coast. His 



descriptions of such scenery are simple and picturesque* He 
was a word-painter rather than a student of human nature. 
His women are stronger than his men, and among them 
are many wayward and lovable creatures; but subtlety of 
intuition plays no part in his characterization. Black also 
contributed a life of Oliver Goldsmith to the English Men of 
Letters series. 

BLACK APE, a sooty, black, short-tailed, and long-faced 
representative of the macaques, inhabiting the island of Celebes, 
and generally regarded as forming a genus by itself, under the 
name of Cynopithecus niger, but sometimes relegated to the rank 
of a subgenus of Macacus. The nostrils open obliquely at some 
distance from the end of the snout, and the head carries a crest 
of long hair. There are several local races, one of which was 
long regarded as a separate species under the name of the Moor 
macaque, Macacus maurus. (See Primates.) 

BLACKBALL, a token used for voting by ballot against the 
election of a candidate for membership of a club or other 
association. Formerly white and black balls about the size of 
pigeons' eggs were used respectively to represent votes for and 
against a candidate for such election; and although this method 
is now generally obsolete, the term " blackball " survives both 
as noun and verb. The rules of most clubs provide that a stated 
proportion of "blackballs " shall exclude candidates proposed 
for election, and the candidates so excluded are said to have been 
" blackballed "; but the ballot {q.v.) is now usually conducted 
by a method in which the favourable and adverse votes are not 
distinguished by different coloured balls at all. Either voting 
papers are employed, or balls — of which the colour has no 
significance — are cast into different compartments of a ballot- 
box according as they are favourable or adverse to the candidate. 

BLACKBERRY, or Bramble, known botanically as Rubus 
fruticosus (natural order Rosaceae), a native of the north tem- 
perate region of the Old World, and abundant in the British 
Isles as a copse and hedge-plant. It is characterized by its 
prickly stem, leaves with usually three or five ovate, coarsely 
toothed stalked leaflets, many of which persist through the 
winter, white or pink flowers in terminal clusters, and black or 
red-purple fruits, each consisting of numerous succulent drupels 
crowded on a dry conical receptacle. It is a most variable 
plant, exhibiting many more or less distinct forms which are 
regarded by different authorities as sub-species or species 
In America several forms of the native blackberry, Rubus 
nigrobaccus (formerly known as R. villosus), are widely cultivated; 
it is described as one of the most important and profitable of 
bush-fruits. 

For details see F. W. Card in L. H. Bailey's Cyclopedia of American 
Horticulture (1900). 

BLACKBIRD {Turdus merula), the name commonly given to 
a well-known British bird of the Turdidae family, for which the 
ancient name was ousel {q.v.), Anglo-Saxon osle, equivalent of 
the German Amsel, a form of the word found in several old 
English books. The plumage of the male is of a uniform black 
colour, that of the female various shades of brown, while the bill 
of the male, especially during the breeding season, is of a bright 
gamboge yellow. The blackbird is of a shy and restless dis- 
position, courting concealment, and rarely seen in flocks, or 
otherwise than singly or in pairs, and taking flight when startled 
with a sharp shrill cry. It builds its nest in March, or early in 
April, in thick bushes or in ivy-clad trees, and usually rears at 
least two broods each season. The nest is a neat structure of 
coarse grass and moss, mixed with earth, and plastered internally 
with mud, and here the female lays from four to six eggs of a 
blue colour speckled with brown. The blackbird feeds chiefly 
on fruits, worms, the larvae of insects and snails, extracting 
the last from their shells by dexterously chipping them on 
stones; and though it is generally regarded as an enemy of the 
garden, it is probable that the amount of damage by it to the 
fruit is largely compensated for by its undoubted services as 
a vermin-killer. The notes of the blackbird are rich and full, 
but monotonous as compared with those of the song-thrush. 
Like many other singing birds it is, in the wild state, a 



20 



BLACK BUCK— BLACKCOCK 



mocking-bird, having been heard to imitate the song of the 
nightingale, the crowing of a cock, and even the cackling of a 
hen. In confinement it can be taught to whistle a variety of 
tunes, and even to imitate the human voice. 

The blackbird is found in every country of Europe, even 
breeding — although rarely— beyond the arctic circle, and in 
eastern Asia as well as in North Africa and the Atlantic islands. 
In most parts of its range it is migratory, and in Britain 
every autumn its numbers receive considerable accession from 
passing visitors. Allied species inhabit most parts of the world, 
excepting Africa south of the Sahara, New Zealand and Australia 
proper, and North America. In some of these the legs as well as 
the bill are yellow or orange; and in a few both sexes are glossy 
black. The ring-ousel, Turdus torquatus, has a dark bill and 
conspicuous white gorget, whence its name. It is rarer and 
more local than the common blackbird, and occurs in England 
only as a temporary spring and autumn visitor. 

BLACK BUCK (Antilope cervicapra), the Indian Antelope, the 
sole species of its genus. This antelope, widely distributed in 
India, with the exception of Ceylon and the region east of the 
Bay of Bengal, stands about 32 in. high at the shoulder; the 
general hue is brown deepening with age to black; chest, belly 
and inner sides of limbs pure white, as are the muzzle and chin, 
and an area round the eyes. The horns are long, ringed, and 
form spirals with from three to five turns. The doe is smaller 
in size, yellowish-fawn above, and this hue obtains also in young 
males. These antelopes frequent grassy districts and are usually 
found in herds. Coursing black-buck with the cheeta (q.v.) is 
a favourite Indian sport. 

BLACKBURN, COLIN BLACKBURN, Baron (1813-1896), 
British judge, was born in Selkirkshire in 1813, and educated at 
Eton and at Trinity College, Cambridge, taking high mathe- 
matical honours in 1835. He was called to the bar in 1838, and 
went the northern circuit. His progress was at first slow, and he 
employed himself in reporting and editing, with T. F. Ellis, eight 
volumes of the highly-esteemed Ellis and Blackburn reports. 
His deficiency in all the more brilliant qualities of the advocate 
almost confined his practice to commercial cases, in which he 
obtained considerable employment in his circuit; but he con- 
tinued to belong to the outside bar, and was so little known to 
the legal world that his promotion to a puisne judgeship in the 
court of queen's bench in 1859 was at first ascribed to Lord 
Campbell's partiality for his countrymen, but Lord Lyndhurst, 
Lord Wensleydale and Lord Cranworth came forward to defend 
the appointment. Blackburn himself is said to have thought 
that a county court judgeship was about to be offered him, 
which he had resolved to decline. He soon proved himself one 
of the soundest lawyers on the bench, and when he was promoted 
to the court of appeal in 1876 was considered the highest 
authority on common law. In 1876 he was made a lord of appeal 
and a life peer. Both in this capacity and as judge of the queen's 
bench he delivered many judgments of the highest importance, 
and no decisions have been received with greater respect. In 
1886 he was appointed a member of the commission charged 
to prepare a digest of the criminal law, but retired on account 
of indisposition in the following year. He died at his country 
residence, Doonholm in Ayrshire, on the 8th of January 1896. 
He was the author of a valuable work on the Law of Sales. 

See The Times, 10th of January 1896; E. Manson, Builders 0} our 
Law (1904). 

BLACKBURN, JONATHAN (c. 1700-e. 1765), American 
portrait painter, was born in Connecticut. He seems to have 
been the son of a painter, and to have had a studio in Boston in 
1 7 50-1 765; among his patrons were many important early 
American families, including the Apthorps, Amorys, Bulfinches, 
Lowells, Ewings, Saltonstalls, Winthrops, Winslows and Otises 
of Boston. Some of his portraits are in the possession of the 
public library of Lexington, Massachusetts, and of the Massa- 
chusetts Historical Society, but most of them are privately 
owned and are scattered over the country, the majority being in 
Boston. John Singleton Copley was his pupil, and it is said 
that he finally left his studio in Boston, through jealousy of 



Copley's superior success. He was a good portrait painter, and 
some of his pictures were long attributed to Copley. 

BLACKBURN, a municipal, county aiid parliamentary 
borough of Lancashire, England, 210 m. N.W. by N. from 
London, and 24J N.NW. from Manchester, served by the 
Lancashire & Yorkshire and the London & North Western 
railways, with several lines from all parts of the county. Pop. 
(1891) 120,064; (1901) 127,626. It lies in the valley of a stream 
called in early times the Blackeburn, but now known as the 
Brook. The hills in the vicinity rise to some 900 ft., and among 
English manufacturing towns Blackburn ranks high in beauty of 
situation. Besides numerous churches and chapels the public 
buildings comprise a large town hall (1856), market house, 
exchange, county courts municipal offices, chamber of commerce, 
free library, and, outside the town, an infirmary. There are an 
Elizabethan grammar school, in modern buildings (1884) and 
an excellent technical school. The Corporation Park and Queen's 
Park are well laid out, and contain ornamental waters. There is 
an efficient tramway service, connecting the town with Darwen, 
5 m. south. The cotton industry employs thousands of operatives , 
the iron trade is also very considerable, and many are engaged 
in the making of machines; but a former woollen manufacture 
is almost extinct. Blackburn's speciality in the cotton industry 
is weaving. Coal, lime and building stone are abundant in the 
neighbourhood. Blackburn received a charter of incorporation 
in 1851, and is governed by a mayor, 14 aldermen and 42 
councillors. The county borough was created in 1888. The 
parliamentary borough, which returns two members, is co- 
extensive with the municipal, and lies between the Accrington 
and Darwen divisions of the county. Area, 7432 acres. 

Blackburn is of considerable antiquity; indeed, the 6th 
century is allocated to the original foundation of a church on the 
site of the present parish church. Of another church on this site 
Cranmer was rector after the Reformation. Blackburn was for 
some time the chief town of a district called Blackburnshire, and 
as early as the reign of Elizabeth ranked as a flourishing market 
town. About the middle of the 17th century it became famous 
for its " checks," which were afterwards superseded by a similar 
linen-and-cotton fabric known as " Blackburn greys." In the,, 
1 8th century the ability of certain natives of the town greatly 
fostered its cotton industry; thus James Hargreaves here 
probably invented his spinning jenny about 1764, though the 
operatives, fearing a reduction of labour, would have none of it, 
and forced him to quit the town for Nottingham. He was in the 
employment of Robert Peel, grandfather of the prime minister 
of that name, who here instituted the factory system, and as the 
director of a large business carefully fostered the improvement 
of methods. 

See W. A. Abram, History of Blackburn (Blackburn, 1897). 

BLACKBURNE, FRANCIS (1782-1867), lord chancellor of 
Ireland, was born at Great Footstown, Co. Meath, Ireland, oil 
the nth of November 1782. Educated at Trinity College, 
Dublin, he was called to the English bar in 1805, and practised 
with great success on the home circuit. Called to the Irish bar 
in 1822, he vigorously administered the Insurrection Act in 
Limerick for two years, effectually restoring order in the district. 
In 1826 he became a serjeant-at-law, and in 1830, and again, 
in 1841, was attorney-general for Ireland. In 1842 he became 
master of the rolls in Ireland, in 1846 chief-justice of the queen's 
bench, and in 1852 (and again in 1866) lord chancellor of Ireland. 
In 1856 he was made a lord justice of appeal in Ireland. He is 
remembered as having prosecuted O'Connell and presided at 
the trial of Smith O'Brien. He died on the 17th of September 
1867. 

BLACKCOCK (Tetrao tetrix), the English name given to a bird 
of the family Tetraonidae or grouse, the female of which is known 
as the grey hen and the young as poults. In size and plumage 
the two sexes offer a striking contrast, the male weighing about 
4 lb, its plumage for the most part of a rich glossy black shot 
with blue and purple, the lateral tail feathers curved outwards so 
as to form, when raised,- a fan-like crescent, and the eyebrows 
destitute of feathers and of a bright vermilion red. The female, 



BLACK COUNTRY— BLACK FOREST 



21 



on the other hand, weighs only 2 lb, its plumage is of a russet 
brown colour irregularly barred with black, and its tail feathers 
are but slightly forked. The males are polygamous, and during 
autumn and winter associate together, feeding in flocks apart 
from the females; but with the approach of spring they separate, 
each selecting a locality for itself, from which it drives off all 
intruders, and where morning and evening it seeks to attract the 
other sex by a display of its beautiful plumage, which at this 
season attains its greatest perfection, and by a peculiar cry, 
which Selby describes as " a crowing note, and another similar 
to the noise made by the whetting of a scythe." The nest, 
composed of a few stalks of grass, is built on the ground, usually 







Blackcock. 



beneath the shadow of a low bush or a tuft of tall grass, and here 
the female lays from six to -ten eggs of a dirty-yellow colour 
speckled with dark brown. The blackcock then rejoins his male 
associates, and the female is left to perform the labours of 
hatching and rearing her young brood. The plumage of both 
sexes is at first like that of the female, but after moulting the 
young males gradually assume the more brilliant plumage of 
their sex. There are also many cases on record, and specimens 
may be seen in the principal museums, of old female birds 
assuming, to a greater or less extent, the plumage of the male. 
The blackcock is very generally distributed over the highland 
districts of northern and central Europe, and in some parts of 
Asia. It is found on the principal heaths in the south of England, 
but is specially abundant in the Highlands of Scotland. 

BLACK COUNTRY, THE, a name commonly applied to a 
district lying principally in S. Staffordshire, but extending into 
Worcestershire and Warwickshire, England. This is one of the 
chief manufacturing centres in the United Kingdom, and the 
name arises from the effect of numerous collieries and furnaces, 
which darken the face of the district, the buildings and the 
atmosphere. Coal, ironstone and clay are mined in close 
proximity, and every sort of iron and steel goods is produced. 
The district extends 15 m. N. W. from Birmingham, and includes 
Smethwick, West Bromwich, Dudley, Oldbury, Sedgley, Tipton, 
Bilston, Wednesbury, Wolverhampton and Walsall as its most 
important centres. The ceaseless activity of the Black Country 
is most readily realized when it is traversed, or viewed from such 
an elevation as Dudley Castle Hill, at night, when the glare of 
furnaces appears in every direction. The district is served by 
numerous branches of the Great Western, London & North 
Western, and Midland railways, and is intersected by canals, 
which carry a heavy traffic, and in some places are made to 
surmount physical obstacles with remarkable engineering skill, 
as in the case of the Castle Hill tunnels at Dudley. Among the 
numerous branches of industry there are several characteristic 
of certain individual centres. Thus, locks are a specialty at 



Wolverhampton and Willenhall, and keys at Wednesfield; 
horses' bits, harness-fittings and saddlery at Walsall and Blox- 
wich, anchors and cables at Tipton, glass at Smethwick, and 
nails and chains at Cradley. 

BLACK DROP, in astronomy, an apparent distortion of the 
planet Mercury or Venus at the time of internal contact with the 
limb of the sun at the beginning or end of a transit. It has been 
in the past a source of much perplexity to observers of transits, 
but is now understood to be a result of irradiation, produced by 
the atmosphere or by the aberration of the telescope. 

BLACKFOOT (Siksika), a tribe and confederacy of North 
American Indians of Algonquian stock. The name is explained 
as an allusion to their leggings being observed by the whites to 
have become blackened by marching over the freshly burned 
prairie. Their range was around the headwaters of the Missouri, 
from the Yellowstone northward to the North Saskatchewan and 
westward to the Rockies. The confederacy consisted of three 
tribes, the Blackfoot or Siksika proper, the Kaina and the 
Piegan. During the early years of the 19th century the Black- 
foots were one of the strongest Indian confederacies of the north- 
west, numbering some 40,000. At the beginning of the 20th 
century there were about 5000, some in Montana and some in 
Canada. 

See Jean L'Heureux, Customs and Religious Ideas of Blackfoot 
Indians in J. A. I., vol. xv. (1886) ; G. B. Grinnell, Blackfoot Lodge 
Tales (1892); G. Catlin, North American Indians (1876); Handbook 
of American Indians (Washington, 1907), under " Siksika." 

BLACK FOREST (Ger. Schwarzwald; the Silva Marciana and 
Abnoba of the Romans), a mountainous district of south-west 
Germany, having an area of 1844 sq. m., of which about two- 
thirds lie in the grand duchy of Baden and the remaining third 
in the kingdom of Wiirttemberg. Bounded on the south and 
west by the valley of the Rhine, to which its declivities abruptly 
descend, and running parallel to, and forming the counterpart of 
the Vosges beyond, it slopes more gently down to the valley of 
the Neckar in the north and to that of the Nagold (a tributary of 
the Neckar) on the north-east. Its total length is 100 m., and its 
breadth varies from 36 m. in the south to 21 in the centre and 13 
in the north. The deep valley of the Kinzig divides it laterally 
into halves, of which the southern, with an average elevation of 
3000 ft., is the wilder and contains the loftiest peaks, which again 
mostly lie towards the western side. Among them are the Feld- 
berg (4898 ft.), the Herzogenhorn (4600), the Blossling (4260) and 
the Blauen (3820). The northern half has an average height of 
2000 ft. On the east side are several lakes, and here the majority 
of the streams take their rise. The configuration of the hills is 
mainly conical and the geological formation consists of gneiss, 
granite (in the south) and red sandstone. The district is poor in 
minerals; the yield of silver and copper has almost ceased, but 
there are workable coal seams near Offenburg, where the Kinzig 
debouches on the plain. The climate in the higher districts is 
raw and the produce is mostly confined to hardy cereals, such as 
oats. But the valleys, especially those on the western side, are 
warm and healthy, enclose good pasture land and furnish fruits 
and wine in rich profusion. They are clothed up to a height of 
about 2000 ft. with luxuriant woods of oak and beech, and above 
these again and up to an elevation of 4000 ft., surrounding the 
hills with a dense dark belt, are the forests of fir which have given 
the name to the district. The summits of the highest peaks are 
bare, but even on them snow seldom lies throughout the summer. 

The Black Forest produces excellent timber, which is partly 
sawn in the valleys and partly exported down the Rhine in logs. 
Among other industries are the manufactures of watches, clocks, 
toys and musical instruments. There are numerous mineral 
springs, and among the watering places Baden-Baden and 
Wildbad are famous. The towns of Freiburg, Rastatt, Offenburg 
and Lahr, which lie under the western declivities, are the chief 
centres for the productions of the interior. 

The Black Forest is a favourite tourist resort and is opened up 
by numerous railways. In addition to the main lines in the 
valleys of the Rhine and Neckar, which are connected with the 
towns lying on its fringe, the district is intersected by the 



2 2 



BLACK HAWK— BLACKIE 



Schwarzwaldbahn from Offenburg to Singen, from which various 
small local lines ramify. 

BLACK HAWK [Ma'katawimesheka'ka, " Black Sparrow 
Hawk"], (i 767-1838, American Indian warrior of the Sauk and 
Fox tribes, was born at the Sauk village on Rock river, near the 
Mississippi, in 1767. He was a member of the Thunder gens of 
the Sauk tribej and, though neither an hereditary nor an elected 
chief, was for some time the recognized war leader of the Sauk 
and Foxes. From his youth he was intensely bloodthirsty and 
hostile to the Americans. Immediately after the acquisition of 
" Louisiana," the Federal government took steps for the removal 
of the Sauk and Foxes, who had always been a disturbing element 
among the north-western Indians, to the west bank of the 
Mississippi river. As early as 1804, by a treaty signed at St 
Louis on the 3rd of November, they agreed to the removal in 
return for an annuity of $1000. British influences were still 
strong in the upper Mississippi valley and undoubtedly led Black 
Hawk and the chiefs of the Sauk and Fox confederacy to repudi- 
ate this agreement of 1804, and subsequently to enter into the 
conspiracy of Tecumseh and take part with the British in the war 
of 18 1 2. The treaties of 1815 at Portage des Sioux (with the 
Foxes) and of 1816 at St Louis (with the Sauk) substantially 
renewed that of 1804. That of 1816 was signed by Black Hawk 
himself, who declared, however, when in 1823 Chief Keokuk and 
a majority of the two nations crossed the river, that the consent 
of the chiefs had been obtained by fraud. In 1830 a final treaty 
was signed at Prairie du Chien, by which all title to the lands of 
the Sauk and Foxes east of the Mississippi was ceded to the 
government, and provision was made for the immediate opening 
of the tract to settlers. Black Hawk, leading the party in opposi- 
tion to Keokuk, at once refused to accede to this cession and 
threatened to retaliate if his lands Were invaded. This pre- 
cipitated what is known as the Black Hawk War. Settlers began 
pouring into the new region in the early spring of 1831, and Black 
Hawk in June attacked several villages near the Illinois- Wisconsin 
line. After massacring several isolated families, he was driven 
off by a force of Illinois militia. He renewed his attack in the 
following year (1832), but after several minor engagements, in 
most of which he was successful, he was defeated (21st of July) 
at Wisconsin Heights on the Wisconsin river, opposite Prairie du 
Sac, by Michigan volunteers under Colonels Henry Dodge and 
James D. Henry, and fleeing westward was again decisively 
defeated on the Mississippi at the mouth of the Bad Axe river (on 
the 1st and 2nd of August) by General Henry Atkinson. His 
band was completely dispersed, and he himself was captured by 
a party of Winnebagoes. At Fort Armstrong, Rock Island, on 
the 21st of September, a treaty was signed, by which a large tract 
of the Sauk and Fox territory was ceded to the United States; 
and the United States granted to them a reservation of 400 sq. m., 
the payment of $20,006 a year for thirty years, and the settlement 
of certain traders' claims against the tribe. With several 
warriors Black Hawk was sent to Fortress Monroe, Virginia, 
where he was confined for a few weeks; afterwards he was 
taken by the government through the principal Eastern cities. 
On his release he settled in 1837 on the Sauk and Fox reservation 
on the Des Moines river, in Iowa, where he died on the 3rd of 
October 1838. 

See Frank E. Stevens, The Black Hawk War (Chicago, 1903) ; 
R. G. Thwaites, " The Story of the Black Hawk War " in vol. xii. 
of the Collections of the State Historical Society of Wisconsin ; J. B. 
Patterson, Life of Ma-ka-tai-me-she-kia-kiak or Black Hawk (Boston, . 
1834), purporting to be Black Hawk's story as told by himself; 1 
and Benjamin Drake, Life of Black Hawk (Cincinnati, 1846). 

BLACKHEATH, an open common in the south-east of London, 
England, mainly in the metropolitan borough of Lewisham. 
This high-lying tract was crossed by the Roman Watling Street 
from Kent, on a line approximating to that of the modern 
Shooter's Hill; and was a rallying ground of Wat Tyler (1381), 
of Jack Cade (1450), and of Audley, leader of the Cornish rebels, 
defeated and captured here by the troops of Henry VII. in 1497. 
It also witnessed the acclamations of the citizens of London on 
the return of Henry V. from the victory of Agincourt, the formal 
meeting between Henry VIII. and Anne of Cleves, and that 



between the army of the restoration and Charles II. The 
introduction into England of the game of golf is traditionally 
placed here in 1608, and attributed to King James I. and his 
Scottish followers. The common, the area of which is 267 acres, 
is still used for this and other pastimes. For the residential 
district to which Blackheath gives name, see Lewisham. 

BLACK HILLS, an isolated group of mountains, covering an 
area of about 6000 sq. m. in the adjoining corners of South 
Dakota and Wyoming, U.S.A. They rise on an average some 
2000 ft. above their base, the highest peak, Harney, having an 
altitude above the sea of 7216 ft. They are drained and in large 
part enclosed by the North (or Belle Fourche) and South forks of 
the Cheyenne river (at whose junction a fur-trading post was 
established about 1830); and are surrounded by semi-arid, 
alkaline plains lying 3000 to 3500 ft. above the sea. The mass 
has an elliptical shape, its long axis, which extends nearly 
N.N.W.-S.S.E., being about 120 m. and its shorter axis about 
40 m. long. The hills are formed by a short, broad, anticlinal 
fold, which is flat or nearly so on its summit. From this fold 
the stratified beds have in large part been removed, the more 
recent having been almost entirely eroded from the elevated 
mass. The edges of these are now found encircling the mountains 
and forming a series of fairly continuous rims of hogbacks. 
The carboniferous and older stratified beds still cover the west 
half of the hills, while from the east half they have been removed, 
exposing the granite. Scientific exploration began in 1849, and 
systematic geological investigation about 1875. Rich gold 
placers had already been discovered, and in 1875 the Sioux 
Indians within whose territory the hills had until then been 
included, were removed, and the lands were open to white 
settlers. Subsequently low-grade quartz mines were found and 
developed, and have furnished a notable part of the gold supply 
of the country (about $100,000,000 from 1875 to 1901). The 
output is to-day relatively small in comparison with that of 
many other fields, but there are one or two permanent gold mines 
of great value working low-grade ore. The silver product from 
1879 to 1901 was about $4,154,000. Deposits of copper, tin, 
iron and tungsten have been discovered, and a variety of Other 
mineral products (graphite, mica, spodumene, coal, petroleum, 
&c). In sharp contrast to the surrounding plains the climate is 
subhumid, especially in the higher Harney region. There is an 
abundance of fertile soil and magnificent grazing land. A third 
of the total area is covered with forests of pine and other trees, 
which have for the most part been made a forest-reserve by the 
national government. Jagged crags, : sudden abysses, magnificent 
canyons, forests with open parks, undulating hills, mountain 
prairies, freaks of weathering and erosion, and the enclosing lines 
of the successive hog-backs afford scenery of remarkable variety 
and wild beauty. There are several interesting limestone caverns, 
and Sylvan Lake, in the high mountain district, is an important 
resort. 

See the publications of the United States Geological Survey 
(especially Professional Paper No. 26, Economic Resources of the 
Northern Black Hills, 1904), and of the South Dakota School of 
Mines (Bulletin No. 4, containing a history and bibliography of 
Black Hills investigations) ; also R. L. Dodge, The Black Hills: 
A Minute Description . . . (New York, 1876). 

BLACKIE, JOHN STUART (1809-1895), Scottish scholar and 
man of letters, was born in Glasgow on the 28th of July 1809. 
He was educated at the New Academy and afterwards at the 
Marischal College, in Aberdeen, where his father was manager 
of the Commerical Bank. After attending classes at Edinburgh 
University (1825-1826), Blackie spent three years at Aberdeen 
as a student of theology. In 1829 he went to Germany, and after 
studying at Gottingen and Berlin (where he came under the 
influence of Heeren, Ottfried Miiller, Schleiermacher, Neander 
and Bockh) he accompanied Bunsen to Italy and Rome. The 
years spent abroad extinguished his former wish to enter the 
Church, and at his father's desire he gave himself up to the study 
of law. He had already, in 1824, been placed in a lawyer's office, 
but only remained there six months. By the time he was 
admitted a member of the Faculty of Advocates (1834) he had 
acquired a strong love of the classics and a taste for letters in 



BLACK ISLE— BLACKMORE, SIR R. 



23 



general. A translation of Faust, which he published in 1834, 
met with considerable success. After a year or two of desultory 
literary work he was (May 1839) appointed to the newly- 
instituted chair of Humanity (Latin) in the Marischal College. 
Difficulties arose in the way of his installation, owing to the action 
of the Presbytery on his refusing to sign unreservedly the Con- 
fession of Faith; but these were eventually overcome, and he 
took up his duties as professor in November 1841. In the 
following year he married. • From the first his professorial 
lectures were conspicuous for the unconventional enthusiasm 
with which he endeavoured to revivify the study of the classics; 
and his growing reputation, added to the attention excited by a 
translation of Aeschylus which he published in 1850, led to his 
appointment in 1852 to the professorship of Greek at Edinburgh 
University, in succession to George Dunbar, a post which he con- 
tinued to hold for thirty years. He was somewhat erratic in his 
methods, but his lectures were a triumph of influential person- 
ality. A journey to Greece in 1853 prompted his essay On the 
Living Language of the Greeks, a favourite theme of his, especially 
in his later years; he adopted for himself a modern Greek 
pronunciation, and before his death he endowed a travelling 
scholarship to enable students to learn Greek at Athens. Scottish 
nationality was another source of enthusiasm with him; and in 
this connexion he displayed real sympathy with Highland home 
life and the grievances of the crofters. The foundation of the 
Celtic chair at Edinburgh University was mainly due to his 
efforts. In- spite of the many calls upon his time be produced 
a considerable amount of literary work, usually on classical 
or Scottish subjects, including some poems and songs of no mean 
order. He died in Edinburgh on the 2nd of March 1895. Blackie 
was a Radical and Scottish nationalist in politics, but of a 
fearlessly independent type; he was one of the " characters " 
of the Edinburgh of the day, and was a well-known figure as he 
went about in his plaid, worn shepherd-wise, wearing a broad- 
brimmed hat, and carrying a big stick. His published works 
include (besides several volumes of verse) Homer and the Iliad 
(1866), maintaining the unity of the poems; Four Phases of 
Morals: Socrates, Aristotle, Christianity, Utilitarianism (1871); 
Essay on Self-Culture (1874); Horae Hellenicae (1874); The 
Language and Literature of the Scottish Highlands (1876); The 
Natural History of Atheism (1877); The Wise Men of Greece 
(1877); Lay Sermons (1881); Altavona (1882); The Wisdom 
of Goethe (1883); The Scottish Highlanders and the Land Laws 
(1885); Life of Burns (1888); Scottish Song (1889); Essays on 
Subjects of Moral and Social Interest (1890); Christianity and 
the Ideal of Humanity (1893). Amongst his political writings 
may be mentioned a pamphlet On Democracy (1867), On Forms 
of Government (1867), and Political Tracts (1868). 

See Anna M. Stoddart, John Stuart Blackie (1895) ; A. Stodart- 
Walker, Selected Poems of J. S. Blackie, with an appreciation (1896) ; 
Howard Angus Kennedy, Professor Blackie (1895). 

BLACK ISLE, The, a district in the east of the county of 
Ross and Cromarty, Scotland, bounded N. by Cromarty Firth, 
E. by Moray Firth, S. by Inner Moray Firth (or Firth of Inverness) 
and Beauly Firth, and W. by the river Conon and the parish of 
Urray. It is a diamond-shaped peninsula jutting out from the 
mainland in a north-easterly direction, the longer axis, from 
Muir of Ord station to the South Sutor at the entrance to Cromarty 
Firth, measuring 20 m., and the shorter, from Ferryton Point 
to CraigtonPoint, due north and south, 12 m., and it has a coast- 
line of 52 m. Originally called Ardmeanach (Gaelic ard, height; 
manaich, monk, " the monk's height," from an old religious house 
on the finely-wooded ridge of Mulbuie), it derived its customary 
name from the fact that, since snow does not lie in winter, the 
promontory looks black while the surrounding country is white. 
Within its limits are comprised the parishes of Urquhart and Logie 
Wester, Killearnan, Knockbain (Gaelic cnoc, hill; bdn, white), 
Avoch (pron. Auch), Rosemarkie, Resolis (Gaelic rudha or ros 
soluis, " cape of the light ") or Kirkmichael and Cromarty. The 
Black Isle branch of the Highland railway runs from Muir of Ord 
to Fortrose; steamers connect Cromarty with Invergordon and 
Inverness, and Fortrose with Inverness; and there are ferries, 



on the southern coast, at North Kessock (for Inverness) and 
Chanonry (for Fort George), and, on the northern coast, at 
Alcaig (for Dingwall), Newhallpoint (for Invergordon), and 
Cromarty (for Nigg). The principal towns are Cromarty and 
Fortrose. Rosehaugh, near Avoch, belonged to Sir George 
Mackenzie, founder of the Advocates' library in Edinburgh, 
who earned the sobriquet of " Bloody " from his persecution of 
the Covenanters. Redcastle, on the shore, near Killearnan 
church, dates from n 79 and is said to have been the earliest 
inhabited house in the north of Scotland. On the forfeiture of 
the earldom of Ross it became a royal castle (being visited by 
Queen Mary), and afterwards passed for a period into the hands 
of the Mackenzies of Gairloch. The chief industries are agri- 
culture — high farming flourishes owing to the great fertility of 
the peninsula — sandstone-quarrying and fisheries (mainly from 
Avoch) . The whole district, though lacking water, is picturesque 
and was once forested. The Mulbuie ridge, the highest point 
of which is 838 ft. above the sea, occupies the centre and is the 
only elevated ground. Antiquarian remains are somewhat 
numerous, such as forts and cairns in Cromarty parish, and 
stone circles in Urquhart and Logie Wester and Knockbain 
parishes, the latter also containing a hut circle and rock 
fortress. 

BLACKLOCK, THOMAS (1721-1791), Scottish poet, the 
son of a bricklayer, was born at Annan, in Dumfriesshire, in 
1721. When not quite six months old he lost his sight by small- 
pox, and his career is largely interesting as that of one who 
achieved what he did in spite of blindness. Shortly after his 
father's death in 1740, some of Blacklock's poems began to be 
handed about among his acquaintances and friends, who arranged 
for his education at the grammar-school, and subsequently at 
the university of Edinburgh, where he was a student of divinity. 
His first volume of Poems was published in 1746. In 1754 he 
became deputy librarian for the Faculty of Advocates, by the 
kindness of Hume. He was eventually estranged from Hume, 
and defended James Beattie's attack on that philosopher. Black- 
lock was among the first friends of Burns in Edinburgh, being 
one of the earliest to recognize his genius. He was in 1762 
ordained minister of the church of Kirkcudbright, a position which 
he soon resigned; in 1767 the degree of doctor in divinity was 
conferred on him by Marischal College, Aberdeen. He died on 
the 7th of July 1791. 

An edition of his poems in 1793 contains a life by Henry Mackenzie. 

BLACKMAIL, a term, in English law, used in three special 
meanings, at different times. The usual derivation of the 
second half of the word is from Norman Fr. maille (medalia; cf. 
"medal"), small copper coin; the New English Dictionary 
derives from " mail " (q.v.), meaning rent or tribute. (1) The 
primary meaning of " blackmail " was rent paid in labour, grain 
or baser metal (i.e. money other than sterling money), called 
reditus nigri, in contradistinction to rent paid in silver or white 
money (mailles blanches). (2) In the northern counties of Eng- 
land (Northumberland, Westmorland and the bishopric of 
Durham) it signified a tribute in money, corn, cattle or other 
consideration exacted from farmers and small owners by free- 
booters in return for immunity from robbers or moss-troopers. 
By a statute of 1601 it was made a felony without benefit 
of clergy to receive or pay such tribute, but the practice 
lingered until the union of England and Scotland in 1707. 
(3) The word now signifies extortion of money or property by 
threats of libel, presecution, exposure, &c. See such headings 
as Coercion, Conspiracy, Extortion, and authorities quoted 
under Criminal Law. 

BLACKMORE, SIR RICHARD (c. 1650-1729), English phy- 
sician and writer, was born at "Corsham, in Wiltshire, about 
1650. He was educated at Westminster school and St Edmund 
Hall, Oxford. He was for some time a schoolmaster, but finally, 
after graduating in medicine at Padua, he settled in practice 
as a physician in London. He supported the principles of the 
Revolution, and was accordingly knighted in 1697. He held 
the office of physician in ordinary both to William III. and 
Anne, and died on the 9th of October 1729. Blackmore had a 



24 



BLAGKMORE, R. D.— BLACK ROD 



passion for writing epics. Prince Arthur, an Heroick Poem in 
X Books appeared in 1695, and was followed by six other long 
poems before 1723. Of these Creation . . . (1712), a philo- 
sophic poem intended to refute the atheism of Vanini, Hobbes 
and Spinoza, and to unfold the intellectual philosophy of Locke, 
was the most favourably received. Dr Johnson anticipated that 
this poem would transmit the author to posterity " among the 
first favourites of the English muse," while John Dennis went 
so far as to describe it. as " a philosophical poem, which has 
equalled that of Lucretius in the beauty of its versification, and 
infinitely surpassed it in the solidity and strength of its reason- 
ing." These opinions have not been justified, for the poem, 
like everything else that Blackmore wrote, is dull and tedious. 
His Creation appears in Johnson's and Anderson's collections 
of the British poets. He left also works on medicine and on 
theological subjects. 

BLACKMORE, RICHARD DODDRIDGE (1825-1900), English 
novelist, was born on the 7th of June 1825 at Longworth, Berk- 
shire, of which village his father was curate in charge. He was 
educated at Blundell's school, Tiverton, and Exeter College, 
Oxford, where he obtained a scholarship. In 1847 he took a 
second class in classics. Two years later he entered as a student 
at the Middle Temple, and was called to the bar in 1852. His 
first publication was a volume of Poems by Melanter (1854), which 
showed no particular promise, nor did the succeeding volume, 
Epullia (1855), suggest that Blackmore had the makings of a poet. 
He was nevertheless enthusiastic in his pursuit of literature; 
and when, a few years later, the complete breakdown of his health 
rendered it clear that he must remove from London, he deter- 
mined to combine a literary life in the country with a business 
career as a market-gardener. He acquired land at Teddington, 
and set earnestly to work, the literary fruits of his new surround- 
ings being a translation of the Georgics, published in 1862. In 
1864 he published his first novel, Clara Vaughan, the merits 
of which were promptly recognized. Cradock Nowell (1866) 
followed, but it was in 1869 that he suddenly sprang into fame 
with Lorna Doone. This fine story was a pioneer in the romantic 
revival; and appearing at a jaded hour, it was presently recog- 
nized as a work of singular charm, vigour and imagination. Its 
success could scarcely be repeated, and though Blackmore wrote 
many other capital stories, of which the best known are The 
Maid of Sker (1872), Chrislowell (1880), Perlycross (1894), Tales 
from the Telling House (1896) and Dariel (1897), he will always 
be remembered almost exclusively as the author of Lorna Doone. 
He continued his quiet country life to the last, and died at 
Teddington on the 20th of January 1900, in his seventy-fifth 
year. Lorna Doone has the true out-of-door atmosphere, is shot 
through and through with adventurous spirit, and in its dramatic 
moments shows both vigour and intensity. The heroine, though 
she is invested with qualities of faery which are scarcely human, 
is an idyllic and haunting figure; and John Ridd, the bluff 
hero, is, both in purpose and achievement, a veritable giant of 
romance. The story is a classic of the West country, and the 
many pilgrimages that are made annually to the Doone Valley 
(the actual characteristics of which differ materially from the 
descriptions given in the novel) are entirely inspired by the 
buoyant imagination of Richard Blackmore. A memorial 
window and tablet to his memory were erected in Exeter 
cathedral in 1904. 

BLACK MOUNTAIN, a mountain range and district on the 
Hazara border of the North-West Frontier Province of India. 
It is inhabited by Yusafzai Pathans. The Black Mountain itself 
has a total length of 25 to 50 m., and an average height of 8000ft. 
above the sea. It rises from the Indus basin near the village of 
Kiara, up to its watershed by Bruddur; thence it runs north- 
west by north to the point on the crest known as Chittabut. 
From Chittabut the range runs due north, finally descending by 
two large spurs to the Indus again. The tribes which inhabit 
the western face of the Black Mountain are the Hassanzais (2300 
fighting men), the Akazais ( 1165 fighting men ) and the Chagar- 
zais (4890 fighting men), all sub-sections of the Yusafzai Pathans. 
It was in this district that the Hindostani Fanatics had their 



stronghold, and they were responsible for much of the unrest 
on this part of the border. 

The Black Mountain is chiefly notable for four British 
expeditions : — 

1. Under Lieut.-Colonel F. Mackeson, in 1852-53, against 
the Hassanzais. The occasion was the murder of two British 
customs officers. A force of 3800 British troops traversed their 
country, destroying their villages and grain, &c. 

2. Under Major-General A. T. Wilde, in 1868. The occasion 
was an attack on a British police post at Oghi in the Agror Valley 
by all three tribes. A force of 12,500 British troops entered the 
country and the tribes made submission. 

3. The First Hazara Expedition in 1888. The cause was the 
constant raids made by the tribes on villages in British territory, 
culminating in an attack on a small British detachment, in which 
two English officers were killed. A force of 1 2,500 British troops 
traversed the country of the tribes, and severely punished them. 
Punishment was also inflicted on the Hindostani Fanatics of 
Palosi. 

4. The Second Hazara Expedition of 1891. The Black 
Mountain tribes fired on a force within British limits. A force 
of 7300 British troops traversed the country. The tribesmen 
made their submission and entered into an agreement with 
government to preserve the peace of the border. 

The Black Mountain tribes took no part in the general frontier 
rising of 1897, and after the disappearance of the Hindostani 
Fanatics they sank into comparative unimportance . . 

BLACKPOOL, a municipal and county borough and seaside 
resort in the Blackpool parliamentary division of Lancashire, 
England, 46 m. N. of Liverpool, served by the Lancashire & 
Yorkshire, and London & North Western railways. Pop. (1891) 
23,846; (1901) 47,346. The town, which is quite modern, 
contains many churches and chapels of all denominations, a 
town hall, public libraries, the Victoria hospital, three piers, 
theatres, ball-rooms, and other places of public amusement, 
including a lofty tower, resembling the Eiffel Tower of Paris. 
The municipality maintains an electric tram service. There are 
handsome promenades along the sea front, which command fine 
views. Extensive works upon these, affording a sea front 
unsurpassed by that of any English watering-place, were com- 
pleted in 1905. The beach is sandy and the bathing good. The 
borough was created in 1876 (county borough, 1904), and is 
governed by a mayor, 12 aldermen and 36 councillors. Area, 
exclusive of foreshore, 3496 acres; including foreshore, 4244 
acres. 

BLACK ROD (more fully, " Gentleman Usher of the Black 
Rod "), an official of the House of Lords, instituted in 1350. His 
appointment is by royal letters patent, and his title is due to his 
staff of office, an ebony stick surmounted with a gold lion. He is 
a personal attendant of the sovereign in the Upper House, and 
is also usher of the order of the Garter, being doorkeeper at 
the meetings of the knights' chapter. He is responsible for the 
maintenance of order in the House of Lords, and on him falls the 
duty of arresting any peer guilty of breach of privilege or other 
offence of which the House takes cognizance. But the duty 
which brings him most into prominence is that of summoning the 
Commons and their speaker to the Upper House to hear a speech 
from the throne or the royal assent given to bills. If the 
sovereign is present in parliament, Black Rod commands the 
attendance of the gentlemen of the Commons, but when lords 
commissioners represent the king, he only desires such attendance. 
Black Rod is on such occasions the central figure of a curious 
ceremony of much historic significance. As soon as the attend- 
ants of the House of Commons are aware of his approach, they 
close the doors in his face. Black Rod then strikes three times 
with his staff, and on being asked " Who is there? " replies 
" Black Rod." Being then admitted he advances to the bar of 
the House, makes three obeisances and says, " Mr Speaker, the 
king commands this honourable House to attend his majesty 
immediately in the House of Lords." This formality originated 
in the famous attempt of Charles I. to arrest the five members, 
Hampden, Pym, Holies, Hesilrige and Strode, in 1642. Indignant 



BLACK SEA— BLACKSTONE 



25 



at this breach of privilege, the House of Commons has ever since 
maintained its right of freedom of speech and uninterrupted 
debate by the closing of the doors on the king's representative. 

BLACK SEA (or Euxine; anc. Pontus Euxinus ), 1 a body of 
water lying almost entirely between the latitudes 41 and 45 N., 
but extending to about 47 N. near Odessa. It is bounded N. by 
the southern coast of Russia; W. by Rumania, Turkey and 
Bulgaria; S. and E. by Asia Minor. The northern boundary is 
broken at Kertch by a strait entering into the Sea of Azov, and 
at the junction of the western and southern boundary is the 
Bosporus, which unites the Black Sea with the Mediterranean 
through the Sea of Marmora and the Dardanelles. The 100 
fathom line is about 10 to 20 m. from the shore except in the 
north-west corner between Varna and Sevastopol, where it 
extends 140 m. seawards. The greatest depth is 1030 fathoms 
(1227 Russian fathoms) near the centre, there being only one 
basin. The steepest incline outside 100 fathoms is to the south- 
east of the Crimea and at Amastra; the incline to the greater 
depths is also steep off the Caucasus and between Trebizond and 
Ba.tum. The conditions that prevail in the Black Sea are very 
different from those of the Mediterranean or any other sea. The 
existence of sulphuretted hydrogen in great quantities below 100 
fathoms, the extensive chemical precipitation of calcium car- 
bonate, the stagnant nature of its deep waters, and the absence of 
deep-sea life are conditions which make it impossible to discuss it 
along with the physical and biological conditions of the Mediter- 
ranean proper. 

The depths of the Black Sea are lifeless, higher organic life not 
being known to exist below 100 fathoms. Fossiliferous remains 
of Dreissena, Cardium and other molluscs have, however, been 
dredged up, which help to show that conditions formerly existed 
in the Black Sea similar to those that exist at the present day in 
the Caspian Sea. According to N. Andrusov, when the union of 
the Black Sea with the Mediterranean through the Bosporus took 
place, salt water rushed into it along the bottom of the Bosporus 
and killed the fauna of the less saline waters. This gave rise to 
a production of sulphuretted hydrogen which is found in the 
deposits, as well as in the deeper waters. 

Observations in temperature and salinity have only been 
taken during summer. During summer the surface salinity of 
the Black Sea is from 1 ■ 70 to 2 -oo % down to 50 fathoms, whereas 
in the greater depths it attains a salinity of 2-25%. The 
temperature is rather remarkable, there being an intermediate 
cold layer between 25 and 50 fathoms. This is due to the 
sinking of the cold surface water (which in winter reaches 
freezing-point) on to the top of the denser more saline water of 
the greater depths. There is thus a minimum circulation in the 
greater depths causing there uniformity of temperature, an 
absence of the circulation of oxygen by other means than 
diffusion, and a protection of the sulphuretted hydrogen from 
the oxidation which takes place in homologous situations in the 
open ocean. The temperature down to 25 fathoms is from 78-3° 
to 46-2° F., and in the cold layer, between 25 and 50 fathoms, is 
from 46-2° to 43-5° F., rising again in greater depths to 48- 2°F. 

The Sea of Marmora may be looked upon as an arm of the 
Aegean Sea and thus part of the Mediterranean proper. Its 
salinity is comparable to that of the eastern basin of the Mediter- 
ranean, which is greater than that of the Black Sea, viz. 4%. 
Similar currents exist in the Bosporus to those of the Strait of 
Gibraltar. Water of less salinity flows outwards from the Black 
Sea as an upper current, and water of greater salinity from the 
Sea of Marmora flows into the Black Sea as an under-current. 
This under-current flows towards Cape Tarhangut, where it divides 
into a left and right branch. The left branch is appreciably 
noticed near Odessa and the north-west corner; the right branch 
sweeps past the Crimea, strikes the Caucasian shore (where it 
comes to the surface running across, but not into, the south-east 
corner of the Black Sea), and finally disperses flowing westwards 
along the northern coast of Asia Minor between Cape Jason and 

1 The early Greek navigators gave it the epithet of axenus, i.e. 
unfriendly to' strangers, but as Greek colonies sprang up on the 
shores this was changed to euxinus, friendly to strangers. 



Sinope. This current causes a warmer climate where it strikes. 
So marked is this current that it has to be taken into account in 
the navigation of the Black Sea. 

The Sea of Azov is exceedingly shallow, being only about 6 
fathoms in its deepest part, and it is largely influenced by the 
river Don. Its water is considerably fresher than the Black Sea, 
varying from 1-55 to o-68%. It freezes more readily and is not 
affected by the Mediterranean current. 

See N. Andrusov, " Physical Exploration of the Black Sea," in 
Geographical Journal, vol. i. p. 49. 

BLACK SEA (Russ. Chcrnomorskaya) , a military district ef 
the province of Kuban, formerly an independent province Of 
Transcaucasia, Russia; it includes the narrow strip of land 
along the N.E. coast of the Black Sea from Novorossiysk to 
the vicinity of Pitsunda, between the sea and the crest of the 
main range of the Caucasus. Area, 2836 sq. m. Pop. (1897) 
54,228; (1906, estimate) 71,900. It is penetrated by numerous 
spurs of this range, which strike the sea abruptly at right angles 
to the coast, and in many cases plunge down into it sheer. Owing 
to its southern exposure, its sheltered position, and a copious 
rainfall, vegetation, in part of a sub-tropical character, grows 
in great profusion. In consequence, however, of the moun- 
tainous character of the region, it is divided into a large number 
of more or less isolated districts, and there is little intercourse 
with the country north of the Caucasus, the passes over the range 
being few and difficult (see Caucasus). But since the Russians 
became masters of this region, its former inhabitants (Circassian 
tribes) have emigrated in thousands, so that the country is now 
only thinly inhabited. It is divided into three districts- 
Novorossiysk, with the town (pop. in 1897, 16,208) of the same 
name, which acts as the capital of the Black Sea district; 
Velyaminovsk; and Sochi. Novorossiysk is connected by rail, 
at the west end of the Caucasus, with the Rostov- Vladikavkaz 
line, and a mountain road leadsirom Velyaminovsk (or Tuapse) 
to Maikop in the province of Kuban. 

BLACKSTONE, SIR WILLIAM (1723-1780), English jurist, 
was born in London, on the 10th of July 1723. His parents' 
having died when he was young, his early education, under the 
care of his uncle, Dr Thomas Bigg, was obtained at the Charter- 
house, from which, at the age of fifteen, he was sent to Pembroke 
College, Oxford. He was entered in the Middle Temple in 174 1. 
In 1 744 he was elected a fellow of All Souls' College. From this 
period he divided his time between the university and the 
Temple, where he took chambers in order to attend the law 
courts. In 1746 he was called to the bar. Though but little 
known or distinguished as a pleader, he was actively 'employed* 
during his occasional residences at the university, in taking part 
in the internal management of his college. In May 1749, as a 
small reward for his services, and to give him further oppor- 
tunities of advancing the interests of the college, Blackstone was 
appointed steward of its manors. In the same year, on the 
resignation of his uncle, Seymour Richmond, he was elected 
recorder of the borough of Wallingford in Berkshire. In 1750 he 
became doctor of civil law. In 1753 he decided to retire from 
London work to his fellowship and an academical life, still con- 
tinuing the practice of his profession as a provincial counsel. 

His lectures on the laws of England appear to have been an 
early and favourite idea; for in the Michaelmas term immedi- 
ately after he abandoned London, he entered on the duty of 
reading them at Oxford; and we are told by the author of his 
Life, that even at their commencement, the high expectations 
formed from the acknowledged abilities of the lecturer attracted 
to these lectures a very crowded class of young men of the first 
families, characters and hopes. Bentham, however, declares 
that he was a " formal, precise and affected lecturer — just what 
you would expect from the character of his writings — cold, 
reserved and wary, exhibiting a frigid pride." It was not till the 
year 1758 that the lectures in the form they now bear were read 
in the university. Blackstone, having been unanimously elected 
to the newly-founded Vinerian professorship, on the 25th of 
October read his first introductory lecture, afterwards prefixed 
to the first volume of his celebrated Commentaries. It is doubtful 



26 



BLACK VEIL— BLAGKWATER 



whether the Commentaries were originally intended for the 
press; but many imperfect and incorrect copies having got into 
circulation, and a pirated edition of them being either published 
or preparing for publication in Ireland, the author thought 
proper to print a correct edition himself, and in November 1765 
published the first volume, under the title of Commentaries 011 
the Laws of England. The remaining parts of the work were 
given to the world in the course of the four succeeding years. 
It may be remarked that before this period the reputation which 
his lectures had deservedly acquired for him had induced him 
to resume practice in London; and, contrary to the general order 
of the profession, he who had quitted the bar for an academic life 
was sent back from the college to the bar with a considerable 
increase of business. He was likewise elected to . parliament, 
first for Hindon, and afterwards for Westbury in Wilts; but in 
neither of these departments did he equal the expectations which 
his writings had raised. The part he took in the Middlesex 
election drew upon him many attacks as well as a severe anim- 
adversion from the caustic pen of " Junius." This circumstance 
probably strengthened the aversion he professed to parliamentary 
attendance, " where," he said, " amidst the rage of contending 
parties, a man of moderation must expect to meet with no 
quarter from any side." In 17 70 he declined the place of solicitor- 
general; but shortly afterwards, on the promotion of Sir Joseph 
Yates to a seat, in the court of common pleas, he accepted a seat 
on the bench, and on the death of Sir Joseph succeeded him 
there also. He died on the 14th of February 1780. 

The design of the Commentaries is exhibited in his first Vinerian 
lecture printed in the introduction to them. The author there 
dwells on the importance of noblemen, gentlemen and educated 
persons generally being well acquainted with the laws of the 
country; and his treatise, accordingly, is as far as possible a 
popular exposition of the laws of England. Falling into the 
common error of identifying the various meanings of the word 
law, he advances from the law of nature (being either the revealed 
or the inferred will of God) to municipal law, which he defines to 
be a rule of civil conduct prescribed by the supreme power in a 
state commanding what is right and prohibiting what is wrong. 
On this definition he founds the division observed in the Com- 
mentaries. The objects of law are rights and wrongs. Rights are 
either rights of persons or rights of things. Wrongs are either 
public or private. These four headings form respectively the 
subjects of the four books, of the Commentaries. 

Blackstone was by no means what would now be called a 
scientific jurist. He has only the vaguest possible grasp of the 
elementary conceptions of law. He evidently regards the law 
of gravitation, the law of nature, and the law of England, as 
different examples of the same principle — as rules of action or 
conduct imposed by a superior power on its subjects. He 
propounds in terms the doctrine that municipal or positive laws 
derive their validity from their conformity to the so-called law 
of nature or law of God. " No human laws," he says, " are of 
any validity if contrary to this." His distinction between rights 
of persons and rights of things, implying, as it would appear, 
that things as well as persons have rights, is attributable to a 
misunderstanding of the technical terms of the Roman law. 
In distinguishing between private and public wrongs (civil 
injuries and crimes) he fails to seize the true principle of the 
division. Austin, who accused him of following slavishly the 
method of Hale's Analysis of the Law, declares that he " blindly 
adopts the mistakes of his rude and compendious model; missing 
invariably, with a nice and surprising infelicity, the pregnant 
but obscure suggestions which it proffered to his attention, and 
which would have guided a discerning and inventive writer to 
an arrangement comparatively just." By the want of precise 
and closely-defined terms, and his tendency to substitute loose 
literary phrases, he falls occasionally into irreconcilable contra- 
dictions. Even in discussing a subject of such immense import- 
ance as equity, he hardly takes pains to discriminate between 
the legal and popular senses of the word, and, from the small 
place which equity jurisprudence occupies in his arrangement, 
he would scarcely seem to have realized its true position in the 



law of England. Subject, however, to these strictures the 
completeness of the treatise, its serviceable if not scientific order, 
and the power of lucid exposition possessed by the author 
demand emphatic recognition. Blackstone's defects as a jurist 
are more conspicuous in his treatment of the underlying principles 
and fundamental divisions of the law than in his account of its 
substantive principles. 

Blackstone by no means confines himself to the work of a 
legal commentator. It is his business, especially when he touches 
on the framework of society, to find a basis in history and reason 
for all the most characteristic English institutions. There is not 
much either of philosophy or fairness in this part of his work. 
Whether through the natural conservatism of a lawyer, or 
through his own timidity and subserviency as a man and a 
politician, he is always found to be a specious defender of the 
existing order of things. Bentham accuses him of being the 
enemy of all reform, and the unscrupulous champion of every 
form of professional chicanery. Austin says that he truckled 
to the sinister interests and mischievous prejudices of power, 
and that he flattered the overweening conceit of the English in 
their own institutions. He displays much ingenuity in giving a 
plausible form to common prejudices and fallacies; but it is by 
no means clear that he was not imposed upon himself. More 
undeniable than the political fairness of the treatise is its merits 
as a work of literature. It is written in a most graceful and 
attractive style, and although no opportunity of embellishment 
has been lost, the language is always simple and clear. Whether 
it is owing to its literary graces, or to its success in flattering the 
prejudices of the public to which it was addressed, the influence 
of the book in England has been extraordinary. Not lawyers 
only, and lawyers perhaps even less than others, accepted it as 
an authoritative revelation of the law. It performed for educated 
society in England much the same service as was rendered to 
the people of Rome by the publication of their previously 
unknown laws. It is more correct to regard it as a handbook of 
the law for laymen than as a legal treatise; and as the first and 
only book of the kind in England it has been received with some- 
what indiscriminating reverence. It is certain that a vast 
amount of the constitutional sentiment of the country has been 
inspired by its pages. To this day Blackstone's criticism of the 
English constitution would probably express the most profound 
political convictions of the majority of the English people. 
Long after it has ceased to be of much practical value as an 
authority in the courts, it remains the arbiter of all public dis- 
cussions on the law or the constitution. On such occasions the 
Commentaries are apt to be construed as strictly as if they were 
a code. It is curious to observe how much importance is attached 
to the ipsissima verba of a writer who aimed more at presenting 
a picture intelligible to laymen than at recording the principles 
of the law with technical accuracy of detail. 

See also the article English Law. 

BLACK VEIL, in the Roman Catholic Church, the symbol of 
the most complete renunciation of the world and adoption of 
a nun's life. On the appointed day the nun goes through 
all the ritual of the marriage ceremony, after a solemn mass at 
which all the inmates of the convent assist. She is dressed in 
bridal white with wreath and veil, and receives a wedding-ring, 
as spouse of the Church. Afterwards she presides at a wedding- 
breakfast, at which a bride-cake is cut. She thus bids adieu 
to all her friends, and having previously taken the white veil, 
the betrothal, she now assumes the black, and for ever forswears 
the world and its pleasures. Her hair is cut short, and her bridal 
robes are exchanged for the sombre religious habit. Her Wedding- 
ring, however, she continues to wear, and it is buried with her. 

BLACKWATER, the name of a number of rivers and streams 
in England, Scotland and Ireland. The Blackwater in Essex, 
which rises near Saffron Walden, has a course of about 40 m. to 
the North Sea. The most important river of the name is in 
southern Ireland, rising in the hills on the borders of the counties 
Cork and Kerry, and flowing nearly due east for the greater part 
of its course, as far as Cappoquin, where it turns abruptly south- 
ward, and discharges through an estuary into Youghal Bay. 



BLACKWATER FEVER— BLADDER DISEASES 



27 



The length of its valley (excluding the lesser windings of the 
river) is about 90 m., and the drainage area about 1300 sq. m. 
It is navigable only for a few miles above the mouth, but its 
salmon fisheries are both attractive to sportsmen and of consider- 
able commercial value. The scenery of its banks is at many 
points very beautiful. 

BLACKWATER FEVER, a disease occurring in tropical 
countries and elsewhere, which is often classed with malaria 
(q.v.). It is characterized by irregular febrile paroxysms, accom- 
panied by rigors, bilious vomiting, jaundice and haemoglobinuria 
(Sambon). It has a wide geographical distribution, including 
tropical Africa, parts of Asia, the West Indies, the southern 
United States, and — in Europe — Greece, Sicily and Sardinia; 
but its range is not coextensive with malaria. Malarial 
parasites have occasionally been found in the blood. Some 
authorities believe it to be caused by the excessive use of 
quinine, taken to combat malaria. This theory has had the 
support of Koch, but it is not generally accepted. If it were 
correct, one would expect blackwater fever to be regularly 
prevalent in malarial countries and to be more or less coextensive 
with the use of quinine, which is not at all the case. It often 
resembles yellow fever, but the characteristic black vomit of 
yellow fever rarely occurs in blackwater fever, while the black 
urine from which the latter derives its name is equally rare in 
the former. According to the modern school of tropical para- 
sitology, blackwater fever is neither a form of malaria nor 
produced by quinine, but a specific disease due to a protozoal 
parasite akin to that which causes the red water fever of cattle. 

BLACKWELL, THOMAS (1701-1757), Scottish classical 
scholar, was born at Aberdeen on the 4th of August 1701. He 
took the degree of M.A. at the Marischal College in 17 18. He 
was appointed professor of Greek in 1723, and was principal 
of the institution from 1 748 until his death on the 8th of March 
1757. In 1735 his first work, An Inquiry into the Life and 
Writings of Homer, was published anonymously. It was re- 
printed in 1736, and followed (in 1747) by Proofs of the Enquiry 
into Homer's Life and Writings, a translation of the copious 
notes in foreign languages which had previously appeared. This 
work, intended to explain the causes of the superiority of Homer 
to all the poets who preceded or followed him, shows considerable 
research, and contains many curious and interesting details; 
but its want of method made Bentley say that, when he had gone 
through half of it, he had forgotten the beginning, and, when 
he had finished the reading of it, he had forgotten the whole. 
Blackwell's next work (also published anonymously in 1748) 
was Letters Concerning Mythology. In 1752 he took the degree 
of doctor of laws, and in the following year published the first 
volume of Memoirs of the Court of Augustus; the second volume 
appeared in 1755, the third in 1764 (prepared for the press, after 
Blackwell's death, by John Mills) . This work shows considerable 
originality and erudition, but is even more unmethodical than 
his earlier writings and full of unnecessary digressions. Black- 
well has been called the restorer of Greek literature in the north 
of Scotland; but his good qualities were somewhat spoiled by 
pomposity and affectation, which exposed him to ridicule. ' 

BLACKWOOD, WILLIAM (1776-1834), Scottish publisher, 
founder of the firm of William Blackwood & Sons, was born of 
humble parents at Edinburgh on the 20th of November 1776. 
At the age of fourteen he was apprenticed to a firm of booksellers 
in Edinburgh, and he followed his calling also in Glasgow and 
London for several years. Returning to Edinburgh in 1804, he 
opened a shop in South Bridge Street for the sale of old, rare 
and curious books. He undertook the Scottish agency for John 
Murray and other London publishers, and gradually drifted into 
publishing on his own account, removing in 18 16 to Princes 
Street. On the 1st of April 1817 was issued the first number of 
the Edinburgh Monthly Magazine, which on its seventh number, 
bore the name of Blackwood's as the leading part of the title. 
" Maga," as this magazine soon came to be called, was the organ 
of the Scottish Tory party, and round it gathered a host of 
able writers. William Blackwood died on the 16th of September 
1834, and was succeeded by his two sons, Alexander and Robert, 



who added a London branch to the firm. In 1845 Alexander 
Blackwood died, and shortly afterwards Robert. 

A younger brother, John Blackwood (1818-1879), succeeded 
to the business; four years later he was joined by Major William 
Blackwood, who continued in the firm until his death in 1861. 
In 1862 the major's elder son, William Blackwood (b. 1836), 
was taken into partnership. John Blackwood, was a man of 
strong personality and great business discernment; it was in the 
pages of his magazine that George Eliot's first stories, Scenes 
of Clerical Life, appeared. He also inaugurated the " Ancient 
Classics for English readers " series. On his death Mr William 
Blackwood was left in sole control of the business. With him 
were associated his nephews, George William and J. H. Black- 
wood, sons of Major George Blackwood, who was killed at 
Maiwand in 1880. 

See Annals of a Publishing House; William Blackwood and his 
Sons . . . (1897-1898), the first two volumes of which were Written 
by Mrs Oliphant; the third, dealing with John Blackwood, by his 
daughter, Mrs Gerald Porter. 

BLADDER (from A.S. blaeddre, connected with blawan, 
to blow, cf. Ger. blase), the membranous sac in animals which 
receives the urine secreted from the kidneys. The word is also 
used for any similar sac, such as the gall-bladder, the swim- 
bladder in fishes, or the small vesicle in various seaweeds. 

BLADDER AND PROSTATE DISEASES. The urinary 
bladder in man (for the anatomy see Urinary System), being 
the temporary reservoir of the renal secretion, and, as such, 
containing the urine for longer or shorter periods, is liable to 
various important affections. These are dealt with in the first 
part of this article. The diseases of the prostate are so intimately 
allied that they are best considered, as in the subsequent section, 
as part of the same subject. 

Diseases of the Bladder. 

Cystitis, or inflammation of the bladder, which may be acute 
or chronic, is due to the invasion of the mucous lining by micro- 
organisms, which gain access either from the urethra, 
the kidneys or the blood-stream. It is easy to see how c y stu,s - 
the diplococci of gonorrhoea may infect the bladder-membrane by 
direct extension of the inflammation, and how the bacilli which 
are swarming in the neighbouring bowel may find access to the 
urethra or bladder when the intervening tissues have been 
rendered penetrable by a wound or by inflammation. Sometimes, 
however, especially in the female, the germs from the large 
intestine enter the bladder by way of the vulva and the urethra. 

Any condition leading to disturbance of the function of the 
bladder, such as enlargement of the prostate, stricture of the 
urethra, stone, or injury, may cause cystitis by preparing the 
way for bacillary invasion. The bacilli of tuberculosis and of 
typhoid fever may set up cystitis by coming down into the 
bladder from the kidneys with the urine, or they reach it by 
the blood-stream, or invade it by the urethra. Another way of 
cystitis being set up is by the introduction of the germs of 
suppuration by a catheter or bougie sweeping them in from the 
urethra; or the instrument itself may be unsterilized and dirty 
and so may introduce them. It used formerly to be thought that 
wet or cold was enough to cause inflammation of the bladder, but 
the probability is that this acts only by lowering the resistance 
of the lining membrane of the bladder, and preparing it for the 
invasion of the germs which were merely waiting for an oppor- 
tunity. In the same way, gout or injury may lead to the lurking 
bacilli being enabled to effect their attack. But in every case 
disease-germs are the cause of the trouble, and they may be found 
in the urine. The first effect of inflammation is to render the 
bladder irritable, so that as soon as a few drops of urine have 
collected, the individual has intense or uncontrollable desire to 
micturate. The effort may be very painful and may be accom- 
panied by bleeding from the overloaded blood-vessels of the 
inflamed membrane. In addition to blood, pus is likely to be 
found in the urine, which by this time is alkaline and ammoniacal, 
and teeming with micro-organisms. As regards treatment, the 
patient should be at once sent to bed in a warm room, and should 



28 



BLADDER AND PROSTATE DISEASES 



sit several times a day in a very hot hip-bath. When he has got 
back to bed, a fomentation under oil-silk, or some other water- 
proof material, should be placed over the lower part of the 
abdomen. The diet should be milk (diluted with hot or cold 
water), barley-water, and bread and butter; no alcoholic drink 
should be allowed. If the urine is acid, bicarbonate of soda may 
be given, or citrate of soda; if alkaline, urotropine — a derivative 
of formic aldehyde — may prove a useful urinary disinfectant. If 
the straining and distress are great, a suppository of \ or \ a grain 
of morphia may be introduced into the rectum every two or three 
hours. The bowels must be kept freely open. If the urine is foul, 
the bladder should be frequently washed out by a soft catheter 
and two or three feet of india-rubber tubing with a funnel at the 
other end, weak and abundant hot lotions of Sanitas or Condy's 
fluid being used. 

Chronic cystitis is the condition left when the acute symptoms 
have passed away, but it is liable at any moment to resume the 
acute condition. If the cystitis is very intractable, refusing to 
yield to hot irrigations, and to washings with nitrate of silver 
lotion, it may be advisable to open the bladder from the front, 
and to explore, treat, drain and rest it. 

In tuberculous cystitis there is added to the symptoms the 
discovery of the bacilli of tuberculosis in the urine, and cysto- 
scopic examination may reveal the presence of tubercles of the 
mucous membrane or even of ulceration. The patient is probably 
losing weight, and he may present foci of tuberculosis at the back 
of the testicle, the lung or kidney, or in a joint or bone, or in a 
lymphatic gland. Treatment is rebellious and unpromising. 
Washings and lotions give but temporary relief, and if the 
bladder is opened for rest, and for a more direct treatment, the 
germs of suppuration may enter, and, working in conjunction 
with the bacilli, may cause great havoc. Koch's tuberculin 
treatment should certainly be given a trial. This consists of the 
injection into the body of an emulsion of dead tubercle bacilli 
which have been sterilized by heat. As a result of this injection 
the blood sets to work to form an " opsonin " — a protective 
material which so modifies the disease-germs as to render them 
attractive to the white corpuscles of the patient's blood (phago- 
cytes), which then seize upon and destroy them. Sir A. E. 
Wright has devised a delicate method of examination of the blood 
(the calculation of the opsonic index) which tells when the 
tuberculin injections should be resorted to and when withheld 
(see Blood). 

Calculi and Gravel. — Uric acid is deposited from the urine either 
as small crystals resembling cayenne pepper, or else, in combina- 
tion with soda and ammonia, as an amorphous " brick- 
Stone. ( j ust „ ^ epos j tj w hich, on cooling, leaves a red stain on 
the bottom of the vessel, soluble in hot water. These substances 
are derived from the disintegration of nitrogenized food taken in 
excess of demand, and from the breaking down of the human 
tissues. They occur therefore in fevers, in wasting diseases, and 
in the normal subject after excessive muscular exercises, especially 
if these exercises have been accompanied with so much perspira- 
tion that the excess of water from the blood has escaped by the 
skin rather than by the kidneys. The abundance of this deposit 
is in accordance with the amount of heat developed and work 
done in the body, and corresponds with the dust and ashes raked 
out of the fire-box of the locomotive after a long run. But 
supposing that the uric acid debris continues to be excessive, the 
risk of the formation of renal qx vesical calculi becomes consider- 
able, and it may be advisable to place the patient on a restricted 
nitrogenized diet, to induce him to drink large quantities of water, 
and to keep his bowels so loose with watery laxatives, such as 
Epsom salts or sulphate of soda, that the waste products of his 
body are made to escape by the bowels rather than by the kidneys. 
In addition to the salts just mentioned, an occasional dose of blue 
pill will prove helpful. A course of treatment at Contrex6ville 
or Carlsbad may be taken with advantage. 

Alkaline urine is unable to hold the phosphates of ammonia and 
magnesia in solution, so they are deposited in abundance either in 
the kidney or bladder. If the voided urine is allowed to stand in a 
tall glass they sink to the bottom with pus and mucus in a cloudy 



deposit. To remedy this condition it is necessary to treat the 
cystitis with which the bacterial decomposition of the urine is 
associated. It may be that a calculus of acid urine, such as one 
of uric acid or oxalate of lime, has been resting in the bladder and 
keeping up incessant irritation, and that the micro-organisms of 
decomposition or suppuration have found their way to the mucous 
lining of the bladder from either the bowel, the urethra or the 
blood-stream; undergoing cultivation there they break up the 
urea into carbonate of ammonia and so render the urine alkaline. 
This alkaline urine deposits its phosphates, which light upon the 
calculus and encrust it with a mortary shell, which may go on 
increasing in size until it may even fill the bladder. Sometimes 
the nucleus of a calculus is a chip of bone or a blood-clot, or some 
foreign substance which has been introduced into the bladder. 
Sooner or later the urine becomes alkaline and the calculus is 
encrusted with lime salts. . 

When urine contains a larger amount of chemical constituents 
than it can conveniently hold in solution, a certain quantity crys- 
tallizes out, and may be deposited in the kidney or in the bladder. 
If the crystals run together in the kidney the resulting concretion 
may either remain in that organ or may find its way into the 
bladder, where it may remain to form the nucleus of a larger 
vesical calculus, or, especially in the case of females, it may, 
while still small, escape from the bladder during micturition. 

In children, in whom there is a rapid disintegration of nitro- 
genized tissues, a uric acid calculus in escaping from the bladder 
may block the urethra and give rise to sudden retention of urine. 
On introducing a metal "sound," the surgeon may strike the 
stone, and if it happens to be near the bladder he may push it 
back and subsequently remove it by crushing. But if it has made 
its way some distance along the urethra, so that he can feel it 
from the outside, he should remove it by a clean incision. 

A stone in the bladder worries the nerves of the mucous 
membrane, and, giving them the impression that the bladder 
contains much water, causes the desire and need for micturition 
to be constant. The irritation causes an excessive secretion of 
mucus, just as a piece of grit under the eyelid causes a constant 
running from the eye. So the urine, if allowed to stand, gives 
a copious deposit. During micturition the contracting bladder 
bruises its congested blood-vessels against the stone, so that 
towards the end of micturition blood appears in the urine. 
Lastly, cystitis occurs, and the urine contains fetid pus. A 
stone in the bladder gives rise to pain at the end of the penis, 
and it is apt suddenly to stop the flow of urine during micturition. 

The association of any of these symptoms leads the surgeon 
to suspect the presence of a stone in the bladder, and he confirms 
his suspicions by introducing a slender steel rod, a " sound," 
by which he strikes and feels the stone. Further confirmation 
may be obtained by the help of the X-rays, or, in the adult, by 
using a cystoscope. In a child the stone may often be felt 
by a finger in the rectum, the front of the bladder being 
pressed by a hand on the lower part of the abdomen. The 
cystoscope is a straight, hollow metal tube about the size 
of a long cedar pencil, which the surgeon introduces into the 
adult bladder, which has already been filled with warm boracic 
lotion. Down the tube run two fine wires which control a minute 
electric lamp at the bladder end of the instrument. At that end 
also is a small glass window which prevents the fluid escaping 
by the tube, and also a prism; at the other end of the tube is 
an eye-piece. By the use of this slender speculum the practised 
surgeon can recognize the presence of tubercle or tuberculous 
ulceration of the bladder, stone, or other foreign material, and 
innocent or malignant growths. He can also watch the urine 
entering the bladder by the openings of the ureters, and deter- 
mine from which kidney blood or pus is coming. 

The treatment of stone in the bladder is governed by various 
conditions. Speaking generally, the surgeon prefers to introduce 
a lithotrite and crush the stone into small fragments, and then 
to flush out the fragments by using a full-sized, hollow metal 
catheter and an india-rubber wash-bottle. Even in children 
this operation may generally be adopted with success, the stone 
being crushed to atoms and the fragments being washed out to 



BLADDER AND PROSTATE DISEASES 



29 



the last small chip. But if the stone is a very hard one (as are 
some of the oxalate of lime calculi), or if it is very large, or if 
the bladder or the prostate gland is in a state of advanced 
disease, or if the urethra is not roomy enough to admit instru- 
ments of adequate calibre, the crushing operation (lilholrity) 
must be deemed unsuitable, and the stone must be removed by 
a cutting operation {lithotomy) . 

Lithotomy. — Cutting for stone has been long practised; but 
up to the beginning of the 19th century it was performed only 
by a few men, who, bolder than their contemporaries, had 
specially worked at that operation and had attained celebrity 
as skilful lithotomists. Patients went long distances to be 
operated on by them, and certain of the older surgeons, as 
William Cheselden, performed a large number of queries
with most excellent results. The operation was by an incision 
from the perineum, and is ordinarily spoken of as lateral litho- 
tomy. It was splendidly designed, and gave good results, 
especially in children. But it is now a thing of the past, having 
almost entirely given place to the high or supra-pubic operation. 
In the high operation the patient, being duly prepared, is placed 
upon his back and the bladder is washed out with hot boracic 
lotion, and when the lotion returns quite clean a final injection 
is made until the bladder is felt rising above the pubes. Then 
the india-rubber tube is removed from the silver catheter by 
which the injection has been made, and the end of the catheter 
is plugged by a spigot. An incision is then made in the middle 
line of the abdomen over the bladder region. The incision must 
be kept as low as possible, so that the bladder may be reached 
below the peritoneum, which, higher up, gives it an external, 
serous coat. As the bladder is approached, a good many veins 
are seen to be in the way, some of which have to be wounded. 
The bladder-wall is recognized by its coarse network of pale 
muscular fibres, through which, on each side of the middle line, a 
strong suture is passed, so that when the bladder is opened and 
the lotion comes rushing out, the opening which has been made 
into the bladder may not sink into the depths of the pelvis. A 
finger introduced into the bladder makes out the exact size and 
position of the stone, or stones, and the removal is effected 
by special forceps. Bleeding having ceased, the bladder-wound 
;ls partly or entirely closed by sutures an'd allowed to fall into 
the pelvis, the catheter having been removed. It is advisable 
to leave a drainage tube in the abdominal wound for a while, 
so that if urine leaks from the bladder-wound it may find a 
ready escape to the dressings. 

Litholapaxy. — Lithotrity consists of two parts — the crushing 
of the stone, and the removal of the detritus. The two stages 
are now carried out at one " sitting," without an interval being 
allowed between them, as was formerly the practice, and the 
term " litholapaxy " designates this method. The patient 
having been anaesthetized, 10 oz. of hot boracic lotion are in- 
jected, and the crushing instrument, the lithotrite, is then passed 
into the bladder. The lithotrite has two blades, a " male " and 
a " female," the latter fenestrated, the former solid with its sur- 
face notched. When the stone is fixed between the blades the 
screw is used, and great pressure is applied evenly, gradually 
and continuously to the stone. The lithotrite is made of very 
tough steel, so that hard stones may be crushed without danger 
of the instrument breaking or bending. Care must be taken not 
to catch the bladder-wall with the lithotrite. This danger is 
avoided by raising the point of the lithotrite immediately after 
grasping the stone and before crushing. The stone breaks into 
two or more pieces, and these fragments must be crushed, one 
by one, until they are powdered fine enough to escape by the 
large evacuating catheter. If the stone be large and hard, half 
an hour or longer may be required to crush it sufficiently fine. 
When the surgeon fails to catch any more large pieces, the pre- 
sumption is that the stone has been thoroughly broken up. 
The lithotrite is then withdrawn and the detritus is washed out 
by an " aspirator," which consists of a stiff elastic ball which is 
connected with a trap, into which fragments of stone fall so as not 
to pass out on the instrument being used at later periods in the 
operation. A large catheter, with the eye very near the end of 



the short curve, is passed into the bladder; the aspirator, full 
of boracic lotion, is attached to the catheter, and a few ounces 
of the fluid are expressed from the aspirator into the bladder by 
squeezing the rubber ball. When the pressure is taken off the 
ball, it dilates and draws the fluid out of the bladder, and with 
it some of the detritus, which falls into the trap. This is re- 
peated until all the fragments have been removed. After the 
operation the patient sometimes suffers from discomfort. His 
urine should be drawn off by a soft catheter at regular intervals 
for a few days. If the pain be severe, it can generally be relieved 
by fomentations. The patient must be kept in bed after the 
operation, and in cases where the stone has been large and the 
bladder irritable, the surgeon should insist on his remaining 
there for at least a week; in those cases which go on favourably 
the patients are soon able to perform their ordinary duties. 
Fatal terminations, however, do now and again occur from sup- 
pression of urine, the result of the old-standing kidney disease 
which so often complicates these cases. 

To Brigade-Surgeon Lieutenant-Colonel Dennis Francis 
Keegan, of the Indian Medical Service, is due the fact that the 
operation of crushing and promptly removing all fragments of 
a vesical calculus is as well suited for boys as for men. In entire 
opposition to long-standing European prejudices, Keegan's 
operation is now firmly and permanently established. The old 
operation (Cheselden's) of cutting a stone out through the 
bottom of a boy's bladder is now seldom resorted to, and if a 
stone in a boy is found too large or too hard to lend itself to 
the crushing operation, it is removed by a vertical incision 
through the lower part of the anterior wall of the abdomen, as 
described above. For a successful performance of the crushing 
operation in a boy a small lithotrite has, of course, to be used, 
and it must be of the very best English make. The operation 
has to be done with the utmost gentleness and thoroughness, 
not a particle of the crushed stone being left in the bladder, 
since otherwise the piece left becomes the nucleus of a fresh stone 
and the trouble recurs. 

The treatment of vesical calculi by other means than operative 
surgery is of little value. Attempts have been made to dissolve 
them by internal remedies, or by the injection of chemical 
agents into the bladder; but, although such methods have for 
a time been apparently successful, they have invariably been 
found worthless for removing calculi once actually formed/ 
Nevertheless, much can be done towards preventing the formation 
of calculi in those who have a tendency to their formation, by 
attention to diet, by taking proper exercise, and by the internal 
administration of drugs. 

Rupture of the bladder may be caused by a kick or blow over the 
upper part of the abdomen, or by a wheel passing over it; or it 
may be a complication of fracture of the pelvis. If the rupture is in 
that part of the bladder which is uncovered by the peritoneum, the 
extravasated urine may be cut down upon and let out with good 
prospect of success; but if the rupture is in the upper or hinder part 
of the bladder the urine is let loose into the general peritoneal cavity 
and sets up peritonitis, which is more than likely to prove fatal. 
If the surgeon knows that the bladder is ruptured he should operate 
at once in order to provide escape for the urine, and also to sew up 
the rent. If the possibility of the bladder being ruptured be even 
suspected, the surgeon should pass a catheter. Perhaps he draws 
off an ounce or two of blood-stained urine. This makes him doubly 
suspicious, so he injects into the bladder five, eight or ten ounces 
of warm boracic lotion, and, leaving it there for a few minutes, he 
measures the amount which he is able afterwards to withdraw; if 
he finds that a certain amount is lost he is assured that a leakage 
has taken place and he at once proceeds to operate. If only the 
diagnosis is made promptly, and the operation is at once undertaken, 
the outlook is not unfavourable. A generation or so back nearly all 
the cases of rupture of bladder ended fatally. 

Villous disease of the bladder is innocent; that is to say, it does 
not spread to the neighbouring structures or implicate the lymphatic 
glands. The villi are slender, branched, filamentous processes which, 
springing from the floor of the bladder, float in the urine like seaweed. 
They are freely supplied with blood-vessels, so that when a piece, 
of a villus is broken off there is likely to be blood in the urine. Indeed, 
painless haemorrhage is one of the characteristic features of the 
disease, and when fragments of the " seaweed " are found in the 
urine the diagnosis is clear. If the bladder is opened from the front, 
as already described, the villi may be nipped off by special forceps 
and the disease permanently cured. 



3 o 



BLADDER AND PROSTATE DISEASES 



Malignant disease of the bladder is almost always the warty form 
of cancer known as epithelioma. It springs as a sessile growth 
from the mucous membrane of the floor near the opening of one of 
the ureters, and, worrying the sensory nerves, causes irritability of 
the bladder and incontinence of urine. In due course septic germs 
reach the bladder, either from the urethra, the bowel, the kidneys 
or the blood-stream, and cystitis sets in. When ulceration has taken 
place, blood occurs in the urine, and the patient — generally beyond 
middle age — suffers dull or lancinating pains. Eventually the 
rectum may also be involved and the distress becomes extreme. 
The presence of the growth may be determined by sounding the 
bladder, by the cystoscope, and by the finger in the rectum. If 
the growth invades the outlet, retention of urine may occur, and the 
surgeon may be compelled to open the bladder from the front of the 
abdomen. In cases where operation is out of the question, washing 
the bladder with hot boracic lotion may give great relief. The 
treatment of cancer of the bladder by operation is, as a rule, un- 
satisfactory, because of the close proximity of the growth to the 
ureters and to the rectum. If, however, the disease were recognized 
early and had not invaded the neighbouring structures, and if it 
were upon the upper or the anterior part of the bladder, its removal 
might be hopefully undertaken. 

Hypertrophy and Dilatation. — When there is long-continued 
obstruction to the flow of urine, as in stricture of the urethra, or 
enlargement of the prostate, the bladder-wall becomes much 
thickened, the muscular fibres increasing both in size and number; 
the condition is known as " hypertrophy." Hypertrophy may be 
accompanied by dilatation of the bladder, a condition which the 
bladder may assume when the voiding of its contents is interfered 
with for a length of time. 

Paralysis of the bladder is a want of contractile power in the 
muscular fibres of the bladder-wall. It may result from injuries 
whereby the spinal cord is lacerated or pressed upon, so that the 
micturition centre, which is situated in the lumbar region, is thrown 
out of working order. The result may be either retention or in- 
continence of urine ; sometimes there is at first retention, which 
later is followed by incontinence. Paralysis is also met with in 
certain nervous diseases, as in locomotor ataxia, and in various 
cerebral lesions, as in apoplexy. 

Atony of the bladder is a paresis or partial paralysis. It is due 
to a want of tone in the muscular fibres, and is frequently the result 
of over-distension of the bladder, such as may occur in cases of 
enlargement of the prostate. The patient is unable to empty the 
bladder, and the condition of atony gets increasingly worse. 

In both paralysis and atony the indication is carefully to 
prevent over-distension by the urine being retained too long, and 
at the same time to treat by appropriate means the cause which 
has produced or is keeping up the condition. 

Incontinence of urine may occur in the adult or in the child, but 
is due to widely different causes in the two cases. In the child it 
may be simply a bad habit, the child not having been properly 
trained; but more frequently there is a want of control in the 
micturition-centre, so that the child passes its water unwittingly, 
especially during the night. In adults it is not so much a condition 
of incontinence in the sense of water being passed against the will, 
but is a suggestion that the bladder is already full, the water which 
passes being the overflow from a too full reservoir. It is usually 
caused by an obstruction external to the bladder, e.g. enlarged pro- 
state or stricture of the urethra; a calculus may produce the con- 
dition. In the child an attempt mustbe made to improve the tone 
of the micturition-centre by the use of belladonna or strychnine 
internally, and of a blister or faradism externally over the lumbar 
region, and every effort should be made to train the child to pass 
water at stated times and regular intervals. In the adult the cause 
which produces the over-distension must be removed if possible; 
but, as a rule, the patient has to be provided with a catheter, which 
he can pass before the bladder has filled to overflowing. A soft 
flexible catheter should be given in preference to a rigid or semi- 
rigid one. The best form is the red-rubber catheter, and he should 
be taught the need of keeping it absolutely clean. In the case of 
children incontinence of urine means irritability; in adults it means 
overflow. 

The condition termed by Sir James Paget stammering micturition 
is analogous to speech stammering, and occurs in those who are 
nervous and easily put out. It would seem to be due to the sphincter 
of the bladder not relaxing synchronously with the contraction of the 
detrusor, and is sometimes caused by external irritation, such as 
preputial adhesions. Occasionally not a drop of urine can be passed, 
or a little passes and then a sudden stoppage occurs; the more the 
patient strains the worse he becomes, until at last there is complete 
retention of urine. The trouble can sometimes be cured by the 
removal of irritating causes, and in these cases, as well as in those in 
which no such cause can be discovered, care should be taken to avoid 
those difficulties which have given rise to the patient's worst failures. 
If at any time he should fail to perform the act of micturition, he 
ought not to strain, but should quietly wait for a little before making 
any further effort. Regularity in the times of making water is also 
of much importance. 

Retention of urine may occur in paralysis of the bladder, or in 
conditions where the patient is suffering from an illness which blunts 



the nervous sensibility, such as apoplexy, concussion of the brain, 
or typhoid fever. It is, however, more commonly due to obstruc- 
tion anterior to the bladder, as in stricture of the urethra or enlarge- 
ment of the prostate. The distended bladder can be felt as a rounded 
swelling above the pubes, and perhaps reaching to the level of the 
navel. Percussion over it gives a dull note. When the bladder is 
distended, it is necessary to evacuate it as soon as possible. If 
there is no obstruction to the flow of urine, the retention being due 
to atony or paralysis, a soft catheter is passed and the water drawn 
off. But when there is an obstruction which cannot be overcome, 
aspiration has to be resorted to, the needle of the aspirator being 
pushed through the abdominal wall into the bladder. The point of 
puncture in the abdominal wall is in the middle line a few inches 
above the symphysis pubis. The bladder may be emptied in this 
way very many times in the same person with only good result. 

Diseases of Prostate Gland. 

The prostate gland may become acutely inflamed as the result 
of the backward extension of gonorrhoeal inflammation of the 
urethra; it may also be attacked by the germs of ordinary 
suppuration as well as by the bacilli of tuberculosis. A sudden 
enlargement of a large gland lying against the outlets of the 
bladder and the bowel renders micturition difficult, painful or 
impossible, and interferes with defaecation. Pressure of the 
seat of the chair upon the perineum also causes distress, so the 
man sits sideways and on the edge of the seat. If abscess forms, 
it should be incised from the perineum; if allowed to run its 
course it may burst into the bladder, the urethra or the rectum, 
and set up serious complication. The treatment of prostatitis 
(inflammation of the prostate) consists in rest in bed, sitz-baths 
and fomentations. If retention of urine takes place a soft 
catheter must be passed. In the early stage of an acute attack a 
dozen leeches upon the perineum may do good. The bowels 
must be kept freely open, and from time to time, as the pain 
demands, a morphia suppository may be introduced into the 
bowel. 

Chronic prostatitis is a legacy from a recent or long-past attack of 
gonorrhoea. The enlargement gives rise to a feeling of weight and 
fulness in the perineum, irritability of the bladder, and a gleety 
urethral discharge. Manual examination reveals the presence of a 
large, hard mass in front of the bladder, and in the mass there can 
often be felt softish or tender areas which seem to threaten abscess. 
On urine being passed into a glass, a cloudiness is seen, and material 
like pieces of vermicelli or broken threads may be noticed. These 
are the castings from the long tubular glands, and are characteristic 
of chronic inflammation of the prostate. The occasional passage of 
a large metal bougie, the use of weak lotions of nitrate of silver, the 
administration of quinine and iron, and the application of blisters 
to the perineum, may be tried as circumstances direct. The patient 
should lead a quiet life, free from sexual excitement. Horse-exercise, 
cycle-riding, rough games and alcohol should be avoided. 

Enlargement of the prostate exists in a considerable proportion 
of men of about sixty years of age and onward. It consists of an 
uncontrolled growth of the normal muscular and glandular 
tissue of the prostate, interfering with, or absolutely stopping, 
the outflow of the urine. Gently pushing the bladder upwards 
and backwards, it increases the length of the urethra, so that 
in order to draw off retained urine the catheter must be longer 
than ordinary, but inasmuch as there is no actual narrowing of 
the passage it may be of full calibre. The beak should be well 
turned up so that it may ride in front of, and surmount, the 
median enlargement. Because of the thick, ring-like mass of 
new tissue around the outlet of the bladder, there is difficulty in 
micturition, and because the muscular bladder wall is now 
unable to contract upon all its contents a certain amount of 
urine is retained. As the enlarged prostate bulges up in the 
floor of the bladder, a pouch or hollow forms behind it, from 
which the muscular wall is unable to dislodge the stagnant urine. 
This keeps up constant irritation, and if by chance the germs of 
decomposition find their way thither, cystitis sets in and the 
patient's condition becomes serious, not only because of the risk 
to which his tired and irritated kidneys are submitted, but 
because of the possibility of a phosphatic stone being formed in 
the bladder. The seriousness of enlargement of the prostate 
does not depend upon the size of the growth so much as upon the 
inability of the patient to empty his bladder completely. 

The surgeon forms his estimate of the size of the prostate by rectal 
examination. But sometimes a patient has retention of urine from 



BLADDER- WORT— BLAENAVON 



3i 



enlarged prostate, when by this method of manual examination the 
amount of increase appears quite unimportant. The explanation is 
that the enlargement is chiefly confined to a small piece of the gland 
which protrudes like a tongue into the water-way. Robert M°Gill of 
Leeds was the first surgeon to remove by a supra-pubic operation 
this tongue-like process of new prostatic growth. Attempts had 
sometimes been made to get rid of it by instrumentation through the 
urethra, but they had not met with much success. 

When the surgeon has made out the existence of an enlargement 
of the prostate, the next thing is to find to what extent this interferes 
with the bladder being emptied. To do this, he asks the patient to 
pass. as much water as he is able, and then with due precautions 
introduces a soft catheter and measures the amount of urine which he 
thus draws off — half an ounce, an ounce, two ounces, however much 
it may be. It is this " residual urine " which causes the annoyance 
and the danger of enlarged prostate, and unless arrangements can 
be made for its regular withdrawal serious trouble is almost certain 
to ensue. The passing of a large catheter may have the effect of so 
opening up the water-way that, at any rate for a time, the irritability 
of the bladder may cease, in which case the patient may be instructed 
in the art of passing a catheter for himself. Or the surgeon may find 
that in addition to the regular passing of a large catheteran occasional 
washing-out of the bladder with hot boracic lotion is all that is 
needed in the way of active treatment. At the same time, howeverj 
the patient is placed upon a plain and wholesome diet with little or 
no alcohol, and he is instructed to lead in every respect a regular 
and quiet life. To many men with enlarged prostate the passing of 
an instrument night and morning is no great hardship, while to 
others the idea of leading what is called a " catheter life " appears 
intolerable, or, having for a time been patiently carried out, is found 
not only severely trying but greatly disappointing. 

In some people the very first passing of a catheter sets up a local 
and constitutional disturbance, the bladder being rendered irritable 
and intolerant, the temperature going up, and shiverings and 
perspirations manifesting themselves. This condition was formerly 
called " catheter fever," and was looked upon as something mys- 
terious and peculiar. It is now generally understood to be the 
result of septic inoculation of the interior of the bladder. 

Lastly, in other persons the passing of the catheter is attended 
with so much difficulty, distress or bleeding, that something more 
helpful and effectual is urgently called for. 

Operative Treatment.— It has long been known that large 
tumours of the uterus sometimes dwindle if the ovaries are 
removed by operation, and Professor William White of Phila- 
delphia thought that prostatic growths might be similarly 
influenced by the removal of the testicles. Beyond question 
considerable improvement has followed this operation in cases 
of enlargement of the prostate, especially where the enlargement 
seetaed to be general, soft and vascular. A similar though 
perhaps a slower effect is produced when the duct of the testis, 
the vas deferens, is divided on each side of the body. If there 
is no great urgency about the case this treatment may well be 
tried, the bladder being all the while duly emptied by catheter 
and washed by irrigation. But if the case is urgent, there being 
difficulty or bleeding with the passing of the catheter, the 
bladder being excessively irritable and the urine foul, a more 
radical measure is needed. The best operation is that upon the 
lines laid down by Robert M°Gill, who opened the bladder 
through the anterior abdominal wall and removed that part of 
the prostate gland which was blocking the water-way. M e GiU's 
operation was improved upon by Eugene Fuller of New York, 
who, in 1895, published a full account of his procedure. 1 Having 
opened the bladder from the front (as in supra-pubic lithotomy), 
he introduced his left index finger into the rectum and thrust the 
prostate gland towards the right index finger, which was then in 
the bladder. With the nail of that finger, or with the end of a 
pair of scissors, he made a rent in the mucous membrane of the 
bladder and the capsule of the gland, and then shelled out the 
mass of new tissue which had caused the prostatic enlargement. 
This operation is called " prostatectomy," which means the 
removal of the prostate gland. The prostate gland, however, is 
not removed, but only a muscular and glandular mass (adenoma), 
which, growing within the prostatic capsule, encircles the 
urethra and squeezes the original gland tissue out of existence. 
Following on the lines of M c Gill and Fuller, P. J. Freyer has done 
excellent work in England towards placing this operation upon 
a sound basis. 

Subsequently to the operation the bladder enjoys complete 

1 Diseases of the Genito-urinary System, by Eugene Fuller, M.D. 
(London and New York, 1900). 



and needful rest, and the kidneys, which previously were in a 
condition of perpetual disturbance, improve in working power. 
The wound in the bladder and in the abdominal wall gradually 
closes; the function of the bladder returns, and the patient is 
soon able to go back to his usual occupation in greatly improved 
health and vigour. The operation is, necessarily, a serious one, 
and the age of the patient, the condition of his bladder, of his 
kidneys, and of his blood-vessels, require to- be taken into con- 
sideration; still, the operation gives an excellent account of 
itself in statistics, and if a practical surgeon advises a patient to 
accept its risks his counsel may well be followed. 

Malignant disease of the prostate is distinguished from senile 
glandular enlargement by the rapidity of its growth, by the freeneSs 
of the bleeding which is associated with the introduction of a catheter, 
and by the marked wasting which the individual undergoes. Un- 
fortunately, by the time that the cancerous nature of the disease is 
definitely recognized, the prospect of relief being afforded by opera- 
tion is small. (E. O.*) 

BLADDER-WORT, the name given to a submerged water 
plant, Utricidariq vulgaris, with finely divided leaves upon which 
are borne small bladders provided with trap-door entrances 
which open only inwards. Small crustaceans and other aquatic 
animals push their way into the bladders and are unable to 
escape. The products of the decay of the organisms thus 




A, Bladder of .Utricularia neglecta (after Darwin), enlarged. 
B, stellate hairs from interior of bladder of U. vulgaris. 

captured are absorbed into the plant by star-shaped hairs which 
line the interior of the bladder. In this way the plant is supplied 
with nitrogenous food from the animal kingdom. Bladder-wort 
bears small, yellow, two-lipped flowers on a stem which rises above 
the surface of the water. It is found in pools and ditches in the 
British Isles, and is widely distributed in the north temperate 
zone. The genus contains about two hundred species in tropical 
and temperate regions. 

BLADES, WILLIAM (1824-1890), English printer and biblio- 
grapher, was born at Clapham, London, on the 5th of December 
1824. In 1840 he was apprenticed to his' father's printing 
business in London, being subsequently taken into partnership. 
The firm was afterwards known as Blades, East & Blades. 
His interest in printing led him to make a study of the volumes 
produced by Caxton's press, and of the early history of printing 
in England. His Life and Typography of William Caxton, 
England's First Printer, was published in 1861-1863, and the 
conclusions which he set forth were arrived at by a careful 
examination of types in the early books, each class of type being 
traced from its first use to the time when, spoilt by wear, it 
passed out of Caxton's hands. Some 450 volumes from the 
Caxton Press were thus carefully compared and classified in 
chronological order. In 1877 Blades took an active part in 
organizing the Caxton celebration, and strongly supported the 
foundation of the Library Association. He was a keen collector 
of old books, prints and medals. His publications relate chiefly 
to the early history of printing, the Enemies of Books, his most 
popular work, being produced in 1881. He died at Sutton in 
Surrey on the 27th of April 1890. 

BLAENAVON, or Blaenafon, an urban district in the northern 
parliamentary division of Monmouthshire, England, 15 m. N. by 
W. of Newport, on the Great Western, London & North Western 
and Rhymney railways. Pop. (igoi) 10,869. It lies in the upper- 
most part of the Afon Lwyd valley, at an elevation exceeding 
1000 ft, in a wild and mountainous district, on the eastern 



32 



BLAGOVYESHCHENSK— BLAINE 



edge of the great coal and iron mining region of Glamorganshire 
and Monmouthshire. There are very extensive iron and steel 
works, with blast furnaces and rolling mills in the district, which 
employ the large industrial population. 

BLAGOVYESHCHENSK, a town of East Siberia, chief town of 
the Amur government, on the left bank of the Amur, near its 
confluence with the Zeya in 50 15' N. lat. and 127 38' E. long., 
610 m. by river above Khabarovsk. Founded in 1856, the town 
had, in 1900, 37,368 inhabitants, and is the seat of the bishop of 
Amur and Kamchatka. There are steam flour-mills and iron- 
works. It is a centre for tea exported to Russia, cattle brought 
from Transbaikalia and Mongolia for the Amur, and for grain. 

BLAIKIE, WILLIAM GARDEN (1820-1899), Scottish divine, 
was born on the 5th of February 1820, at Aberdeen, where his 
father had been the first provost of the reformed corporation. 
After studying at the Marischal College, where Alexander Bain 
and David Masson were among his contemporaries, he went in 
1839 to Edinburgh to complete his theological course under 
Thomas Chalmers. In 1842 he was presented to the living of 
Drumblade by Lord Kintore, with whose family he was con- 
nected. The Disruption controversy reached its climax immedi- 
ately afterwards, and Blaikie, whose sympathies were entirely 
with Chalmers, was one of the 474 ministers who signed the deed 
of demission and gave up their livings. He was Free Church 
minister at Pilrig, between Edinburgh and Leith, from 1844 to 
1868. Keenly interested in questions of social reform, his first 
publication was a pamphlet, which was afterwards enlarged into 
a book called Belter Days for Working People. It received public 
commendation from Lord Brougham, and 60,000 copies were 
sold. He formed an association for providing better homes for 
working people, and the Pilrig Model Buildings were erected. 
He also undertook the editorship of the Free Church Magazine, 
and then that of the North British Review, which he carried on 
until 1863. In 1864 he was asked to undertake the Scottish 
editorship of the Sunday Magazine, and for this magazine much 
of his most characteristic literary work was done, especially in 
the editorial notes, then a new feature in magazine literature. 

In 1868 Blaikie was called to the chair of apologetics and 
pastoral theology at New College, Edinburgh. In dealing with 
the latter subject he was seen at his very best. He had 
wide experience, a comprehensive grasp of facts, abundant 
sympathy, an extensive knowledge of men, and a great capacity 
for teaching. In 1870 he was one of two representatives chosen 
from the Free Church of Scotland to attend the united general 
assembly of the Presbyterian churches of the United States. 
He prolonged his visit to make a thorough acquaintance with 
American Presbyterianism, and this, followed by a similar tour 
in Europe, fitted him to become the real founder of the Presby- 
terian Alliance. Much of his strength in the later years of life 
was given to this work. In 1892 he was elected to the chairman- 
ship of the general assembly, the last of the moderators who had 
entered the church before the disruption. In 1897 he resigned 
his professorship, and died on the 1 ith of June 1899. 

Blaikie was an ardent philanthropist, and an active and 
intelligent temperance reformer, in days when this was far from 
easy. He raised £14,000 for the relief of the Waldensian churches. 
Although he took an active part in the affairs of his denomination, 
he was not a mere ecclesiastic. He had a keen eye for the 
evidences of spiritual growth or decline, and emphasized the need 
of maintaining a high level of spiritual life. He welcomed 
Moody to Scotland, and the evangelist made his headquarters 
with him during his first visit. His best books are The Work 
of the Ministry — A Manual of Homiletic and Pastoral Theology 
(1873); The Books of Samuel in the Expositors' Bible Series 
(2 vols.); The Personal Life of David Livingstone (1880); After 
Fifty Years (1893), an account of the Disruption Movement 
in the form of letters of a grandfather; Thomas Chalmers 
(1896). ' (D. Mn.) 

BLAINE, JAMES GILLESPIE (1830-1893), American states- 
man, was born in West Brownsville, Pennsylvania, on the 31st of 
January 1830, of sturdy Scottish-Irish stock on the side of his 
father. He was the great-grandson of Colonel Ephraim Blaine 



(1 741-1804), who during the War of Independence served in 
the American army, from 1778 to 1782 as commissary-general 
of the Northern Department. With many early evidences of 
literary capacity and political aptitude, J. G. Blaine graduated 
at Washington College in Washington, Pennsylvania, in 1847, 
and subsequently taught successively in the Military Institute, 
Georgetown, Kentucky, and in the Institution for the Blind at 
Philadelphia. During this period, also, he studied law. Settling 
in Augusta, Maine, in 1854, he became editor of the Kennebec 
Journal, and subsequently of the Portland Advertiser. But his 
editorial work was soon abandoned for a more active public 
career. He was elected to the lower house of the state legislature 
in 1858, and served four years, the last two as speaker. He also 
became chairman of the Republican state committee in 1859, and 
for more than twenty years personally directed every campaign of 
his party. 

In 1862 he was elected to Congress, serving in the House 
thirteen years (December 1863 to December 1876), followed by a 
little over four years in the Senate. He was chosen speaker of the 
House in 1869 and served three terms. The House was the fit 
arena for his political and parliamentary ability. He was a ready 
and powerful debater, full of resource, and dexterous in con- 
troversy. The tempestuous politics of the war and reconstruction 
period suited his aggressive nature and constructive talent. The 
measures for the rehabilitation of the states that had seceded 
from the Union occupied the chief attention of Congress for 
several years, and Blaine bore a leading part in framing and 
discussing them. The primary question related to the basis of 
representation upon which they should be restored to their full 
rank in the political system. A powerful section contended that 
the basis should be the body of legal voters, on the ground that 
the South could not then secure an increment of political power: 
on account of the emancipated blacks unless these blacks were 
admitted to political rights. Blaine, on the other hand, con- 
tended that representation should be based on population instead 
of voters, as being fairer to the North, where the ratio of voters 
varied widely, and he insisted that it should be safeguarded by 
security for impartial suffrage. This view prevailed, and the 
Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution was substantially 
Blaine's proposition. In the same spirit he opposed a scheme of 
military governments for the southern states, unless associated 
with a plan by which, upon the acceptance of prescribed con- 
ditions, they could release themselves from military rule and 
resume civil government. He was the first in Congress to oppose 
the claim, which gained momentary and widespread favour in 
1867, that the public debt, pledged in coin, should be paid in 
greenbacks. The protection of naturalized citizens who, on 
return to their native land, were subject to prosecution on 
charges of disloyalty, enlisted his active interest and support, and 
the agitation, in which he was conspicuous, led to the treaty of 
1870 between the United States and Great Britain, which placed 
adopted and native citizens on the same footing. 

As the presidential election of 1876 approached, Blaine was 
clearly the popular favourite of his party. His chance for 
securing the nomination, however, was materially lessened by 
persistent charges which were brought against him by the 
Democrats that as a member of Congress he had been guilty of 
corruption in his relations with the Little Rock & Fort Smith and 
the Northern Pacific railways. 1 By the majority of Republicans, 
at least, he was considered to have cleared himself completely, 
and in the Republican national convention he missed by only 
twenty-eight votes the nomination for president, being finally 
beaten by a combination of the supporters of all the other 
candidates. Thereupon he entered the Senate, where his activity 
was unabated. Currency legislation was especially prominent. 
Blaine, who had previously opposed greenback inflation now 
resisted depreciated silver coinage. He was the earnest champion 
of the advancement of American shipping, and advocated 
liberal subsidies, insisting that the policy of protection should be 
applied on sea as well as on land. The Republican national 

1 This attack led to a dramatic scene in the House, in which Blaine 
fervidly asseverated his denial. 



BLAINVILLE— BLAIR, F. P. 



33 



convention of 1880, divided between the two nearly equal forces 
of Blaine and General U. S. Grant — John Sherman of Ohio also 
having a considerable following— struggled through thirty-six 
ballots, when the friends of Blaine, combining with those of 
Sherman, succeeded in nominating General James A. Garfield. 
In the new administration Blaine became secretary of state, but, 
owing to the assassination of President Garfield and the re- 
organization of the cabinet by President Chester A. Arthur, he 
held the office only until December 1881. His brief service was 
distinguished by several notable steps. In order to promote the 
friendly understanding and co-operation of the nations on the 
American continents he projected a Pan-American congress, 
which, after being arranged for, was frustrated by his retirement. 
He also sought to secure a modification of the Clayton-Bulwer 
treaty, and in an extended correspondence with the British 
government strongly asserted the policy of an exclusive American 
control of any isthmian canal which might be built to connect the 
Atlantic and Pacific oceans. 

With undiminished hold on the imagination and devotion of 
his followers he was nominated for president in 1884. After a 
heated canvass, in which he made a series of brilliant speeches, 
he was beaten by a narrow margin in New York. By many, 
including Blaine himself, the defeat was attributed to the effect 
of a phrase, " Rum, Romanism and Rebellion," used by a 
clergyman, Rev. Samuel D. Burchard (1812-1891), on the 29th 
of October 1884, in Blaine's presence, to characterize what, in his 
opinion, the Democratic party stood for. The phrase was not 
Blaine's, but his opponents made use of it to misrepresent his 
attitude toward the Roman Catholics, large numbers of whom 
are supposed, in consequence, to have withdrawn their support. 
Refusing to be a presidential candidate in 1888, he became 
secretary of state under President Harrison, and resumed his 
work which had been interrupted nearly eight years before. The 
Pan-American congress, then projected, now met in Washington, 
and Blaine, as its master spirit, presided over and guided its 
deliberation through its session of five months. Its most im- 
portant conclusions were for reciprocity in trade, a continental 
railway and compulsory arbitration in international complications. 
Shaping the tariff legislation for this policy, Blaine negotiated a 
large number of reciprocity treaties which augmented the com- 
merce of his country. He upheld American rights in Samoa, 
pursued a vigorous diplomacy with Italy over the lynching of 
eleven Italians, all except three of them American naturalized 
citizens, in New Orleans on the 14th of May 1891, held a firm 
attitude during the strained relations between the United States 
and Chile (growing largely out of the killing and wounding of 
American sailors of the U.S. ship " Baltimore " by Chileans in 
Valparaiso on the 16th of October 1891), and carried on with 
Great Britain a resolute controversy over the seal fisheries of 
Bering Sea, — a difference afterwards settled by arbitration. He 
resigned on the 4th of June 1892, on the eve of the meeting of the 
Republican national convention, wherein his name was ineffectu- 
ally used, and he died at Washington, D.C., on the 27th of 
January 1893. 

During his later years of leisure he wrote Twenty Years of 
Congress (1884-1886), a brilliant historical work in two volumes. 
Of singularly alert faculties, with a remarkable knowledge of the 
men and history of his country, and an extraordinary memory, 
his masterful talent for politics and state-craft, together with 
his captivating manner and engaging personality, gave him, for 
nearly two decades, an unrivalled hold upon the fealty and 
affection of his party. 

See the Biography of James G. Blaine (Norwich, Conn., 1895) by 
Mary Abigail Dodge ("Gail Hamilton"), and, in the "American 
Statesmen Series," James G. Blaine (Boston, 1905) by C. E. Stan- 
wood; also Mrs Blaine's Letters (1908). (C. E. S.) 

BLAINVILLE, HENRI MARIE DUCROTAY DE (1777-1850), 
French naturalist, was born at Arques, near Dieppe, on the 
12th of September 1777. About 1796 he went to Paris to study 
painting, but he ultimately devoted himself to natural history, 
and attracted the attention of Baron Cuvier, for whom he 
occasionally lectured at the College de France and at the 
iv. 2 



Athenaeum. In 181 2 he was aided by Cuvier to obtain the chaii 
of anatomy and zoology in the Faculty of Sciences at Paris, but 
subsequently an estrangement grew up between the two men 
and ended in open enmity. In 1825 Blainville was admitted 
a member of the Academy of Sciences; and in 1830 he was 
appointed to succeed J. B. Lamarck in the chair of natural 
history at the museum. Two years later, on the death of Cuvier, 
he obtained the chair of comparative anatomy, which he con- 
tinued to occupy for the space of eighteen years, proving him- 
self no unworthy successor to his great teacher. He died at 
Paris on the 1st of May 1850. Besides many separate memoirs, 
he was the author of Prodrome d'une nouvelle distribution mitho- 
dique du regne animal (181 6); Osteographie ou description 
iconographique comparSe du squelelte, &c. (1839-1864); Faune 
francaise (1821-1830); Cours de physiologie ginirale et comparee 
(1833); Manuel de malacologie et de conchyliologie (1825-1827); 
Histoire des sciences de Forganisme (1845). 

BLAIR, FRANCIS PRESTON (1791-1876), American journa- 
list and politician, was born at Abingdon, Virginia, on the 12th 
of April 1 791. He removed to Kentucky, graduated at Transyl- 
vania University in 181 1, took to journalism, and was a 
contributor to Amos Kendall's paper, the Argus, at Frank- 
fort, In 1830, having become an ardent follower of Andrew 
Jackson, he was made editor of the Washington Globe, the 
recognized organ of the Jackson party. In this capacity, and 
as a member of Jackson's "Kitchen Cabinet," he long exerted 
a powerful influence; the Globe was the administration organ 
until 1841, and the chief Democratic organ until 1845; Blair 
ceased to be its editor in 1849. In 1848 he actively supported 
Martin Van Buren, the Free Soil candidate, for the presidency, 
and in 1852 he supported Franklin Pierce, but soon afterwards 
helped to organize the new Republican party, and presided 
at its preliminary convention at Pittsburg, Pennsylvania, in 
February 1856. He was influential in securing the nomination 
of John C. Fremont at the June convention (1856), and of 
Abraham Lincoln in i860. After Lincoln's re-election in 1864 
Blair thought that his former close personal relations with the 
Confederate leaders might aid in bringing about a cessation of 
hostilities, and with Lincoln's consent went unofficially to 
Richmond and induced President Jefferson Davis to appoint com- 
missioners to confer with representatives of the United States. 
This resulted in the futile " Hampton Roads Conference " of the 
3rd of February 1865 (see Lincoln, Abraham). After the Civil 
War Blair became a supporter of President Johnson's recon- 
struction policy, and eventually rejoined the Democratic party. 
He died at Silver Spring, Maryland, on the 18th of October 1876. 

His son, Montgomery Blair (1813-1883), politician and 
lawyer, was born in Franklin county, Kentucky, on the 10th of 
May 1813. He graduated at West Point in 1835, but, after a 
year's service in the Seminole War, left the army, studied law, 
and began practice at St Louis, Missouri. After serving as 
United States district attorney (1839-1843), as mayor of St 
Louis (1842-1843), and as judge of the court of common pleas 
(1843-1849), he removed to Maryland (1852), and devoted 
himself to law practice principally in the Federal supreme coui t. 
He was United States solicitor in the court of claims from 1855 
until 1858, and was associated with George T. Curtis as counsel 
for the plaintiff in the Dred Scott case in 1857. In i860 he took 
an active part in the presidential campaign in behalf of Lincoln, 
in whose cabinet he was postmaster-general from 1861 until 
September 1864, when he resigned as a result of the hostility 
of the Radical Republican faction, who stipulated that Blair's 
retirement should follow the withdrawal of Fremont's name as 
a candidate for the presidential nomination in that year. Under 
his administration such reforms and improvements as the 
establishment of free city delivery, the adoption of a money 
order system, and the use of railway mail cars were instituted 
— the last having been suggested by George B. Armstrong 
(d. 1871), of Chicago, who from 1869 until his death was general 
superintendent of the United States railway mail service. 
Differing from the Republican party on the reconstruction policy, 
Blair gave his adherence to the Democratic party after the Civil 



34 



BLAIR^ H.-^BLAIK ATHOLL 



War. He died at Silver Spring, Maryland, on the 27 th of July 

1883. ; 

Another son, Francis Preston Blair, jun. (1821-1875'), 
soldier and political leader, was born at Lexington, Kentucky, 
on the 19th of February 1821. After graduating at Princeton 
in 1841 he practised law in St Louis, and later served in the 
Mexican War. He was ardently opposed to the extension of 
slavery and supported Martin Van Buren, the Free Soil can- 
didate for the presidency in 1848. He served from 1852 to 1856 
in the Missouri legislature as a Free Soil Democrat, in 1856 
joined the Republican party, and in 1857-1860 and 1861-1862 
was a member of Congress, where he proved an able debater. 
Immediately after South Carolina's secession, Blair, believing 
that the southern leaders were planning to carry Missouri into 
the movement, began active efforts to prevent it and personally 
[organized and equipped a secret body of 1000 men to be ready 
for the emergency. When hostilities became inevitable, acting 
in conjunction with Captain (later General) Nathaniel Lyon, 
he suddenly transferred the arms in the Federal arsenal at 
St Louis to Alton, Illinois, and a few days later (May 10, 1861) 
surrounded and captured a force of state guards which ha!d 
been stationed at Camp Jackson in the suburbs of St Louis with 
the intention of seizing the arsenal. This action gave the Federal 
cause a decisive initial advantage in Missouri. Blair was pro- 
moted brigadier-general of volunteers in August 1862 and a 
major-general in November 1862. In Congress as chairman of 
the important military affairs committee his services were of 
ihe greatest value. He commanded a division in the Vicksburg 
campaign and in the fighting about Chattanooga, and was one of 
Sherman's corps commanders in the final campaigns in Georgia 
and the Carolinas. In 1866 like his father and brother he 
opposed the Congressional reconstruction policy, and on that 
issue left the Republican party. In 1868 he was the Demo- 
cratic candidate for -vice-president on the ticket with Horatio 
Seymour. In 1871-1873 he was a United States senator from 
Missouri. He died in St Louis, on the 8th of July 1875. 

BLAIR, HUGH (1718-1800), Scottish Presbyterian divine, 
was born on the 7th of April 1718, at Edinburgh, where his 
father was a merchant. Entering the university in 1730 he 
graduated M.A. in 1739; his thesis, De Fundamentis et Obliga- 
tione Legis Naturae, contains an outline of the moral principles 
afterwards unfolded in his sermons. He was licensed to preach 
in 1 741, and a few months later the earl of Leven, hearing of his 
eloquence, presented him to the parish of Collessie in Fife. In 
1743 he was elected to the second charge of the Canongate church, 
Edinburgh, where he ministered until removed to Lady Yester's, 
one of the city churches, in 1754. In 1757 the university of 
St Andrews conferred on him the degree of D.D., and in the 
following year he was promoted to the High Church, Edinburgh, 
the most important charge in Scotland. In 1759 he began, 
under the patronage of Lord Kames, to deliver a course of 
lectures on composition, the success of which led to the foundation 
of a chair of rhetoric and belles lettres in the Edinburgh University. 
To this chair he was appointed in 1762, with a salary of £70 a 
year. Having long taken interest in the Celtic poetry of the 
Highlands, he published in 1763 a laudatory Dissertation on 
Macpherson's Ossian, the authenticity of which he maintained. 
In 1777 the first volume of his Sermons appeared. It was 
succeeded by four other volumes, all of which met with the 
greatest success. Samuel Johnson praised them warmly, and 
they were translated into almost every language of Europe. 
In 1780 George III. conferred upon Blair a pension of £200 a 
year. In 1783 he retired from his professorship and published 
his Lectures on Rhetoric, which have been frequently reprinted. 
He died on the 27 th of December 1800. Blair belonged to the 
" moderate " or latitudinarian party, and his Sermons have 
been criticized as wanting in doctrinal definiteness. His works 
display little originality, but are written in a flowing and 
elaborate style. He is remembered chiefly by the place he fills 
in the literature of his time. Blair's Sermons is a typical religious 
book of the period that preceded the Anglican revival. 

See J. Hall, Account of Life and Writings of Hugh Blair (1807). 



BLAIR, JAMES (1656-1743), American divine and educa- 
tionalist, was born in Scotland, probably at Edinburgh, in 1656. 
He graduated M.A. at Edinburgh University in 1673, was 
beneficed in the Episcopal Church in Scotland, and for a time 
was rector of Cranston Parish in the diocese of Edinburgh. In 
1682 he left Scotland for England, and three years later was sent 
by the bishop of London, Henry Compton, as a missionary to 
Virginia. He soon gained great influence over the colonists both 
in ecclesiastical and in civil affairs, and, according to Prof. Moses 
Coit Tyler, " probably no other man in the colonial time did so 
much for the intellectual life of Virginia." He was the minister 
of Henrico parish from 1685 until 1694, of the Jamestown church 
from 1694 until 1710, and of Bruton church at Williamsburg 
from 1710 until his death. From 1689 until his death he was the 
commissary of the bishop of London for Virginia, the highest 
ecclesiastical position in the colony, his duties consisting ■" in 
visiting the parishes, correcting the lives of the clergy, and 
keeping them orderly." In 1693, by the appointment of King 
William III., he became a member of the council of Virginia, 
of which he was for many years the president. Largely because 
of charges brought against them by Blair, Governor Sir Edmund 
Andros, Lieutenant-governor Francis Nicholson, and Lieutenant- 
governor Alexander Spotswood were removed in 1698, 1705 and 
1722 respectively. Blair's greatest service to the colony was 
rendered as the founder, and the president from 1693 until his 
death, of the College of William and Mary, for which he himself 
secured a charter in England. " Thus, James Blair may be 
called," says Tyler, " the creator of the healthiest and most 
extensive intellectual influence that was felt in the Southern 
group of colonies before the Revolution." He died on the 18th 
of April 1743, and was buried at Jamestown, Va. He published 
a collection of 117 discourses under the title Our Saviour's 
Divine Sermon on the Mount (4 vols., 1722; second edition, 1732), 
and, in collaboration with Henry Hartwell and Edward Chilton, 
a work entitled The Present State of Virginia and the College 
(1727; written in 1693), probably the best account of the 
Virginia of that time. 

See Daniel E. Motley's Life of Commissary James Blair (Baltimore, 
1901 ; series xix. No. 10, of the Johns Hopkins University Studies 
in Historical and Political Science), and, for a short sketch and an 
estimate, M. C. Tyler's A History of American Literature, 1607-1765 
(New York, 1878). 

BLAIR, ROBERT (1 699-1 746), Scottish poet, eldest son of 
the Rev. Robert Blair, one of the king's chaplains, was born at 
Edinburgh in 1699. He was educated at Edinburgh University 
and in Holland, and in 1731 was appointed to the living of 
Athelstaneford in East Lothian. He married in 1738 Isabella, 
daughter of Professor William Law. The possession of a small 
fortune gave him leisure for his favourite pursuits, gardening 
and the study of English poets. He died at Athelstaneford on 
the 4th of February 1746. His only considerable work, The 
Grave (1743), is a poem written in blank verse of great vigour 
and freshness, and is much less conventional than its gloomy 
subject might lead one to expect. Its religious subject no doubt 
contributed to its great popularity, especially in Scotland; but 
the vogue it attained was justified by its picturesque imagery 
and occasional felicity of expression. It inspired William Blake 
to undertake a series of twelve illustrative designs, which were 
engraved by Louis Schiavonetti, and published in 1808. 

See the biographical introduction prefixed to his Poetical Works, 
by Dr Robert Anderson, in his Poets of Great Britain, vol. viii. 
(I794-) 

BLAIR ATHOLL (Gaelic blair, " a plain "), a village and 
parish of Perthshire, Scotland, 35! m. N.W. of Perth by the 
Highland railway. Pop. (1901) 367; of parish, 1722. It is 
situated at the confluence of the Tilt and the Garry. The oldest 
part of Blair Castle, a seat of the duke of Atholl, dates from 
1269; as restored and enlarged in 1869-1872 from the plans of 
David Bryce, R.S.A., it is a magnificent example of the Scottish 
baronial style. It was occupied by the marquess of Montrose 
prior to the battle of Tippermuir in 1644, stormed by the Crom- 
wellians in 1653, and garrisoned on behalf of James II. in 1689. 
The Young Pretender stayed in it in 174s, and the duke of 



BLAIRGOWRIE-^BLAKE, R. 



35 



Cumberland in 1746. The body of Viscount Dundee, conveyed 
hither from the battlefield of Killiecrankie, was buried in the 
church of Old Blair, in which a monument was erected to his 
memory in 1889 by the 7th duke of Atholl. The grounds 
surrounding the castle are among the most beautiful in the 
Highlands. A golf course has been laid down south-east of the 
village, between the railway and the Garry, and every September 
a great display of Highland games is held. Ben-y-gloe (3671 ft. 
high), the scene of the hunt given in 1529 by the earl of Atholl 
in honour of James V. and the queen dowager, may be climbed 
by way of Fender Burn, a left-hand tributary of the Tilt. The 
falls of Fender, near the old bridge' of Tilt, are eclipsed by the 
falls of Bruar, 4 m. west of Blair Atholl, formed by the Bruar, 
which, rising in Ben Dearg (3304 ft.), flows into the Garry after 
an impetuous course of 10 m. 

BLAIRGOWRIE, a police burgh of Perthshire, Scotland, 
situated on the Ericht. Pop. (1901) 3378. It is the terminus 
of a branch line of the Caledonian railway from Coupar Angus, 
from which it is 4J m. distant, and is 16 m. N. by E. of Perth by 
road. The town is entirely modern, and owes its progress to the 
water-power supplied by the Ericht for linen and jute factories. 
There are also sawmills, breweries and a large factory for bee 
appliances. Strawberries, raspberries and other fruits are 
largely grown in the neighbourhood. A park was presented to 
the town in 1892. On the left bank of the Ericht, opposite 
Blairgowrie, with which it is connected by a four-arched bridge, 
stands the town and police burgh of Rattray (pop. 2019), where 
there are flax and jute mills. Donald Cargill the Covenanter, 
who was executed at Edinburgh, was a native of the parish. 
Four miles west of Blairgowrie, on the coach road to Dunkeld, lies 
Loch Clunie, of some interest historically. On a crannog in the 
lake are the ruins of a small castle which belonged to James 
(" the Admirable ") Crichton, and the large mound near the loch 
was the site of the castle in which Edward I. lodged on one of his 
Scottish expeditions. 

BLAKE, EDWARD (1833- ), Irish-Canadian statesman, 
eldest son of William Hume Blake of Cashel Grove, Co. Galway, 
who settled in Canada in 1832, and there became a distinguished 
lawyer and chancellor of Ontario, was born on the 13th of 
October 1833 at Adelaide in Middlesex county, Ontario. Edu- 
cated at Upper Canada College and the university of Toronto, 
Blake was called to the bar in 1856 and quickly obtained a good 
practice, becoming Q.C. in 1864. In 1867 he was elected member 
for West Durham in the Dominion parliament, and for South 
Bruce in the provincial legislature, in which he became leader 
of the Liberal opposition two years later. On the defeat of John 
Sandfield Macdonald's government in 1871 Blake became prime 
minister of Ontario, but resigned this office the same year in 
consequence of the abolition of dual representation. He declined 
the leadership of the Liberal party in the Dominion parliament, 
but, having taken an active part in bringing about the overthrow 
of Sir John Macdonald's ministry in 1873, joined the Liberal 
cabinet of Alexander Mackenzie, though without portfolio or 
salary. Impaired health soon compelled him to resign, and to 
take the voyage to Europe; on his return in 1875 he rejoined 
the cabinet as minister of justice, in which office it fell to him to 
take the chief part in framing the constitution of the supreme 
court of Canada. Continued ill-health compelled him in 1877 
again to seek rest in Europe, having first exchanged the portfolio 
of justice for the less exacting office of president of the council. 
During his absence the Liberal government was driven from 
power by the elections of 1878; and Blake himself, having 
failed to secure re-election, was for a short time without a seat 
in parliament. From 1880 to 1887 he was leader of the opposition, 
being succeeded on his resignation of the position in the latter 
year by Mr (afterwards Sir) Wilfrid Laurier. In 1892 he became 
a member of the British House of Commons as an Irish Nationalist, 
being elected for South Longford. But he did not fulfil the 
expectations which had been formed on the strength of his 
colonial reputation; he took no very prominent part in debate, 
and gave little evidence of his undoubted oratorical gifts. In 
1907 he retired from public life. In 1858 he had married 



Margaret, daughter of Benjamin Cronyn, first bishop of 
Huron. 

See John Charles Dent, The Last Forty Years: Canada Since the 
Union of 184.1 (2 vols., Toronto, 1881) ; J. S. Willison, Sir Wilfrid 
Laurier and the Liberal Party (2 vols., London, 1904). 

BLAKE, ROBERT (1599-1657), English parliamentarian and 
admiral, was born at Bridgwater in Somersetshire. The day of 
his birth is not known, but he was baptized oh the 27th of 
September 1599. Blake was the eldest son of a well-to-do 
merchant, and received his early education at the grammar 
school of Bridgwater. In 1615 he was sent to Oxford, entering 
at first St Alban's Hall, but removing afterwards to Wadham 
College, then recently founded. He remained at the university 
till 1625, but failed to obtain any college preferment. Nothing is 
known of his life with certainty for the next fifteen years. An 
anonymous Dutch writer, in the Hollandische Mercurius (1652), 
represents him as saying that he had lived in Schiedam " for five 
or six years " in his youth. He doubtless engaged in trade, and 
apparently with success. When, after eleven years of kingship 
without parliaments, a parliament was summoned to meet in 
April 1640, Blake was elected to represent his native borough, 
This parliament, named "the Short," was dissolved in three 
weeks, and the career of Blake as a politician was suspended. 
Two years later the inevitable conflict began. Blake declared 
for the Parliament, and served under Sir John Horner. In 1643 
he was entrusted with the command of one of the forts of Bristol, 
This he stoutly held during the siege of the town by Prince 
Rupert, and earned the approval of parliament by refusing to 
surrender his post till duly informed of the capitulation. In 
1644 he gained high distinction by the resolute defence of Lyme 
in Dorsetshire. The siege was raised on the 23rd of May, and on 
the 8th of July Blake took Taunton by surprise, and notwith- 
standing its imperfect defences and inadequate supplies, held the 
town for the Parliament against two sieges by the Royalists 
until July 1645, when it was relieved by Fairfax. In 1645 he 
re-entered parliament as member for Taunton, when the Royalist 
Colonel Windham was expelled. 

He adhered to the Parliamentary party after the king's death, 
and within a month (February 1649) was appointed, with 
Colonels Dean and Popham, to the command of the fleet, under 
the title of General of the Sea. In April he was sent in pursuit 
of Prince Rupert, who with the Royalist fleet had entered the 
harbour of Kinsale in Ireland. There he blockaded the prince 
for six months; and when the latter, in want of provisions, and 
hopeless of relief, succeeded in making his escape with the flee! 
and in reaching the Tagus, Blake followed him thither, and again 
blockaded him for some months. The king of Portugal refusing 
permission for Blake to attack his enemy, the latter made re- 
prisals by falling on the Portuguese fleet, richly laden, returning 
from Brazil. He captured seventeen ships and burnt three, 
bringing his prizes home without molestation. After revictual- 
ling his fleet, he sailed again, captured a French man-of-war, and 
then pursued Prince Rupert, who had been asked to go away 
by the Portuguese and had entered the Mediterranean. In 
November 1650 Blake destroyed the bulk of the Royalist 
squadron near Cartagena. The thanks of parliament were voted 
to Blake, and he received a grant of /iooo. He was continued 
in his office of admiral and general of the sea; and in May 
following he took, in conjunction with Ayscue, the Scilly Islands. 
For this service the thanks of parliament were again awarded 
him, and he was soon after made a member of the council of 
state. 

In 1652 war broke out with the Dutch, who had made great 
preparations for the conflict. In March the command of the 
fleet was given to Blake for nine months; and in the middle of 
May the Dutch fleet of forty-five ships, led by their great admiral 
Tromp, appeared in the Downs. Blake, who had only twenty 
ships, sailed to meet them, and the battle took place off Dover 
on the 19th of May. The Dutch were defeated in an engagement 
of four or five hours, lost two ships, and withdrew under cover 
of darkness. Attempts at accommodation were made by the 
states, but they failed. Early in July war was formally declared, 



36 



BLAKE, WILLIAM 



and in the same month Blake captured a large part of the Dutch 
fishery-fleet and the twelve men-of-war that formed their convoy. 
On the 28th of September Blake and Penn again encountered the 
Dutch fleet, now commanded by De Ruyter and De Witt, off 
the Kentish Knock, defeated it, and chased it for two days. 
The Dutch took refuge in Goree. A third battle was fought 
near the end of November. By this time the ships under Blake's 
command had been reduced in number to forty, and nearly the 
half of these were useless for want of seamen. Tromp, who 
had been reinstated in command, appeared in the Downs, with 
a fleet of eighty ships besides ten fireships. Blake, nevertheless, 
risked a battle off Dungeness, but was defeated, and withdrew 
into the Thames. The English fleet having been refitted, put 
to sea again in February 1653; and on the 18th Blake, at the 
head of eighty ships, encountered Tromp in the Channel. The 
Dutch force, according to Clarendon, numbered 100 ships of 
war, but according to the official reports of the Dutch, only 
seventy. The battle was severe, and continued through three 
days, the Dutch, however, retreating, and taking refuge in the 
shallow waters off the French coast. In this action Blake was 
severely wounded. The three English admirals put to sea again 
in May; and on the 3rd and 4th of June another battle was 
fought near the North Foreland. On the first day Dean and 
Monk were repulsed by Tromp; but on the second day the scales 
were turned by the arrival of Blake, and the Dutch retreated to 
the Texel. 

Ill-health now compelled Blake to retire from the service for 
a time, and he did not appear again on the seas for about eighteen 
months; meanwhile he sat as a member of the Little Parliament 
(Barebones's). In November 1654 he was selected by Cromwell 
to conduct a fleet to the Mediterranean to exact compensation 
from the duke of Tuscany, the knights of Malta, and the piratical 
states of North Africa, for wrongs done to English merchants. 
This mission he executed with his accustomed spirit and with 
complete success. Tunis alone dared to resist his demands, and 
Tunis paid the penalty of the destruction of its two fortresses 
by English guns. In the winter of 1655-1656, war being declared 
against Spain, Blake was sent to cruise off Cadiz and the neigh- 
bouring coasts, to intercept the Spanish shipping. One of his 
captains captured a part of the Plate fleet in September 1656. 
In April 1657 Blake, then in very ill health, suffering from 
dropsy and scurvy, and anxious to have assistance in his arduous 
duties, heard that the Plate fleet lay at anchor in the bay of 
Santa Cruz, in the island of Teneriffe. The position was a very 
strong one, defended by a castle and several forts with guns. 
Under the shelter of these lay a fleet of sixteen ships drawn up 
in crescent order. Captain Stayner was ordered to enter the bay 
and fall on the fleet. This he did. Blake followed him. Broad- 
sides were poured into the castle and the forts at the same time; 
and soon nothing was left but ruined walls and charred fragments 
of burnt ships. The wind was blowing hard into the bay; but 
suddenly, and fortunately for the heroic Blake, it shifted, and 
carried him safely out to sea. " The whole action," says Clar- 
endon, " was so incredible that all men who knew the place 
wondered that any sober man, with what courage soever en- 
dowed, would ever have undertaken it; and they could hardly 
persuade themselves to believe what they had done; while 
the Spaniards comforted themselves with the belief that they 
were devils and not men who had destroyed them in such a 
manner." The English lost one ship and 200 men killed and 
wounded. The thanks of parliament were voted to officers and 
men; and a very costly jewel (diamond ring) was presented to 
Blake, " as a testimony," says Cromwell in his letter of 10th 
June, " of our own and the parliament's good acceptance of 
your carriage in this action." " This was the last action of the 
brave Blake." 

After again cruising for a time off Cadiz, his health failing 
more and more, he was compelled to make homewards before 
the summer was over. He died at sea, but within sight of Ply- 
mouth, on the 17th of August 1657. His body was brought to 
London and embalmed, and after lying in state at Greenwich 
House was interred with great pomp and solemnity in Westminster 



Abbey. , In 1661 Charles II. ordered the exhumation of Blake's 
body, with those of the mother and daughter of Cromwell and 
several others. They were cast out of the abbey, and were 
reburied in the churchyard of St Margaret's. "But that regard," 
says Johnson, " which was denied his body has been paid to his 
better remains, his name and hjs memory. Nor has any writer 
dared to deny him the praise of intrepidity, honesty, contempt 
of wealth, and love of his country." Clarendon bears the follow- 
ing testimony to his excellence as a commander: — " He was the 
first man that declined the old track, and made it apparent that 
the science might be attained in less time than was imagined. 
He was the first man that brought ships to contemn castles on the 
shore, which had ever been thought very formidable, but were 
discovered by him to make a noise only, and to fright those who 
could be rarely hurt by them." 

A life of Blake is included in the work entitled Lives, English and 
Foreign. Dr Johnson wrote a short life of him, and in 1852 appeared 
Hepworth Dixon's fuller narrative, Robert Blake, Admiral and 
General at Sea. Much new matter for the biography of Blake will 
be fourid in the Letters and Papers Relating to the First Dutch War, 
edited by S. R. Gardiner for the Navy Records Society (1898-1899.) 

BLAKE, WILLIAM (1757-1827), English poet and painter, 
was born in London, on the 28th of November 1757. His father, 
James Blake, kept a hosier's shop in Broad Street, Golden Square; 
and from the scanty education which the young artist received, 
it may be judged that the circumstances of the family were not 
very prosperous. For the facts of William Blake's early life 
the world is indebted to a little book, called A Father's 
Memoirs on a Child, written by Dr Malkin in 1806. Here we 
learn that young Blake quickly developed a taste for design, 
which his father appears to have had sufficient intelligence to 
recognize and assist by every means in his power. At the age of 
ten the boy was sent to a drawing school kept by Henry Pars 
in the Strand, and at the same time he was already cultivating 
his own taste by constant attendance at the different art sale 
rooms, where he was known as the " little connoisseur " Here 
he began to collect prints after Michelangelo, and Raphael, 
Diirer and Heemskerk, while at the school in the Strand he 
had the opportunity of drawing from the antique. After four 
years of this preliminary instruction Blake entered upon another 
branch of art study. In 1777 he was apprenticed to James 
Basire, an engraver of repute, and with him he remained seven 
years. His apprenticeship had an important bearing on Blake's 
artistic education, and marks the department of art in which 
he was made technically proficient. In 1778, at the end of his 
apprenticeship, he proceeded to the school of the Royal Academy, 
where he continued his early study from the antique, and had 
for the first time an opportunity of drawing from the living model. 

This is in brief all that is known of Blake's artistic education. 
That he ever, at the academy or elsewhere, systematically 
studied painting we do not know; but that he had already 
begun the practice of water colour for himself is ascertained. 
So far, however, the course of his training in art schools, and 
under Basire, was calculated to render him proficient only as a 
draughtsman and an engraver. He had learned how to draw, 
and he had mastered besides the practical difficulties of engraving, 
and with these qualifications he entered upon his career. In 1780 
he exhibited a picture in the Royal Academy Exhibition, con- 
jectured to have been executed in water colours, and he continued 
to contribute to the annual exhibitions up to the year 1808. 
In 1782 he married Catherine Boucher, the daughter of a market- 
gardener at Battersea, with whom he lived always on affectionate 
terms, and the young couple after -their marriage established 
themselves in Green Street, Leicester Fields. Blake had already 
become acquainted with some of the rising artists of his time, 
amongst them Stothard, Flaxman and Fuseli, and he now began 
to see something of literary society. At the house of the Rev. 
Henry Mathew, in Rathbone Place, he used to recite and some- 
times to sing poems of his own composition, and it was through 
the influence of this gentleman, combined with that of Flaxman, 
that Blake's first volume of poetry was printed and published in 
1783. From this time forward the artist came before the 
world in a double capacity. By education as well as native 



BLAKE, WILLIAM 



37 



talent, he was pledged to the life of a painter, and these Poetical 
Sketches, though they are often no more than the utterances of 
a boy, are no less decisive in marking Blake as a future 
poet. 

For a while the two gifts are exhibited in association. To 
the close of his life Blake continued to print and publish, after a 
manner of his own, the inventions of his verse illustrated by 
original designs, but there is a certain period in his career when 
the union of the two gifts is peculiarly close, and when their 
service to one another is unquestionable. In 1784 Blake, moving 
from Green Street, set up in company with a fellow-pupil, Parker, 
as print-seller and engraver next to his father's house in Broad 
Street, Golden Square, but in 1787 this partnership was severed, 
and he established an independent business in Poland Street. 
It was from this house, and in 1787, that the Songs of Innocence 
were published, a work that must always be remarkable for 
beauty both of verse and of design, as well as for the singular 
method by which the two were combined and expressed by the 
artist. Blake became in fact Jais own printer and publisher. 
He engraved upon copper, by a process devised by himself, both 
the text of his poems and the surrounding decorative design, 
and to the pages printed from the copper plates an appropriate 
colouring was afterwards added by hand. The poetic genius 
already discernible in the first volume of Poetical Sketches is 
here more decisively expressed, and some of the songs in this 
volume deserve to take rank with the best things of their kind in 
our literature. In an age of enfeebled poetic style, when Words- 
worth, with more weighty apparatus, had as yet scarcely begun 
his reform of English versification, Blake, unaided by any con- 
temporary influence, produced a work of fresh and living beauty; 
and if the Songs of Innocence established Blake's claim to the 
title of poet, the setting in which they were given to the world 
proved that he was also something more. For the full develop- 
ment of his artistic powers we have to wait till a later date, 
but here at least he exhibits a just and original understanding of 
the sources of decorative beauty. Each page of these poems 
is a study of design, full of invention, and often wrought with 
the utmost delicacy of workmanship. The artist retained to 
the end this feeling for decorative effect; but as time went on, 
he considerably enlarged the imaginative scope of his work, 
and decoration then became the condition rather than the aim 
of his labour. 

Notwithstanding the distinct and precious qualities of this 
volume, it attracted but slight attention, a fact perhaps not very 
wonderful, when the system of publication is taken into account. 
Blake, however, proceeded with other work of the same kind. 
The same year he published The Book of Thel, more decidedly 
mystic in its poetry, but scarcely less beautiful as a piece of 
illumination; The Marriage of Heaven and Hell followed in 
1790; and in 1793 there are added The Gates of Paradise, The 
Vision of the Daughters of Albion, and some other " Prophetic 
Books." It becomes abundantly clear on reaching this point 
in his career that Blake's utterances cannot be judged by ordinary 
rules. The Songs of Experience, put forth in 1 794 as a companion 
to the earlier Songs of Innocence, are for the most part intelligible 
and coherent, but in these intervening works of prophecy, as 
they were called by the author, we get the first public expression 
of that phase of his character and of his genius upon which a 
charge of insanity has been founded. The question whether 
Blake was or was not mad seems likely to remain in dispute, 
but there can be no doubt whatever that he was at different 
periods of his life under the influence of illusions for which 
there are no outward facts to account, and that much of what 
he wrote is so far wanting in the quality of sanity as to be without 
a logical coherence. On the other hand, it is equally clear that 
no madness imputed to Blake could equal that which would be 
involved in the rejection of his work on this ground. The greatness 
of Blake's mind is even better established than its frailty, and in 
considering the work that he has left we must remember that 
it is by the sublimity of his genius, and not by any mental defect, 
that he is most clearly distinguished from his fellows. With 
the publication of the Songs of Experience Blake's poetic career, 



so far at least as ordinary readers are concerned, may be said to 
close. A writer of prophecy he continued for many years, but 
the works by which he is best known in poetry are those earlier 
and simpler efforts, supplemented by a few pieces taken from 
various sources, some of which were of later production. But 
although Blake the poet ceases in a general sense at this date, 
Blake the artist is only just entering upon his career. In the 
Songs of Innocence and Experience, and even in some of the 
earlier Books of Prophecy, the two gifts worked together in 
perfect balance and harmony; but at this point the supremacy 
of the artistic faculty asserts itself, and for the remainder of his 
life Blake was pre-eminently a designer and engraver. The 
labour of poetical composition continues, but the product 
passes beyond the range of general comprehension; while, with 
apparent inconsistency, the work of the artist gains steadily iv 
strength and coherence, and never to the last loses its hold upon 
the understanding. It may almost be said without exaggeration 
that his earliest poetic work, The Songs of Innocence, and nearly 
his latest effort in design, the illustrations to The Book of Job, 
take rank among the sanest and most admirable products of 
his genius. Nor is the fact, astonishing enough at first sight, 
quite beyond a possible explanation. As Blake advanced in his 
poetic career, he was gradually hindered and finally overpowered 
by a tendency that was most serviceable to him in design. His 
inclination to substitute a symbol for a conception, to make an 
image do duty for an idea, became an insuperable obstacle to 
literary success. He endeavoured constantly to treat the 
intellectual material of verse as if it could be moulded into 
sensuous form, with the inevitable result that as the ideas to 
be expressed advanced in complexity and depth of meaning, 
his poetic gifts became gradually more inadequate to the task 
of interpretation. The earlier poems dealing with simpler 
themes, and put forward at a time when the bent of the artist's 
mind was not strictly determined, do not suffer from this difficulty; 
the symbolism then only enriches an idea of no intellectual 
intricacy; but when Blake began to concern himself with 
profounder problems the want of a more logical understanding of 
language made itself strikingly apparent. If his ways of thought 
and modes of workmanship had not been developed with an 
intensity almost morbid, he would probably have been able to 
distinguish and keep separate the double functions of art and 
literature. As it is, however, he remains as an extreme illustration 
of the ascendancy of the artistic faculty. For this tendency to 
translate ideas into image, and to find for every thought, however 
simple or sublime, a precise and sensuous form, is of the essence 
of pure artistic invention. If this be accepted as the dominant 
bent of Blake's genius, it is not so wonderful that his work in 
art should have strengthened in proportion as his poetic powers 
waned; but whether the explanation satisfies all the require- 
ments of the case or not, the fact remains, and cannot be over- 
looked by any student of Blake's career. 

In 1 796 Blake was actively employed in the work of illustration. 
Edwards, a bookseller of New Bond Street, projected a new 
edition of Young's Night Thoughts, and Blake was chosen to 
illustrate the work. It was to have been issued in parts, but for 
some reason not very clear the enterprise failed, and only a 
first part, including forty-three designs, was given to the world. 
These designs were engraved by Blake himself, and they are 
interesting not only for their own merit but for the peculiar 
system by which the illustration has been associated with the 
text. It was afterwards discovered that the artist had executed 
original designs in water-colour for the whole series, and these 
drawings, 537 in number, form one of the most interesting 
records of Blake's genius. Gilchrist, the painter's biographer, 
in commenting upon the engraved plates, regrets the absence 
of colour, " the use of which Blake so well understood, to relieve 
his simple design and give it significance," and an examination 
of the original water-colour drawings fully supports the justice 
of his criticism. Soon after the publication of this work Blake 
was introduced by Flaxman to the poet Hayley, and in the year 
1 801 he accepted the suggestion of the latter, that he should 
take up his residence at Felpham in Sussex. The mild and 



3» 



BLAKELOCK— BLAK.ESLEY 



amiable poet had planned to write a life of Cowper, and for the 
illustration of this and other works he sought Blake's help and 
companionship. The residence at Felph'am continued for three 
years, partly pleasant and partly irksome to Blake, but appar- 
ently not very profitable to the progress of his art. One of the 
annoyances of his stay was a malicious prosecution for traason 
set on foot by a common soldier whom Blake had summarily 
ejected from his garden; but a more serious drawback was the 
increasing irritation which the painter seems to have experienced 
from association with Hayley. In 1 804 Blake returned to London, 
to take up his residence in South Moulton Street, and as the 
fruit of his residence in Felpham, he published, in the manner 
already described, the prophetic books called the Jerusalem, 
The Emanation of the Giant Albion, and Milton. The first of these 
is a very notable performance in regard to artistic invention. 
Many of the designs stand out from the text in complete in- 
dependence, and are now and then of the very finest quality. 

In the years 1804-1805 Blake executed a series of designs 
in illustration of Robert Blair's The Grave, of much beauty and 
grandeur, though showing stronger traces of imitation of Italian 
art than any earlier production. These designs were purchased 
from the artist by an adventurous and unscrupulous publisher, 
Cromek, for the paltry sum of £21, and afterwards published in a 
series of engravings by Schiavonetti. Despite the ill treatment 
Blake received in the matter, and the other evils, including 
a quarrel with his friend Stothard as to priority of invention 
of a design illustrating the Canterbury Pilgrims, which his 
association with Cromek involved, the book gained for him a 
larger amount of popularity than he at any other time secured. 
Stothard's picture of the Canterbury Pilgrims was exhibited in 
1807, and in 1809 Blake, in emulation of his' rival's success, 
having himself painted in water-colour a picture of the same 
subject, opened an exhibition, and drew up a Descriptive Catalogue, 
curious and interesting, and containing a very valuable criticism 
of Chaucer. 

The remainder of the artist's life is not outwardly eventful. 
In 1813 he formed, through the introduction of George Cumber- 
land of Bristol, a valuable friendship with John Linnell and other 
rising water-colour painters. Amongst the group Blake seems 
to have found special sympathy in the society of John Varley, 
who, himself addicted to astrology, encouraged Blake to cultivate 
his gift of inspired vision; and it is probably to this influence 
that we are indebted for several curious drawings made from 
visions, especially the celebrated "ghost of a flea " and the very 
humorous portrait of the builder of the Pyramids. In 182 1 
Blake removed to Fountain Court; in the Strand, where he died 
on the 1 2th of August 1827. The chief work of these last years 
was the splendid series of engraved designs in illustration of the 
book of Job. Here we find the highest imaginative qualities 
of Blake's art united to the technical means of expression 
which he best understood. Both the invention and the engraving 
are in all ways remarkable, and the series may fairly be cited in 
support of a very high estimate of his genius. None of his works 
is without the trace of that peculiar artistic instinct and power 
which seizes the pictorial element of ideas, simple or sublime, 
and translates them into the appropriate language of sense; 
but here the double faculty finds the happiest exercise. The 
grandeur of the theme is duly reflected in the simple and sublime 
images of the artist's design, and in the presence of these plates 
we are made to feel the power of the artist over the expressional 
resources of human form, as well as his sympathy with the 
imaginative significance of his subject. 

A life of Blake, with selections from his works, by Alexander 
Gilchrist, was published in 1863 (new edition by W. G. Robertson, 
1906) ; in 1868 A. C. Swinburne published a critical essay on his 
genius, remarkable for a full examination of the Prophetic Books, 
and in 1874 William Michael Rossetti published a memoir prefixed 
to an edition of the poems. In 1893 appeared The Works of William 
Blake, edited by E. J. Ellis and W. B. Yeats. But for a long time 
all the editors paid too little attention to a correct following of 
Blake's own MSS. The text of the poems was finally edited with 
exemplary care and thoroughness by John Sampson in his edition 
of the Poetical Works (1905), which has rescued Blake from the 
" improvements " of previous editors. See also The Letters of 



William Blake, together . with a Life by Frederick Tatham; edited 
by A. G. B. Russell (1906); and Basil de Selincourt, William, Blake 
(1909). (J. C. C.) 

BLAKELOCK, RALPH ALBERT (1847- ), American 
painter, was born in New York, on the 15th of October, 1847. 
He graduated at the College of the City of New York in 1867. 
In art he was self-taught and markedly original. Until ill-health 
necessitated the abandonment of his profession, he was a most 
prolific worker, his subjects including pictures of North American 
Indian life, and landscapes — notably such canvases as "The 
Indian Fisherman"; "Ta-wo-koka: or Circle Dance"; 
"Silvery Moonlight"; "A Waterfall by Moonlight"; "Soli- 
tude"; and "Moonlight on Long Island Sound." 

BLAKENEY, WILLIAM BLAKENEY, Baron (1672-1761), 
British soldier, was born. at Mount Blakeney in Limerick in 1672. 
Destined by his father for politics, he soon showed a decided 
preference for a military career, and at the age of eighteen headed 
the tenants in defending the Blakeney estate against the Rap- 
parees. As a volunteer he went to the war in Flanders, and at 
the siege of Venlo in 1702 won his commission. He served as 
a subaltern throughout Marlborough's campaigns, and is said 
to have been the first to drill troops by signal of drum or colour. 
For many years after the peace of Utrecht he served unnoticed, 
and was sixty-five years of age before he became a colonel. 
This neglect, which was said to be due to the hostility of Lord 
Verney, ceased when the duke of Richmond was appointed 
colonel of Blakeney's regiment, and thenceforward his advance 
was rapid. Brigadier-general in the Cartagena expedition of 
1741, and major-general a little later, he distinguished himself 
by his gallant and successful defence of Stirling Castle against 
the Highlanders in 1745. Two years later George II. made him 
lieutenant-general and lieutenant-governor of Minorca. The 
governor of that island never set foot in it, and Blakeney was 
left in command for ten years. 

In 1756 the Seven Years' War was preluded by a swift descent 
of the French on Minorca. Fifteen thousand troops under 
marshal the due de Richelieu, escorted by a strong squadron 
under the marquis de la Gallisonniere, landed on the island on 
the 1 8th of April, and at once began the siege of Fort St Philip, 
where Blakeney commanded at most some 5000 soldiers and 
workmen. The defence, in spite of crumbling walls and rotted 
gun platforms, had already lasted a month when a British fleet 
under vice-admiral the Hon. John Byng appeared. La Gallison- 
niere and Byng fought, on the 20th of May, an indecisive battle, 
after which the relieving squadron sailed away and Blakeney 
was left to his fate. A second expedition subsequently appeared 
off Minorca, but it was then too late, for after a heroic resistance 
of -seventy-one days the old general had been compelled to 
surrender the fort to Richelieu (April 18-June 28, 1756). Only 
the ruined fortifications were the prize of the victors. Blakeney 
and his little garrison were transported to Gibraltar with absolute 
liberty to serve again. Byng was tried and executed; Blakeney, 
on his return to England, found himself the hero of the nation. 
Rewards came freely to the veteran. He was made colonel of 
the Enniskillen regiment of infantry, knight of the Bath, and 
Baron Blakeney of Mount Blakeney in the Irish peerage. A 
little later Van Most's statue of him was erected in Dublin, and 
his popularity continued unabated for the short remainder of 
his life. He died on the 20th of September 1761, and was buried 
in Westminster Abbey. 
, See Memoirs of General William Blakeney (1757). 

BLAKESLEY, JOSEPH WILLIAMS (1808-1885), English 
divine, was born in London on the 6th of March 1808, and was 
educated at St Paul's school, London, and at Corpus Christi and 
Trinity Colleges, Cambridge. In 1831 he was elected a fellow, 
and in 1839 a tutor of Trinity. In 1833 he took holy orders, and 
from 1845 to 1872 held the college living of Ware, Hertfordshire. 
Over the signature " Hertfordshire Incumbent " he contributed 
a large number of letters to The Times on the leading social and 
political subjects of the day, and he also wrote many reviews of 
books for that paper. In 1863 he was made a canon of Canter- 
bury, and in 1872 dean of Lincoln. Dean Blakesley was the 



BLAMIRE— BLANC, MONT 



39 



author of the first English Life of Aristotle (1839), an edition of 
Herodotus (1852-1854) in the Bibliotheca Classica, and Four 
Months in Algeria (1859). He died on the 18th of April 1885. 

BLAMIRE, SUSANNA (1747-1794), English poet, daughter of 
a Cumberland yeoman, was born at Cardew Hall, near Dalston, 
in January 1 747. Her mother died while she was a child, and she 
was brought up by her aunt, a Mrs Simpson of Thackwood, who 
sent her niece to the village school at Raughton Head. Susanna 
Blamire's earliest poem is " Written in a Churchyard, on seeing 
a number of cattle grazing," in imitation of Gray. She lived an 
uneventful life among the farmers of the neighbourhood, and her 
gaiety and good-humour made her a favourite in rustic society. 
In 1767 her elder sister Sarah married Colonel Graham of Gart- 
more. " An Epistle to her friends at Gartmore " gives a playful 
description of the monotonous simplicity of her life. To her 
Perthshire visits her songs in the Scottish vernacular are no 
doubt partly due. Her chief friend was Catharine Gilpin of 
Scaleby Castle. The two ladies spent the winters together in 
Carlisle, and wrote poems in common. Susanna Blamire died 
in Carlisle on the 5th of April 1794. The poems which were not 
collected during her lifetime, were first published in 1842 by 
Henry Lonsdale as The Poetical Works of Miss Susanna Blamire, 
" the Muse of Cumberland," with a memoir by Mr Patrick 
Maxwell. Some of her songs rank among the very best of north- 
country lyrics. " And ye shall walk in silk attire " and " What 
ails this heart o' mine," are well known, and were included in 
Johnson's Scots' Musical Museum. 

BLANC, (Jean Joseph Charles) LOUIS (1811-1882), French 
politician and historian, was born on the 29th of October 181 1 
at Madrid, where his father held the post of inspector-general of 
finance under Joseph Bonaparte. Failing to receive aid from 
Pozzo di Borgo, his mother's uncle, Louis Blanc studied law in 
Paris, living in poverty, and became a contributor to various 
journals. In the Revue du progrbs, which he founded, he published 
in 1839 his study on L' Organisation du travail. The principles 
laid down in this famous essay form the key to Louis Blanc's 
whole political career. He attributes all the evils that afflict 
society to the pressure of competition, whereby the weaker are 
driven to the wall. He demanded the equalization of wages, and 
the merging of personal interests in the common good — ■" & 
chacun selon ses besoins, de chacun selon ses facultes." This was 
to be effected by the establishment of " social workshops," a sort 
of combined co-operative society and trade-union, where the 
workmen in each trade were to unite their efforts for their 
common benefit. In 1841 he published his Histoire de dix ans 
1830-1840, an attack upon the monarchy of July. It ran through 
four editions in four years. 

In 1847 he published the two first volumes of his Histoire de la 
Revolution Francaise. Its publication was interrupted by the 
revolution of 1848, when Louis Blanc became a member of the 
provisional government. It was on his motion that, on the 25th 
of February, the government undertook " to guarantee the 
existence of the workmen by work "; and though his demand 
for the establishment of a ministry of labour was refused — as 
beyond the competence of a provisional government — he was 
appointed to preside over the government labour commission 
{Commission du Gouvernement pour les travailleurs) established 
at the Luxembourg to inquire into and report on the labour 
question. On the 10th of May he renewed, in the National 
Assembly, his proposal for a ministry of labour, but the temper 
of the majority was hostile to socialism, and the proposal was 
again rejected. His responsibility for the disastrous experiment 
of the national workshops he himself denied in his Appel aux 
honnltes gens (Paris, 1849), written in London after his flight; 
but by the insurgent mob of the 15th of May and by the victorious 
Moderates alike he was regarded as responsible. Between the 
sansculottes, who tried to force him to place himself at their head, 
and the national guards, who maltreated him, he was nearly done 
to death. Rescued with difficulty, he escaped with a false 
passport to Belgium, and thence to London; in his absence he 
was condemned by the special tribunal established at Bourges, 
in contumaciam, to deportation. Against trial and sentence he 



alike protested, developing his protest in a series of articles in the 
Nouveau Monde, a review published in Paris under his direction. 
These he afterwards collected and published as Pages de I'histoire 
de la revolution de 1848 (Brussels, 1850). 

During his stay in England he /made use of the unique collection 
of materials for the revolutionary period preserved at the 
British Museum to complete his Histoire dela Resolution Franqaise 
12 vols. (1847-1862). In 1858 he published a reply to Lord 
Normanby's A Year of Revolution in Paris (1858), which he 
developed later into his Histoire de la revolution de 1848 (2 vols., 
1870-1880). As far back as 1839 Louis Blanc had vehemently 
opposed the idea of a Napoleonic restoration, predicting that it 
would be "despotism without glory," " the Empire without the 
Emperor." He therefore remained in exile till the fall of the 
Second Empire in September 1870, after which he returned to 
Paris and served as a private in the national guard. On the 8th 
of February 187 1 he was elected a member of the National 
Assembly, in which he maintained that the republic was " the 
necessary form of national sovereignty," and voted for the 
continuation of the war; yet, though a member of the extreme 
Left, he was too clear-minded to sympathize with the Commune, 
and exerted his influence in vain on the side of moderation. In 
1878 he advocated the abolition of the presidency and the senate. 
In January 1879 he introduced into the chamber a proposal for 
the amnesty of the Communists, which was carried. This was 
his last important act. His declining years were darkened by 
ill-health and by the death, in 1876, of his wife (Christina Groh), 
an Englishwoman whom he had married in 1865. He died at 
Cannes on the 6th of December 1882, and on the 12th of December 
received a state funeral in the cemetery of Pere-Lachaise. 

Louis Blanc possessed a picturesque and vivid style, and 
considerable power of research; but the fervour with which he 
expressed his convictions, while placing him in the first rank of 
orators, tended to turn his historical writings into political 
pamphlets. His political and social ideas have had a great 
influence on the development of socialism in France. His 
Discours politiques (1847-1881) was published in 1882. His 
most important works, besides those already mentioned, are 
Lettres sur I'Angleterre (1866-1867), Dix annees de I'histoire de 
l' Angleterre (1879-1881), and Questions d'aujourd'hui et de demain 

(1873-1884). 

See L. Fiaux, Louis Blanc (1883). 

BLANC, MONT, the culminating point (15,782 ft.) of the 
mountain range of the same name, which forms part of the 
Pennine Alps, and is divided unequally between France, Italy 
and Switzerland. The actual highest summit is wholly French 
and is the loftiest peak in the Alps, and in Europe also, if certain 
peaks in the Caucasus be excluded. At Geneva the mountain 
was in former days named the Montagne Maudite, but the 
present name seems to have been always used locally. On the 
north is the valley of Chamonix, and on the east the head of the 
valley of Aosta. Among the great glaciers which stream from the 
peak the most noteworthy are those of Bossons and Taconnaz 
(northern slope) and of Brenva and Miage (southern slope). 
The first ascent was made in 1 786 by two Chamonix men, Jacques 
Balmat and Dr Michel Paccard, and the second in 1 787 by Balmat 
with two local men. Later in 1787 H. B. de Saussure made the 
third ascent, memorable in many respects, and was followed a 
week later by Colonel Beaufoy, the first Englishman to gain the 
top. These ascents were all made from Chamonix, which is still 
the usual starting point, though routes have been forced up the 
peak from nearly every side, those on the Italian side being much 
steeper than that from Chamonix. The ascent from Chamonix 
is now frequently made in summer (rarely in winter also), but, 
owing to the great height of the mountain, the view is unsatis- 
factory, though very extensive (Lyons is visible). There is an inn 
at the Grands Mulets (9909 ft.). In 1890 M. Vallot built an 
observatory and shelter hut (14,312 ft.) on the Bosses du Droma- 
daire (north-west ridge of the mountain), and in 1893 T. J. C. 
Janssen constructed an observatory just below the very summit. 

SeeC.Durier, Le Mont Blanc (4th ed., Paris, 1897) ; C.E.Mathews, 
The Annals of Mont Blanc (London. 1898); P. Giissfeldt, Der 



40 

Montblanc (Berlin, 1894, also a French translation, Geneva, I 
L. Kurz, Climbers' Guide to the Chain of Mont Blanc, section vi. 
(London, 1892) ; L. Kurz and X. Imfeld, Carte de la chaine du Mont 
Blanc (1896, new edition 1905). (W. A. B. C.) 

BLANCHARD, SAMUEL LAMAN (1804-1845), British author 
and journalist, the son of a painter and glazier, was born at Great 
Yarmouth on the 15th of May 1804. He was educated at St 
Olave's school, Southwark, and then became clerk to a proctor 
in Doctors' Commons. At an early age he developed literary 
tastes, contributing dramatic sketches to a paper called Drama. 
For a short time he was a member of a travelling dramatic 
company, but subsequently became a proof-reader in London, 
and wrote for the Monthly Magazine. In 1827 he was made 
secretary of the Zoological Society, a post which he held for three 
years. In 1828 he published Lyric Offerings, dedicated to Charles 
Lamb. He had a verj varied journalistic experience, editing in 
succession the Monthly Magazine, the True Sun, the Constitu- 
tional, the Court Journal, the Courier, and George Cruikshank's 
Omnibus; and from 1841 till his death he was connected with 
the Examiner. In 1846 Bulwer-Lytton collected a number of his 
prose-essays under the title Sketches of Life, to which a memoir of 
the author was prefixed. His verse was collected in 1876 by 
Blanchard Jerrold. Over-work broke down his strength, and, 
unnerved by the death of his wife, he died by his own hand on 
the 15th of February 1845. 

His eldest son, Sidney Laman Blanchard, who was the author 
of Yesterday and To-day in India, died in 1883. 

BLANCHE, JACQUES EMILE ( 1 86 1- ) , French painter, was 
born in Paris. He enjoyed an excellent cosmopolitan education, 
and was brought up at Passy in a house once belonging to the 
princesse de Lamballe, which still retained the atmosphere of 
18th-century elegance and refinement and influenced his taste 
and work. Although he received some instruction in painting 
from Gervex, he may be regarded as self-taught. He acquired a 
great reputation as a portrait painter; his art is derived from 
French and English sources, refined, sometimes super-elegant, 
but. full of character. Among his chief works are his portraits of 
his father, of Pierre Louys, the Thaulow family, Aubrey Beardsley 
and Yvette Guilbert. 

BLANCHE OF CASTILE (1188-1252), wife of Louis VIII. of 
France, third daughter of Alphonso VIII., king of Castile, and of 
Eleanor of England, daughter of Henry II., was born at Valencia. 
In consequence of a treaty between Philip Augustus and John of 
England, she was betrothed to the former's son, Louis, and was 
brought to France, in the spring of 1200, by John's mother 
Eleanor. On the 22nd of May 1200 the treaty was finally signed, 
John ceding with his niece the fiefs of Issoudun and Gracay, 
together with those that Andre de Chavigny, lord of Chateauroux, 
held in Berry, of the English crown. The marriage was celebrated 
the next day, at Portmort on the right bank of the Seine, in John's 
domains, as those of Philip lay under an interdict. 

Blanche first displayed her great qualities in 1216, when Louis,- 
who on the death of John claimed the English crown in her right, 
invaded England, only to find a united nation against him. Philip 
Augustus refused to help his son, and Blanche was his sole 
support. The queen established herself at Calais and organized 
two fleets, one of which was commanded by Eustace the Monk, 
and an army under Robert of Courtenay; but all her resolution 
and energy were in vain. Although it would seem that her 
masterful temper exercised a sensible influence upon her 
husband's gentler character, her role during his reign (1223-1226) 
is not well known. Upon his death he left Blanche regent and 
guardian of his children. Of her twelve or thirteen children, six 
had died, and Louis, the heir — afterwards the sainted Louis IX., 
— was but twelve years old. The situation was critical, for the 
hard- won domains of the house of Capet seemed likely to fall to 
pieces during a minority. Blanche had to bear the whole burden 
of affairs alone, to break up a league of the barons (1226), and to 
repel the attack of the king of England (1 230). But her" energy 
and firmness overcame all dangers. There was an end to the 
calumnies circulated against her, based on the poetical homage 
rendered her by Theobald IV., count of Champagne, and the 



BLANCHARD— BLANDRATA 



prolonged stay in Paris of the papal legate, Romano Bonaventura, 
cardinal of Sant' Angelo. The nobles were awed by her warlike 
preparations or won over by adroit diplomacy, and their league 
was broken up. St Louis owed his realm to his mother, but 
he himself always remained somewhat under the spell of her 
imperious personality. After he came of age (1236) her influence 
upon him may still be traced. In 1248 she again became regent, 
during Louis IX. 's absence on the crusade, a project which she 
had strongly opposed. In the disasters which followed she main- 
tained peace, while draining the land of men and money to aid 
her son in the East. At last her strength failed her. She fell ill 
at Melun in November 1252, and was taken to Paris, but lived 
only a few days. She was buried at Maubuisson. 

Besides the works 'of Joinville and William of Nangis, see FJie 
Berger, " Histoire de Blanche de Castille, reine de France," in 
Bibliotheque des ecoles franqaises d'Athenes et de Rome { vol. lxx. 
(Paris, 1895) ; Le Nain de Tillemont, " Vie de Saint Louis," ed. by 
J. de Gaulle for the Societe de I'histoire de France (6 vols., 1847- 
1851) ; and Paulin Paris, " Nouvelles recherches sur les mceurs de la 
reine Blanche et de Thibaud," in Cabinet historique (1858). 

BLANCH FEE, or Blanch Holding (from Fr. blanc, white), 
an ancient tenure in Scottish land law, the duty payable being in 
silver or white money in contradistinction to gold. The phrase 
was afterwards applied to any holding of which the quit-rent was 
merely nominal, such as a penny, a peppercorn, &c. 

BLANDFORD, or Blandford Forum, a market town, and 
municipal borough in the northern parliamentary division of 
Dorsetshire, England, on the Stour, 19 m. N.W. of Bournemouth 
by the Somerset & Dorset railway. Pop. (1901) 3649. The 
town is ancient, but was almost wholly destroyed by fire in the 
1 8th century. The church of St Peter and St Paul, a classical 
building, was built in 1732. There are a grammar-school 
(founded in 1521 at Milton Abbas, transferred to Blandford in 
1775), a Blue Coat school (1729), and other educational charities. 
Remnants of a mansion of the 14th century, Damory Court, are 
seen in a farmhouse, and an adjoining Perpendicular chapel is 
used as a barn. There are numerous early earthworks on the 
chalk hills in the neighbourhood. The fine modern mansion of 
Bryanston, in the park adjoining the town, is the seat of Lord 
Portman. The municipal borough is under a mayor, 4 aldermen 
and 12 councillors. Area, 145 acres. 

BLANDRATA, or Biandrata, GIORGIO (c. 1515-1588), 
Italian physician and polemic, who came of the De Blandrate 
family, powerful from the early part of the 13th century, was 
born at Saluzzo, the youngest son of Bernardino Biandrata. 
He graduated in arts and medicine at Montpellier in 1533, and 
specialized in the functional and nervous disorders of women. 
In 1544 he made his first acquaintance with Transylvania; 
in 1553 he was with Alciati in the Grisons; in 1557 he spent a 
year at Geneva, in constant intercourse with Calvin, who dis- 
trusted him. He attended the English wife (Jane Stafford) of 
Count Celso Massimiliano Martinengo, preacher of the Italian 
church at Geneva, and fostered anti-trinitarian opinions in that 
church. In 1558 he found it expedient to remove to Poland, 
where he became a leader of the heretical party at the synods 
of Pinczow (1558) and Ksionzh (1560 and 1562). His point 
was the suppression of extremes of opinion, on the basis of a 
confession literally drawn from Scripture. He obtained the 
position of court physician to the queen dowager, the Milanese 
Bona Sforza. She had been instrumental in the burning (1539) 
of Catharine Weygel, at the age of eighty, for anti-trinitarian 
opinions; but the writings of Ochino had altered her views, 
which were now anti-Catholic. In 1563 Biandrata transferred 
his services to the Transylvanian court, where the daughters 
of his patroness were married to ruling princes. He revisited 
Poland (1576) in the train of Stephen Bathory, whose tolerance 
permitted the propagation of heresies; and when (1579) Chris- 
topher Bathory introduced the Jesuits into Transylvania, 
Biandrata found means of conciliating them. Throughout his 
career he was accompanied by his two brothers, Ludovico and 
Alphonso, the former being canon of Saluzzo. In Transylvania, 
Biandrata co-operated with Francis David (d. 1579), the anti- 
trinitarian bishop, but in 1578 two circumstances broke the 



BLANE— BLANK VERSE 



41 



connexion. Blaridrata was charged with "Italian vice"; 
David renounced the worship of Christ. To influence David, 
Blandrata sent for Faustus Socinus from Basel. Socinus was 
David's guest, but the discussion between them led to no result. 
At the instance of Blandrata, David was tried and condemned 
to prison at Deva (in which he died) on the charge of innovation. 
Having amassed a fortune, Blandrata returned to the com- 
munion of Rome. His end is obscure. According to the Jesuit, 
Jacob Wujek, he was strangled by a nephew (Giorgio, son of 
Alphonso) in May 1588. He published a few polemical writings, 
some in conjunction with David. 

See Malacarne, Commentario delle Opere e delle Vicende di G. 
Biandrata (Padova, 1814); Wallace, Anti-trinitarian Biography, 
vol. ii. (1850). (A. Go.*) 

BLANE, SIR GILBERT (1740-1834), Scottish physician, 
was born at Blanefield, Ayrshire, on the 29th of August 1749. 
He was educated at Edinburgh university, and shortly after 
his removal to London became private physician to Lord Rodney, 
whom he accompanied to the West Indies in 1779. He did much 
to improve the health of the fleet by attention to the diet of the 
sailors and by enforcing due sanitary precautions, and it was 
largely through him that in 1795 the use of lime-juice was made 
obligatory throughout the navy as a preventive of scurvy. 
Enjoying a number of court and hospital appointments he built 
up a good practice for himself in London, and the government 
constantly consulted him on questions of public hygiene. He 
was made a baronet in 181 2 in reward for the services he rendered 
in connexion with the return of the Walcheren expedition. 
He died in London on the 26th of June 1834. Among his works 
were Observations on the Diseases of Seamen (1795) and Elements 
of Medical Logic (1819). 

BLANFORD, WILLIAM THOMAS (1832-1905), English 
geologist and naturalist, was born in London on the 7th of 
October 1832. He was educated in private schools in Brighton 
and Paris, and with a view to the adoption of a mercantile career 
spent two years in a business house at Civita Vecchia. On return- 
ing to England in 185 1 he was induced to enter the newly estab- 
lished Royal School of Mines, which his younger brother Henry 
F. Blanford (1834-1893), afterwards head of the Indian Meteoro- 
logical Department, had already joined; he then spent a year 
in the mining school at Freiburg, and towards the close of 1854 
both he and his brother obtained posts on the Geological Survey 
of India. In that service he remained for twenty-seven years, 
retiring in 1882. He was engaged in various parts of India, in 
the Raniganj coalfield, in Bombay, and in the coalfield near 
Talchir, where boulders considered to have been ice-borne 
were found in the Talchir strata — a remarkable discovery con- 
firmed by subsequent observations of other geologists in equiva- 
lent strata elsewhere. His attention was given not only to 
geology but to zoology, and especially to the land-mollusca and 
to the vertebrates. In 1866 he was attached to the Abyssinian 
expedition, accompanying the army to Magdala and back; 
and in 1871-1872 he was appointed a member of the Persian 
Boundary Commission. The best use was made of the excep- 
tional opportunities of studying the natural history of those 
countries. For his many contributions to geological science 
Dr Blanford was in 1883 awarded the Wollaston medal by the 
Geological Society of London; and for his labours on the zoology 
and geology of British India he received in 1901 a royal medal 
from the Royal Society. He had been elected F.R.S. in 1874, 
and was chosen president of the Geological Society in 1888. 
He was created CLE. in 1904. He died in London on the 23rd 
of June 1905. His principal publications were: Observations 
on the Geology and Zoology of Abyssinia (1870), and Manual of 
the Geology of India, with H. B. Medlicott (1879). 

Biography, with bibliography and portrait, in Geological Magazine, 
January 1905. 

BLANK (from the Fr. blanc, white), a. word used in various 
senses based on that of " left white," i.e. requiring something 
to be filled in; thus a " blank cheque " is one which requires 
the amount to be inserted, an insurance policy in blank, where 
the name of the beneficiary is lacking, " blank verse " (q.v.) 



verse without rhyme, " blank cartridge " that contains only 
powder and no ball or shot. The word is also used, as a sub- 
stantive, for a ticket in a lottery or sweepstake which does not 
carry a number or the name of a horse running or for an 
unstamped metal disc in coining. 

BLANKENBERGHE, a seaside watering-place on the North 
Sea in the province of West Flanders, Belgium, 12 m. N.E. 
of Ostend, and about 9 m. N.W. of Bruges, with which it 
is connected by railway. It is more bracing than Ostend, and 
has a fine parade over a mile in length. During the season, 
which extends from June to September, it receives a large 
number of visitors, probably over 60,000 altogether, from 
Germany as well as from Belgium. There is a small fishing port 
as well as a considerable fishing-fleet. Two miles north of this 
place along the dunes is Zeebrugge, the point at which the new 
ship-canal from Bruges enters the North Sea. Fixed population 
(1904) 5925. 

BLANKENBURG. (1) A town and health resort of Germany, 
in the duchy of Brunswick, at the N. foot of the Harz Mountains, 
12 m. by rail S.W. from Halberstadt. Pop. (1901) 10,173. It 
has been in large part rebuilt since a fire in 1836, and possesses 
a castle, with various collections, a museum of antiquities, an old 
town hall and churches. There are pine-needle baths and a 
hospital for nervous diseases. Gardening is a speciality. In the 
vicinity is a cliff or ridge of rock called Teufelsmauer (Devil's 
wall), from which fine views are obtained across the plain and 
into the deep gorges of the Harz Mountains. 

(2) Another Blankenburg, also a health-resort, is situated 
in Schwarzburg-Rudolstadt, Thuringia, at the confluence of the 
rivers Rinne and Schwarza, and at the entrance of the Schwar- 
zatal. Its environs are charming, and to the north of it, on an 
eminence, rise the fine ruins of the castle of Greifenstein, built 
by the German king Henry I., and from 1275 to 1583 the seat 
of a cadet branch of the counts of Schwarzburg. 

BLANKETEERS, the nickname given to some 5000 operatives 
who on the 10th of March 181 7 met in St Peter's Field, near 
Manchester, to march to London, each carrying blankets or rugs. 
Their object was to see the prince regent and lay their grievances 
before him. The Habeas Corpus Act was suspended, and the 
leaders were seized and imprisoned. The bulk of the demon- 
stration yielded at once. The few stragglers who persisted in 
the march were intercepted by troops, and treated with consider- 
able severity. Eventually the spokesmen had an interview with 
the ministers, and some reforms were the result. 

BLANK VERSE, the unrhymed measure of iambic deca- 
syllable in five beats which is usually adopted in English epic 
and dramatic poetry. The epithet is due to the absence of the 
rhyme which the ear expects at the end of successive lines. The 
decasyllabic line occurs for the first time in a Provencal poem 
of the 10th century, but in the earliest instances preserved it is 
already constructed with such regularity as to suggest that it 
was no new invention. It was certainly being used almost 
simultaneously in the north of France. Chaucer employed it 
in his Compleynte to Pitie about 1370. In all the literatures of 
western Europe it became generally used, but always with 
rhyme. In the beginning of the 16th century, however, certain 
Italian poets made the experiment of writing decasyllables 
without rhyme. The tragedy of Sophonisba (1515) of G. G. 
Trissino (1478-1550) was the earliest work completed in this 
form; it was followed in 1525 by the didactic poem Le Apt 
(The Bees), of Giovanni Rucellai (1475-1525), who announced 
his intention of writing " Con verso Etrusco dalle rime sciolto," 
in consequence of which expression this kind of metre was called 
versi sciolti or blank verse. In a very short time this form was 
largely adopted in Italian dramatic poetry, and the comedies 
of Ariosto, the Aminta of Tasso and the Pastor Fido of Guarini 
are composed in it. The iambic blank verse of Italy was, how- 
ever, mainly hendecasyllabic, not decasyllabic, and under French 
influences the habit of rhyme soon returned. 

Before the close of Trissino's life, however, his invention had 
been introduced into another literature, where it was destined 
to enjoy a longer and more glorious existence. Towards the 



42 



BLANQUI, J. A.— BLANQUI, L. A. 



close of the reign of Henry VIII., Henry Howard, earl of Surrey, 
translated two books of the Aeneid into English rhymeless verse, 
" drawing " them '* into a strange metre." Surrey's blank verse 
is stiff and timid, permitting itself no divergence from the exact 
iambic movement: — 

"Who can express the slaughter of that night, 

Or tell the number of the corpses slain, 

Or can in tears bewail them worthily? 

The ancient famous city falleth down, 

That many years did hold such seignory." 

Surrey soon found an imitator in Nicholas Grimoald, and in 
1562 blank verse was first applied to English dramatic poetry 
in the Gorboduc of Sackville and Norton. In 1576, in the Steel 
Glass of Gascoigne, it was first used for satire, and by the year 
1585 it had come into almost universal use for theatrical purposes. 
In Lyly's The Woman in the Moon and Peek's Arraignment of 
Paris (both of 1584) we find blank verse struggling with rhymed 
verse and successfully holding its own. The earliest play written 
entirely in blank verse is supposed to be The Misfortunes of 
Arthur (1587) of Thomas Hughes. Marlowe now immediately 
followed, with the magnificent movement of his Tamburlaine 
(1589), which was mocked by satirical critics as " the swelling 
bombast of bragging blank verse" (Nash) and " the spacious 
volubility of a drumming decasyllable " (Greene), but which 
introduced a great new music into English poetry, in such 
" mighty lines "as 

" Still climbing after knowledge infinite, 
And always moving as the restless spheres," 

or: — 

" See where Christ's blood streams in the firmament! " 

Except, however, when he is stirred by a particularly vivid 
emotion, the blank verse of Marlowe continues to be' monotonous 
and uniform. It still depends too exclusively on a counting of 
syllables. But Shakespeare, after having returned to rhyme 
in his earliest dramas, particularly in The Two Gentlemen of 
Verona, adopted blank verse conclusively about the time that 
the career of Marlowe was closing, and he carried it to the greatest 
perfection in variety, suppleness and fulness. He released it 
from the excessive bondage that it had hitherto endured; as 
Robert Bridges has said, " Shakespeare, whose early verse may 
be described as syllabic, gradually came to write a verse depend- 
ent on stress." In comparison with that of his predecessors and 
successors, the blank verse of Shakespeare is essentially regular, 
and his prosody marks the admirable mean between the stiffness 
of his dramatic forerunners and the laxity of those who followed 
him. Most of Shakespeare's lines conform to the normal type 
of the decasyllable, and the rest are accounted for by familiar 
and rational rules of variation. The ease and fluidity of his 
prosody were abused by his successors, particularly by Beaumont 
and Fletcher, who employed the soft feminine ending to excess ; 
in Massinger dramatic blank verse came too near to prose, and 
in Heywood and Shirley it was relaxed to the point of losing all 
nervous vigour. 

The later dramatists gradually abandoned that rigorous 
difference which should always be preserved between the cadence 
of verse and prose, and the example of Ford, who endeavoured 
to revive the old severity of blank verse, was not followed. But 
just as the form was sinking into dramatic desuetude, it took 
new life in the direction of epic, and found its noblest proficient 
in the person of John Milton. The most intricate and therefore 
the most interesting blank verse which has been written is that 
of Milton in the great poems of his later life. He reduced the 
elisions, which had been frequent in the Elizabethan poets, to 
law; he admitted an extraordinary variety in the number of 
stresses; he deliberately inverted the rhythm in order to produce 
particular effects; and he multiplied at will the caesurae or 
breaks in a line. Such verses as 

" Arraying with reflected purple and gold — 
Shoots invisible virtue even to the deep — 
Universal reproach, far worse to bear — 
Me, me only, just object of his ire " — • 
are not mistaken in rhythm, nor to be scanned by forcing them 
to obey the conventional stress. They are instances, and 



Paradise Lost is full of such, of Milton's exquisite art in ringing 
changes upon the metrical type of ten syllables, five stresses and 
a rising rhythm, so as to make the whole texture of the verse 
respond to his poetical thought. Writing many years later 
in Paradise Regained and in Samson Agonistes, Milton retained 
his system of blank verse in its general characteristics, but he 
treated it with increased dryness and with a certain harshness 
of effect. It is certainly in his biblical drama that blank verse 
has been pushed to its most artificial and technical perfection, 
and it is there that Milton's theories are to be studied best; yet 
it must be confessed that learning excludes beauty in some of 
the very audacious irregularities which he here permits himself 
in Samson Agonistes. Such lines as 

" Made arms ridiculous, useless the forgery — 
My griefs not only pain me as a lingering disease — 
Drunk with idolatry, drunk with wine — 
Justly, yet despair not of his final pardon " — 

are constructed with perfect comprehension of metrical law, yet 
they differ so much from the normal structure of blank verse that 
they need to be explained, and to imitate them would be perilous. 
A persistent weakness in the third foot has ever been the snare of 
English blank verse, and it is this element of monotony and 
dulness which Milton is ceaselessly endeavouring to obviate by 
his wonderful inversions, elisions and breaks. 

After the Restoration, and after a brief period of experiment 
with rhymed plays, the dramatists returned to the use of blank 
verse, and in the hands of Otway, Lee and Dryden, it recovered 
much of its magnificence. In the 18th century, Thomson and 
others made use of a very regular and somewhat monotonous 
form of blank verse for descriptive and didactic poems, of which 
the Night Thoughts of Young is, from a metrical point of view, 
the most interesting. With these poets the form is little open to 
licence, while inversions and breaks are avoided as much as 
possible. Since the 18th century, blank verse has been subjected 
to constant revision in the hands of Wordsworth, Coleridge, 
Shelley, Keats, Tennyson, the Brownings and Swinburne, but 
no radical changes, of a nature unknown to Shakespeare and 
Milton, have been introduced into it. 

See J. A. Symonds, Blank Verse (1895); Walter Thomas, Le 
Decasyllabe romain et sa fortune en Europe (1904); Robert Bridges 
Milton's Prosody (1894); Ed. Guest, A History of English Rhythms 
(1882) ; J. Mothere, Les Theories du vers heroique anglais (1886) ; 
J. Schipper, Englische Metrik (1881-1888). (E. G.) 

BLANQUI, JEROME ADOLPHE (1798-1854), French econo- 
mist, was born at Nice on the 21st of November 1798. Begin- 
ning life as a schoolmaster in Paris, he was attracted to the study 
of economics by the lectures of J. B. Say, whose pupil and assist- 
ant he became. Upon the recommendation of Say he" was in 
1825 appointed professor of industrial economy and of history 
at the Conservatoire des Arts et Metiers. In 1833 he succeeded 
Say as professor of political economy at the same institution, 
and in 1838 was elected a member of the Academie des Sciences 
Morales et Politiques. In 1838 appeared his most important 
work, Histoire de I'economie politique en Europe, depuis les 
anciens jusqu'd nos jours. He was indefatigable in research, 
and for the purposes of his economic inquiries travelled over 
almost the whole of Europe and visited Algeria and the East. 
He contributed much to our knowledge of the conditions of the 
working-classes, especially in France. Other works of Blanqui 
were De la situation Sconomique et morale de I'Espagne en 1846; 
Resume de I'histoire du commerce et de Vindustrie (1826); PrScis 
Mementaire d'economie politique (1826); Les Classes ouvrieres 
en France (1848). 

BLANQUI, LOUIS AUGUSTE (1805-1881), French publicist, 
was born on the 8th of February 1805 at Puget-Theniers, where 
his father, Jean Dominique Blanqui, was at that time sub- 
prefect. He studied both law and medicine, but found his real 
vocation in politics, and at once constituted himself a champion 
of the most advanced opinions. He took an active part in the 
revolution of July 1830, and continuing to maintain the doctrine 
of republicanism during the reign of Louis Philippe, was con- 
demned to repeated terms of imprisonment. Implicated in the 
armed outbreak of the Soci6te des Saisons, of which he was a 



BLANTYRE^BLASPHEMY 



43 



leading spirit, he was in the following year, 1840, condemned 
to death, a sentence that was afterwards commuted to imprison- 
ment for life. He was released by the revolution of 1848, only 
to resume his attacks on existing institutions. The revolution, 
he declared, was a mere change of name. The violence of the 
Sociiti rSpublicaine centrale, which was founded by Blanqui to 
demand a modification of the government, brought him into 
conflict with the more moderate Republicans, and in 1849 ne 
was condemned to ten years' imprisonment. In 1865, while 
serving a further term of imprisonment under the Empire, he 
contrived to escape, and henceforth continued his propaganda 
against the government from abroad, until the general amnesty 
of i860 enabled him to return to France. Blanqui's leaning 
towards violent measures was illustrated in 1870 by two un- 
successful armed demonstrations: one on the 12th of January 
at the funeral of Victor Noir, the journalist shot by Pierre 
Bonaparte; the other on the 14th of August, when he led an 
attempt to seize some guns at a barrack. Upon the fall of the 
Empire, through the revolution of the 4th of September, Blanqui 
established the club and journal La patrie en danger. He was one 
of the band that for a moment seized the reins of power on the 
31st of October, and for his share in that outbreak he was again 
condemned to death on the 17 th of March of the following year. 
A few days afterwards the insurrection ' which established the 
Commune broke out, and Blanqui 'was elected a member of the 
insurgent government, but his detention in prison prevented 
him from taking an active part. Nevertheless he was in 1872 
condemned along with the other members of the Commune to 
transportation; but on account of his broken health this 
sentence was commuted to one of imprisonment. In 1879 he 
was elected a deputy for Bordeaux; although the election was 
pronounced invalid, Blanqui was set at liberty, and at once 
resumed his work of agitation. At the end of 1880, after a speech 
at a revolutionary meeting in Paris, he was struck down by 
apoplexy, and expired on the 1st of January 1881. Blanqui's 
uncompromising communism, and his determination to enforce 
it by violence, necessarily brought him into conflict with every 
French government, and half his life was spent in prison. Besides 
his innumerable contributions to journalism, he published an 
astronomical work entitled L'Eternite par les astres (1872), and 
after his death his writings on economic and social questions 
were collected under the title of Critique sociale (1885). 

A biography by G. Geffroy, L'Enferme (1897), is highly coloured 
and decidedly partisan. 

BLANTYRE, the chief town of the Nyasaland protectorate, 
British Central Africa. It is situated about 3000 ft. above the 
sea in the Shire Highlands 306 m. by river and rail N.N.W. of 
the Chinde mouth of the Zambezi. Pop. about 6000 natives 
and 100 whites. It is the headquarters of the principal trading 
firms and missionary societies in the protectorate. It is also a 
station on the African trans-continental telegraph line. The 
chief building is the Church of Scotland church, a fine red brick 
building, a mixture of Norman and Byzantine styles, with lofty 
turrets and white domes. It stands in a large open space and is 
approached by an avenue of cypresses and eucalyptus. The 
church was built entirely by native labour. Blantyre was 
founded in 1876 by Scottish missionaries, and is named after the 
birthplace of David Livingstone. 

BLANTYRE (Gaelic, "the warm retreat"), a parish of 
Lanarkshire, Scotland. Pop.- (1901) 14,145. The parish lies a 
few miles south-east of Glasgow, and contains High Blantyre 
(pop. 2521), Blantyre Works (or Low Blantyre), Stonefield 
and several villages. The whole district is rich in coal, the 
mining of which is extensively carried on. Blantyre Works 
(pop. 1683) was the birthplace of David Livingstone (1813- 
1873) and his brother Charles (1821-1873), who as lads were 
both employed as piecers in a local cotton-mill. The scanty 
remains of Blantyre Priory, founded towards the close of the 
13th century, stand on the left bank of the Clyde, almost opposite 
the beautiful ruins of Bothwell Castle. High Blantyre and 
Blantyre Works are connected with Glasgow by the Caledonian 
railway. Stonefield (pop. 7288), the most populous place in 



the parish, entirely occupied with mining, lies between High 
Blantyre and Blantyre Works. Calderwood Castle on Rotten 
Calder Water, near High Blantyre, is situated amid picturesque 
scenery. 

BLARNEY, a small town of Co. Cork, Ireland, in the mid 
parliamentary division, 5 m. N.W. of the city of Cork on 
the Cork & Muskerry light railway. Pop. (1901) 928. There 
is a large manufacture of tweed. The name " blarney " has 
passed into the language to denote a peculiar kind of persuasive 
eloquence, alleged to be characteristic of the natives of Ireland. 
The " Blarney Stone," the kissing of which is said to confer this 
faculty, is pointed out within the castle. The origin of this 
belief is not known. The castle, built c. 1446 by Cormac 
McCarthy, was of immense strength, and parts of its walls are 
as much as 18 ft. thick. To its founder is traced by some the 
origin of the term " blarney," since he delayed by persuasion 
and promises the surrender of the castle to the lord president. 
Richard Millikin's song, " The Groves of Blarney " (c. 1798), 
contributed to the fame of the castle, which is also bound up 
with the civil history of the county and the War of the Great 
Rebellion. 

BLASHFIELD, EDWIN HOWLAND (1848- ), American 

artist, was born on the 15th of December 1848 in New York City; 
He was a pupil of Bonnat in Paris, and became (1888) a member 
of the National Academy of Design in New York. For some 
years a genre painter, he later turned to decorative work, marked 
by rare delicacy and beauty of colouring. He painted mural 
decorations for a dome in the manufacturers' building at the 
Chicago Exposition of 1893; for the dome of the Congressional 
library, Washington; for the capitol at St Paul, Minnesota; 
for the Baltimore court-house; in New York City for the Appellate 
court house, the grand ball-room of the Waldorf-Astoria hotel, 
the Lawyers' club, and the residences of W. K. Vanderbilt and 
Collis P. Huntington; and in Philadelphia for the residence of 
George W. Drexel. With his wife he wrote Italian Cities (1900) 
and edited Vasari's Lives of the Painters (1896), and was well 
known as a lecturer and writer on art. He became president of 
the Society of Mural Painters, and of the Society of American 
Artists. 

BLASIUS (or Blaise), SAINT, bishop of Sebaste or Sivas in 
Asia Minor, martyred under Diocletian on the 3rd of February 
316. The Roman Catholic Church holds his festival on the 3rd 
of February, the Orthodox Eastern Church on the nth. His 
flesh is said to have been torn with woolcombers' irons before he 
was beheaded, and this seems to be the only reason why he has 
always been regarded as the patron saint of woolcombers. In 
pre-Reformation England St Blaise was a very popular saint, 
and the council of Oxford in 1222 forbade all work on his festival. 
Owing to a miracle which he is alleged to have worked on a child 
suffering from a throat affection, who was brought to him on his 
way to execution, St Blaise's aid has always been held potent in 
throat and lung diseases. The woolcombers of England still 
celebrate St Blaise's day with a procession and general festivities. 
He forms one of a group of fourteen (i.e. twice seven) saints, who 
for their help in time of need have been associated as objects of 
particularly devoted worship in Roman Catholic Germany since 
the middle of the 1 5th century. 
See William Hone, Every Day Book, i. 210. 

BLASPHEMY (through the Fr. from Gr. /3Xa<r0r;/wa, profane 
language, slander, probably derived from root of J3\airTtii>, to 
injure, and $1^17, speech), literally, defamation or evil speaking, 
but more peculiarly restricted to an indignity offered to the 
Deity by words or writing. By the Mosaic law death by stoning 
was the punishment for blasphemy (Lev. xxiv. 16). The 77th 
Novel of Justinian assigned death as the penalty, as did also the 
Capitularies. The common law of England treats blasphemy as 
an indictable offence. All blasphemies against God, as denying 
His being, or providence, all contumelious reproaches of Jesus 
Christ, all profane scoffing at the Holy Scriptures, or exposing 
any part thereof to contempt or ridicule, are punishable by the 
temporal courts with fine, imprisonment and also infamous 
corporal punishment. An act of Edward VI. (1547; repealed 



44 



BLASS— BLASTING 



r 553» and revived 1558) enacts that persons reviling the sacra- 
ment of the Lord's Supper, by contemptuous words or otherwise, 
shall suffer imprisonment. Persons denying the Trinity were 
deprived of the benefit of the Act of Toleration by an act of 1688. 
An act of 1697-1698, commonly called the Blasphemy Act, 
enacts that if any person, educated in or having made profession 
of the Christian religion, should by writing, preaching, teaching or 
advised speaking, deny any one of the Persons of the Holy Trinity 
to be God, or should assert or maintain that there are more gods 
than one, or should deny the Christian religion to be true, or the 
Holy Scriptures to be of divine authority, he should, upon the 
first offence, be rendered incapable of holding any office or place 
of trust, and for the second incapable of bringing any action, of 
being guardian or executor, or of taking a legacy or deed of gift, 
and should suffer three years' imprisonment without bail. It 
has been held that a person offending under the statute is also 
indictable at common law {Rex v. Carlisle, 1819, where Mr 
Justice Best remarks, " In the age of toleration, when that 
statute passed, neither churchmen nor sectarians wished to 
protect in their infidelity those who disbelieved the Holy 
Scriptures"). An act of 1812-1813 excepts from these enact- 
ments " persons denying as therein mentioned respecting the 
Holy Trinity," but otherwise the common and the statute law on 
the subject remain as stated. In the case of Rex v. Woolston 
(1728) the court declared that they would not suffer it to be 
debated whether to write against Christianity in general was not 
an offence punishable in the temporal courts at common law, but 
they did not intend to include disputes between learned men on 
particular controverted points. 

The law against blasphemy has practically ceased to be put in 
active operation. In 1841 Edward Moxon was found guilty of 
the publication of a blasphemous libel (Shelley's Queen Mab), the 
prosecution having been instituted by Henry Hetherington, who 
had previously been condemned to four months' imprisonment 
for a similar offence, and wished to test the law under which he 
was punished. In the case of Cowan v. Milboum (1867) the 
defendant had broken his contract to let a lecture-room to the 
plaintiff, on discovering that the intended lectures were to 
maintain that " the character of Christ is defective, and his 
teaching misleading, and that the Bible is no more inspired than 
any other book," and the court of exchequer held that the 
publication of such doctrine was blasphemy, and the contract 
therefore illegal. On that occasion the court reaffirmed the 
dictum of Chief Justice Hale, that Christianity is part of the laws 
of England. The commissioners on criminal law (sixth report) 
remark that " although the law forbids all denial of the being and 
providence of God or the Christian religion, it is only when 
irreligion assumes the form of an insult to God and man that the 
interference of the criminal law has taken place." In England 
the last prominent prosecution for blasphemy was the case of 
R. v. Ramsey &" Foote, 1883, 48 L.T. 739, when the editor, 
publisher and printer of the Freethinker were sentenced to 
imprisonment; but police court proceedings were taken as late 
as 1908 against an obscure Hyde Park orator who had become a 
public nuisance. 

Profane cursing and swearing is made punishable by the 
Profane Oaths Act 1745, which directs the offender to be brought 
before a justice of the peace, and fined five shillings, two shillings 
or one shilling, according as he is a gentleman, below the rank of 
gentleman, or a common labourer, soldier, &c. 

By the law of Scotland, as it originally stood, the punishment 
of blasphemy was death, but by an act of 1825, amended in 
1837, blasphemy was made punishable by fine or imprisonment 
or both. 

In France, blasphemy (which included, also, speaking against 
the Holy Virgin and the saints, denying one's faith, or speaking 
with impiety of holy things) was from very early times punished 
with great severity. The punishment was death in various 
forms, burning alive, mutilation, torture or corporal punishment. 
In the United States the common law of England was largely 
followed, and in most of the states, also, statutes were enacted 
against the offence, but, as in England, the law is practically 



never put in force. In Germany, the punishment for blasphemy 
is imprisonment varying from one day to three years, according 
to the gravity of the offence. To constitute the offence, the 
blasphemy must be uttered in public, be offensive in character, 
and have wounded the religious susceptibilities of some other 
person. In Austria, whoever commits blasphemy by speech or 
writing is liable to imprisonment for any term from six months 
up to ten years, according to the seriousness of the offence. 

BLASS, FRIEDRICH (1843-1907), German classical scholar, 
was born on the 22nd of January 1843 at Osnabriick. After 
studying at Gottingen and Bonn from i860 to 1863, he lectured at 
several gymnasia and at the university of Konigsberg. In 1876 
be was appointed extraordinary professor of classical philology 
at Kiel, and ordinary professor in 1881. In 1892 he accepted a 
professorship at Halle, where he died on the 5th of March 1907. 
He frequently visited England, and was intimately acquainted 
with leading British scholars. He received an honorary degree 
from Dublin University in 1892, and his readiness to place the 
results of his labours at the disposal of others, together with the 
courtesy and kindliness of his disposition, won the respect of all 
who knew him. Blass is chiefly known for his works in connexion 
with the study of Greek oratory: Die griechische Beredsamkeit 
von Alexander bis auf Augustus (1865); Die attische Beredsamkeit 
(1868-1880; 2nd ed., 1887-1898), his greatest work; editions 
for the Teubner series of Andocides (1880), Antiphon (1881), 
Hypereides (1881, 1804), Demosthenes (Dindorf's ed., 1885), 
Isocrates (1886), Dinarchus (1888), Demosthenes (Rehdantz' ed., 
1893), Aeschines (1896), Lycurgus, Leocrates (1902); Die 
Rhythmen der atliscben Kunslprosa (1901); Die Rhythmen der 
asianischen und romischen Kunstprosa (1905). Among his other 
works are editions of Eudoxus of Cnidus (1887), the 'KB^vaiuv 
iroKLTeia (4th ed., 1903), a work of great importance, and Bacchy- 
lides (3rd. ed., 1904) ; Grammatik des neutestamentlichen Griechisch 
(1902; Eng. trans, by H. St John Thackeray, 1905); Hermeneu- 
tik und Kritik and Paldographie, Buchwesen, und Handschrijten- 
kunde (vol. i. of Miiller's Handbuch der klassischen Altertums- 
wissenschaft, 1891); JJber die Aussprache des Griechischen (1888; 
Eng. trans, by W. J. Purton, 1890); Die Interpolationen in der 
Odyssee (1904); contributions to Collitz's Sammlung der griechi- 
schen Dialektinschriften; editions of the texts of certain portions 
of the New Testament (Gospels and Acts). His last work was an. 
edition of the Choephori (1906). 

See notices in the Academy, March 16, 1907 (J. P. Mahaffy) ; 
Classical Review, May 1907 (J. E. Sandys), which contains also a 
review of Die Rhythmen der asianischen und romischen Kunstprosa. 

BLASTING, the process of rending or breaking apart a solid 
body, such as rock, by exploding within it or in contact with it 
some explosive substance. The explosion is accompanied by the 
sudden development of gas at a high temperature and under a 
tension sufficiently great to overcome the resistance of the 
enclosing body, which is thus shattered and disintegrated. 
Before the introduction of explosives, rock was laboriously 
excavated by hammer and chisel, or by the ancient process of 
" fire-setting," i.e. building a fire against the rock, which, on 
cooling, splits and flakes off. To hasten disintegration, water 
was often applied to the heated rock, the loosened portion being 
afterwards removed by pick or hammer and wedge. In modern 
times blasting has become a necessity for the excavation of rock 
and other hard material, as in open surface cuts, quarrying, 
tunnelling, shaft-sinking and mining queries in general.

For blasting, a hole is generally drilled to receive the charge of 
explosive. The depth and diameter of the hole and the quantity 
of explosive used are all variable, depending on the character of 
the rock and of the explosive, the shape of the mass to be blasted, 
the presence or absence of cracks or fissures, and the position of the 
hole with respect to the free surface of the rock. The shock of 
a blast produces impulsive waves acting radially in all directions, 
the force being greatest at the centre of explosion and varying 
inversely as the square of the distance from the charge. This 
is evidenced by the observed facts. Immediately surrounding 
the explosive, the rock is often finely, splintered and crushed. 
Beyond this is a zone in which it is completely broken and 



BLASTING 



45 



displaced or projected, leaving an enveloping mass of more or 
less ragged fractured rock only partially loosened. Lastly, the 
diminishing waves produce vibrations which are transmitted to 
considerable distances. Theoretically, if a charge of explosive be 
tired in a solid material of perfectly homogeneous texture and at 
a proper distance from the free surface, a conical mass will be 
blown out to the full depth of the drill hole, leaving a funnel- 
shaped cavity. No rock, however, is of uniform mineralogical 
and physical character, so that in practice there is only a rough 
approximation to the conical crater, even under the most favour- 
able conditions. Generally, the shape of the mass blasted out is 
extremely irregular, because of the variable texture of the rock 
and the presence of cracks, fissures and cleavage planes. The 
ultimate or resultant useful effect of the explosion of a confined 
charge is in the direction where the least resistance is presented. 
In the actual work of rock excavation it is only by trial, or by 
deductions based on experience, that the behaviour of a given 
rock can be determined and the quantity of explosive required 
properly proportioned. 

Blasting, as usually carried on, comprises several queries:
(i) drilling holes in the rock to be blasted; (2) placing in the hole 
the charge of explosive, with its fuze; (3) tamping the charge, i.e. 
compacting it and filling the remainder of the hole with some 
suitable material for preventing the charge from blowing out 
without breaking the ground; (4) igniting or detonating the 
charge; (5) clearing away the broken material. The holes for 
blasting are made either by hand, with hammer and drill or 
jumper, or by machine drill, the latter being driven by steam, 
compressed air, or electricity, or,in rare cases,by hydraulic power. 
Drill holes ordinarily vary in diameter from 1 to 3 in., and in 
depth from a few inches up to 15 or 20 ft. or more. The deeper 
holes are made only in surface excavation of rock, the shallower, 
to a maximum depth of say 12 ft., being suitable for tunnelling 
and mining queries.

Hand Drilling. — -The work is either " single-hand " or " double- 
hand." In single-hand drilling, the miner wields the hammer with 
one hand, and with the other holds the drill or " bit," rotating it 
slightly after every blow in order to keep the hole round and 
prevent the drill from sticking fast; in double-hand work, 
one man strikes, while the other holds and rotates the 
drill. For large and deep holes, two hammermen are 
sometimes employed. 

A miner's drill is a steel bar, occasionally round but 
generally of octagonal cross-section, one end of which is 
forged out to a cutting edge (fig. 1). The edge of the drill 
is made either straight, like that of a chisel, or with a 
convex curve, the latter shape being best for very hard 
rock. For hard rock the cutting edge should be rather 
thicker and blunter, and therefore stronger, than for soft 
rock. Drills are made of high-grade steel, as they must 
FlG. I. be tempered accurately and uniformly. The diameter of 
drill steel for hand work is usually from j to I in., and the 
length of cutting edge, or gauge, of the drill is always greater 
than the diameter of the shank, in the proportion of from 7 '4 
to 4-3. Holes over 10 or 12 in. deep generally require the use of a 
set of drills of different lengths and depending in number on the 
depth required. The shortest drill, for starting the hole, has the 
widest cutting edge, the edges of the others being successively 
narrower and graduated to follow each other properly, as drill after 
drill is dulled in deepening the hole. Thus the hole decreases 
in diameter as it is made deeper. The miner's hammer (fig. 2) 
ranges in weight from 3! to 4i ft for single-hand drilling, up to 
8 or 10 ft for double-hand. If the hole is directed downward, a 
little water is poured into it at intervals, to keep the cutting edge 
of the drill cool and make a thin mud of the cuttings. From time 
to time the hole is cleaned out by the " scraper " or " spoon," a 

long slender iron bar, forged 
in the shape of a hollow 
semi-cylinder, with one end 
flattened and turned over at 
right angles. If the hole is 
directed steeply upward and 
the rock is dry, the cuttings 
will run out continuously 
during the drilling; other 



ployed for drilling holes horizontally or upward. Other tools used 
in connexion with rock-drilling are the pick and gad. 

Holes drilled by hand usually vary in depth from say 18 to 36 in., 
according to the nature of the rock and purpose of the work, though 
deeper holes are often made. For soft rock, single-hand drilling is 
from 20 to 30% cheaper than double-hand, but this difference does 
not hold good for the harder rocks. For these double-hand drilling 
is preferable, and may even be 
essential, to secure a reason- 
able speed of work. 

Machine Drills. — The intro- 
duction of machine drills in 
the latter part of the 19th cen- 
tury exerted an important in- 
fluence on the work of rock 
excavation in general, and 
specially on the art of mining. 
By their use many great tun- 
nels and other works involving 
rock excavation under adverse 
conditions have been rapidly 

and successfully carried out. 
Before the invention of 

machine drills such work pro- 
gressed slowly and with diffi- 
culty. Nearly all machine 

drills are of the reciprocating 

or percussive type, in which 

the drill bit is firmly clamped 

to the piston rod and delivers 

a rapid succession of strong . 

blows on the bottom of the - 

hole. The ordinary compressed 

air drill (which may, for surface 

work, be operated also by 

steam) may be taken as an 

illustration. The piston works 

in a cylinder, provided with a 

that of 




Fig. 3. — Ingersoll-Sergeant 
Mining Drill. 



valve motion somewhat similar to 
a steam-engine, together with an automatic device for 
producing the necessary rotation of the piston and drill bit. While 
at work the machine is mounted on a heavy tripod (fig. 3) ; or, if 
underground, sometimes on an iron column or bar, firmly wedged in 
position between the roof and floor, or side walls, of the tunnel or 
mine working. As the hole is deepened, the entire drill head, is 
gradually fed forward on its support by a screw feed, a succession 
of longer and longer drill bits being used as required. 

Among the numerous types and makes of percussion drill may 
be named the following: — Adelaide, Climax, Darlington, Dubois- 
Frangois, Ferroux, Froelich, Hirnant, Ingersoll, Jeffrey, Leyner, 
McKiernan, Rand, Schram, Sergeant, Sullivan and Wood. 

One of the simplest of the machine drills is the Darlington (figs. 4 
and 5): a is the cylinder; 6, piston rod; c, bit; d,d, air inlets, 




Inches 12 



Figs. 4 and 5. — Darlington's Rock Drill. 



Fig. 2. — Sledge-hammer. 



wise the scraper is necessary, or a small pipe with a plunger like 
a syringe is used for washing out the cuttings. The " jumper " is a 
long steel bar, with cutting edges on one or both ends, which is 
alternately raised and dropped in the hole by one or two men. In 
rock work the jumper is rarely used except for holes directed steeply 
downward, though for coal or soft shale or slate it may be em- 



either being used according to the position of the drill while at 
work; h, piston; j, rifle-bar for rotating piston and bit; k, ratchet 
attached to j ; I, brass nut, screwed into h, and in which j works ; 
/, chuck for holding drill-bit; n, air port communicating between 
ends of cylinder, front and back of piston; 0, exhaust port. This 
machine has no valve. From- its construction, the compressed air 
(or steam) is always acting on the annular shoulder round the for- 
ward end of the piston. The piston is thereby forced back on the 



4-6 



BLASTING 



in-stroke until the port » is uncovered. This admits the compressed air 
to the rear end of the cylinder, and as the area of this end of the piston 
is much greater than that of the shoulder on the other end, the piston 
is driven forward and strikes its blow. When it has advanced far 
enough to cover the exhaust port o, the air behind the piston is 
exhausted, and, under the constant inward pressure noted above, 
the stroke is reversed. The rotation of piston and bit is caused by 
the rifle-bar j. On the outward stroke, j, with its ratchet k, is free 
to turn under a couple of pawls and springs, and consequently the 
piston delivers its blow without rotation. On the inward stroke the 
ratchet is held fast by the pawls, and the piston and bit are forced to 
rotate through a small part of a revolution. The cylinder is fed 
forward with respect to the shell r, by rotating the handle p, which 
works a long screw-bar engaging with a nut on the under side of the 
cylinder. The shell r is bolted to the clamp s, which in turn is 
mounted on the hollow column or bar g, or on a tripod, according to 
(he character of the work. By means of the adjustable clamp s, 
the machine can be set for drilling a hole in any desired direction. 
The drill makes from 400 to 800 strokes per minute. 

The " New Ingersoll " drill, which may be taken as an example 
of the numerous machines in which valves are used, is shown in 
section in fig. 6. The steam or compressed air is distributed through 
the ports alternately to the ends of the cylinder, by the reciprocations 
of a spool-valve working in a chest mounted on the cylinder. The 
movements of this valve are caused by the strokes of the main 
piston, which, by means of the wide annular groove around the 
middle of the piston, alternately open and close the spool-valve 
exhaust ports. Fig. 3 shows the Ingersoll "Light Mining drill," 
as mounted on a tripod, and in position for drilling a hole vertically 
downward. In the Leyner drill the drill-bit is not connected to 
the piston, but is struck a quick succession of blows by the latter. 
An important feature of this machine is the provision lor directing 
a stream of water into the hole for clearing out the cuttings. For 
this purpose the shank of the drill-bit is perforated longitudinally, 
the water being supplied under pressure from a small tank, to which 
compressed air is led. 

A rock drill of entirely different design, the Brandt, has been 
successfully used in Europe for driving railway tunnels. It is 
operated by hydraulic power, the pressure water being supplied by 
a pump. The hollow drill-bit, which has a serrated cutting edge, is 
forced under heavy pressure against the bottom of the hole, and is 
rotated slowly — at six to eight revolutions per minute — by a pair of 
small hydraulic cylinders, thus grinding and crushing the rock instead 
of chipping it. The bottom of the hole is kept clean and the drill-bit 
cooled by a stream of water passing down through its hollow shank. 
On account of its size and weight, this machine is not suitable for 
mine work. 

Most of the machine drills are made in a number of sizes, from 
2 in. up to 5 in. diameter of cylinder, the larger sizes being capable 
of drilling holes 5 in. diameter and 30 ft. deep. They range in weight 
from say 95 to 690 lb for the drill head (unmounted), the tripods 
weighing from 40 to 260 lb, exclusive of the weights placed for 
stability on the tripod legs (fig. 3). The sizes in most common use 
for mining are from 2.\ in. to 3^ in. diameter of cylinder. In rock of 
average hardness the best drills make from 4 to 75 linear ft. of hole 
per hour. For use in narrow veins, or other confined workings 
underground, several extremely small and light compressed air 
drills have been introduced, as, for example, the Franke and Wonder, 
the first of which weighs complete only 16 lb, and the second 18 lb. 
These drills are held in the hands of the miner in the required position, 
and strike a rapid succession of light blows. A large number of 
mechanical drills operated by hand power have been invented. 
Some imitate hand-drilling in the mode of delivering the blow; in 



has been successfully used in collieries, viz. rotary auger drills, 
mounted on light columns and driven through gearing hy diminutive 
motors. These are intended for boring in coal, slate or other similar 
soft material. Hand augers resembling a carpenter's brace and bit 
are also often used in collieries. 

Whatever may be the method of drilling, after the hole has been 
completed to the depth required, it is finally cleaned out by a scraper 
or swab; or, when compressed air drills are used, by a jet of air 
directed into the hole by a short piece of pipe connected through a 
flexible hose with the compressed air supply pipe. The hole is then 
ready for the charge. 

Location and Arrangement of Holes. — For hand drilling in mining 
the position of the holes is determined largely by the character and 





Fig. 7. 

shape of the face of rock to be blasted. The miner observes the 
joints and cracks of the rock, placing the holes to take advantage 
of them and so obtain the best result from the blast. In driving a 
tunnel or drift, as in figs. 7 and 8, the rock joints can be made of 
material assistance by beginning with hole No. I and following in 
succession by Nos. 2, 3 and 4. Frequently the ore, or vein matter, 
is separated from the wall-rock by a thin, soft layer of clay (D,D, 
fig. 8). This would act almost as a free face, and the first holes of 
the round would be directed at an angle towards it, for blasting out 
a wedge; after which the positions of the other holes would be 
chosen. 

When machine drills are employed, less attention is given to 
natural cracks or joints, chiefly because when the drill is once set up 
several holes at 
different angles 
can be drilled in 
succession by 
merely swinging 
the cylinder of 
the machine into 
a new position 
with respect to 
its m o u n t i ng. 
According to one 
method, the holes 
are placed with 





Fig. 9. 



Fig. 10. 




Fig. 6. — New Ingersoll Drill. 

others the drill-bit is caused to reciprocate by means of combinations 
of crank and spring. None of these machines is entirely satisfactory, 
and but few are in use. 

Among percussion rock-drills operated by electricity are the 
Bladray, Box, Durkee, Marvin and Siemens-Halske. The Marvin 
drill works with a solenoid ; most of the others have crank and spring 
movements for producing the reciprocations of the piston. Power 
is furnished by a small electric motor, either mounted on the machine 
itself, as with the Box drill, or more often standing on the ground 
and transmitting its power through a flexible shaft. Although rather 
frequently used, electric percussion drills cannot yet be considered 
entirely successful, at least for mine service, in competition with 
compressed air machines. Another type of electric drill, however, 



some degree of symmetry, in roughly concentric rings, as shown 
by figs. 9 and 10. The centre holes are blasted first, and are 
followed by the others in one or more volleys as indicated by the 
dotted lines. Another method is the " centre cut," in which the 
holes are drilled in parallel rows on each side of the centre line of the 
tunnel, drift or shaft. Those in the two rows nearest the middle are 
directed towards each other, and enclose a prism of rock, which is 
first blasted out by heavy charges, after which the rows of side holes 
will break with relatively light charges. 

Explosives.— A great variety of explosives are in use for blasting 
purposes. Up to 1864, gunpowder was the only available 
explosive, but in that year Alfred Nobel first applied nitro- 
glycerin for blasting, and in 1867 invented dynamite. This 
name was originally applied to his mixture of nitroglycerin 
with kieselguhr, but now includes also other mechanical 
mixtures or chemical compounds which develop a high 
explosive force as compared with gunpowder. Besides these 
there are the so-called nameless or safety explosives, used 
in collieries where inflammable gases are given off from the 
coal. 

Gunpowder, or black powder, is seldom used for rock- 
blasting, except in quarrying building-stone, where slow 
explosives of relatively low power are desirable to avoid 
shattering the stone, and in such collieries as do not require the 
use of safety explosives. Gunpowder is exploded by deflagration, 
by means of a fuze, and exerts a comparatively slow and rending 
force. The high explosives, on the other hand, are exploded by 
detonation, through the agency of a fuze and fulminating cap, 
exerting a quick, shattering, rather than a rending force. Dyna- 
mites and flameless explosives are made in a variety of strengths, 
and are packed in waterproofed cartridges of different sizes. The 
grades of dynamite most commonly employed contain from 35 
to 60% of nitroglycerin; the stronger are used for tough rock 
or deep holes, or for holes unfavourably placed in narrow mine 
workings, as sometimes in shaft-sinking or tunnelling. When of 
good quality high explosives are safer to handle than gunpowder, 



BLASTING 



47 



as they cannot be ignited by sparks and are not so easily exploded. 
The ordinary dynamites used in mining are about four times as 
powerful as gunpowder. 

Nitroglycerin in its liquid form is now rarely used for blasting, 

Cartly because its full strength is not often necessary but chiefly 
ecause of the difficulty and danger of transporting, handling and 
charging it. If employed at all, it is charged in thin tinned plate 
cases or rubber-cloth cartridges. 

Blasting with Black Powder. — The powder is coarse-grained, 
usually from | to fV in. in size, and is charged in paper cartridges, 
8 to 10 in. long and of a proper diameter to fit loosely in the drill 
hole. A piece of fuze, long enough to reach a little beyond the 
mouth of the hole, is inserted in the cartridge and tied fast. For 
wet holes paraffined paper is used, the miner waterproofing the joints 
with grease. When more than one cartridge is required for the blast, 
that which has the fuze attached is usually charged last. The 
cartridges are carefully rammed down by a wooden tamping bar 
and the remainder of the hole filled with tamping. This consists of 
finely broken rock, dry clay or other comminuted material, carefully 
compacted by the tamping bar on top of the charge. The fuze is a 
cord, having in the centre a core of gunpowder, enclosed in several 
layers of linen or hemp waterproofed covering. It is ignited by the 
miner's candle or lamp, or by a candle end so placed at the mouth 
of the hole that the flame must burn its way through the fuze cover- 
ing. As the fuze burns slowly, at the rate of 2 or 3 ft. per minute, 
the miner uses a sufficient length to allow him to reach a place of 
safety. 

For blasting in coal, " squibs " instead of fuzes are often used. 
A squib is simply a tiny paper rocket, about | in. diameter by 3 in. 
long, containing fine gunpowder and having a sulphur slow-match 
at one end. It is fired into the charge through a channel in the 
tamping. This channel may be formed by a piece of J in. gas pipe, 
tamped in the hole and reaching the charge; or a " needle," a long 
taper iron rod, is laid longitudinally in the hole, with its point 
entering the charge, and after the tamping is finished, by carefully 
withdrawing the needle a little channel is left, through which the 
squib is fired. In this connexion it may be noted that for breaking 
ground in gassy collieries several substitutes for explosives have 
been used to a limited extent, e.g. plugs of dry wood driven tightly 
into a row of drill holes, and which on being wetted swell and split 
the coal; quicklime cartridges, which expand powerfully On the 
application of water; simple wedges, driven by hammer into the 
drill holes; multiple wedges, inserted in the holes and operated 
by hydraulic pressure from a small hand force-pump. 

Blasting with High Explosives. — High explosives are fired either 
by ordinary fuze and detonating cap or by electric fuze. Detonating 
caps of ordinary strength contain 10 to 15 grains of fulminating 
mixture. The cap is crimped tight on the end of the fuze, embedded 
in the cartridge, and on being exploded by fire from the fuze detonates 
the charge. The number of cartridges charged depends on the depth 
of hole, the length of the line of least resistance, and the toughness 
and other characteristics of the rock. Each cartridge should be 
solidly tamped, and, to avoid waste spaces in the hole, which would 
reduce the effect of the blast, it is customary to split the paper 
covering lengthwise with a knife. This allows the dynamite to 
spread under the pressure of the tamping bar. The cap is often 
placed in the cartridge preceding the last one charged, but it is 
better to insert it last, in a piece of cartridge called a " primer." 
Though the dynamites are not exploded by sparks, they should 
nevertheless always be handled carefully. It is not so essential to 
fill the hole completely and so thoroughly to compact the tamping, 
as in charging black powder, because of the greater rapidity and 
shattering force of the explosion of dynamite; tamping, however, 
should never be omitted, as it increases the efficiency of the blast. 
In exploding dynamite, strong caps, containing say 15 grains of 
fulminating powder, produce the best results. Weaker caps are not 
economical, as they do not produce complete detonation of the 
dynamite. This is specially true if the weather be cold. Dynamite 
then becomes less sensitive, and the cartridges should be gently 
warmed before charging, to a temperature of not more than §0° F. 
Poisonous fumes are often produced by the explosion of the nitro- 
glycerin compounds. These are probably largely due to incomplete 
detonation, by which part of the nitroglycerin is vaporized or 
merely burned. This is most likely to occur when the dynamite is 
chilled, or of poor quality, or when the cap is too weak, There is 
generally but little inconvenience from the fumes, except in confined 
underground workings, where ventilation is imperfect. 

Like nitroglycerin, the common dynamites freeze at a temperature 
of from 42 ° to 46 F. They are then comparatively safe, and so far 
as possible should be transported in the frozen state. At very low 
temperatures dynamite again becomes somewhat sensitive to shock. 
When it is frozen at ordinary temperatures even the strongest 
detonating caps fail to develop the full force. In thawing dynamite, 
care must be exercised. The fact that a small quantity will often 
burn quietly has led to the dangerously mistaken notion that mere 
heating will not cause explosion. It is chiefly a question of tempera- 
ture. If the quantity ignited by flame be large enough to heat the 
entire mass to the detonating point (say 36cr F.) before all is con- 
sumed, an explosion will result. Furthermore, dynamite, when 
even moderately heated, becomes extremely sensitive to shocks. 



There are several accepted modes of thawing dynamite: (1) In a 
water bath, the cartridges being placed in a vessel surrounded on 
the sides and bottom by warm water contained in a larger enclosing 
vessel. The warm water may be renewed from time to time, or 
the water bath placed over a candle or small lamp, not on a stove. 
(2) In two vessels, similar to the above, with the space between them 
occupied by air, provided the heat applied can be definitely limited, 
as by using a candle. (3) When large quantities of dynamite are 
used a supply may be kept on shelves in a wooden room or chamber, 
warmed by a stove, or by a coil of pipe heated by exhaust steam 
from an engine. Live steam should not be used, as the heat might 
become excessive. Thawing should always take place slowly, never 
before an open fire or by direct contact with a stove or steam pipes 
and care must be taken that the heat does not rise high enough to 
cause sweating or exudation of liquid nitroglycerin from the 
cartridges, which would be a source of danger. 

For the storage of explosives at mines, &c. , proper magazines must 
be provided, situated in a safe place, not too near other buildings, 
and preferably of light though fireproof construction. Masonry 
magazines, though safer from some points of view, may be the cause 
of greater damage in event of an explosion, because the brick or 
stones act as projectiles. Isolated and abandoned mine workings, 
if dry, are sometimes used as magazines. 

Firing blasts by electricity has a wide application for both surface 
and underground work. An electrical fuze (fig. 11) consists of a 
pair of fine, insulated copper wires, several feet long and about 3*5 
of an inch in diameter, with their bare ends inserted in a detonating 
cap. For firing, the fuze wires are joined to long leading wires, 
connected with some source of electric current. By joining the fuze 
wires in series or in groups, any number of holes may be 
fired simultaneously, according to the current avail- 
able. A round of holes fired in this way, as for driving 
tunnels, sinking shafts, or in large surface excavations, 
produces better results, both in economy of explosive 
and effect of the blast, than when the holes are fired 
singly or in succession. Also, the miners are enabled to 
prepare for the blast with more care and deliberation, 
and then to reach a place of safety before the current 
is transmitted. Another advantage is that there is no 
danger of a hole " hanging fire," which sometimes 
causes accidents in using ordinary fuzes. 

Hanging fire may be due to a cut, broken or dam- 
aged powder fuze, which may smoulder for some time 
before communicating fire to the charge. " Miss-fires," 
which also are of not infrequent occurrence with both 
ordinary and electric fuzes, are cases where explosion 
from any cause fails to take place. After waiting a 
sufficient length of time before approaching the charged 
hole, the miner carefully removes the tamping down to 
within a few inches of the explosives and inserts and 
fires another cartridge, the concussion usually detonat- 
ing the entire charge. Sometimes another hole is 
drilled near the one which has missed. No attempt to 
remove the old charge should ever be made. p IG IJ) 

High tension electricity, generated by a frictiohal El ec tricaJ 
machine, provided with a condenser, was formerly Fuze 
much used for blasting. The bare ends of the fuze 
wires in the detonating cap are placed say | in. apart, leaving 
a gap across which a spark is discharged, passing through a 
priming charge of some sensitive composition. The priming 
is not only combustible but also a conductor of electricity, 
such as an intimate mixture of potassium chlorate with copper 
sulphide and phosphide. By the combustion of the priming the 
fulminate mixture in the cap is detonated. As these fuzes are more 
apt to deteriorate when exposed to dampness than fuzes for low- 
tension current, and the generating machine is rather clumsy and 
fragile, low-tension current is more generally employed. It may be 
generated by a small, portable dynamo, operated by hand, or may be 
derived from a battery or from any convenient electric circuit. The 
ends of the fuze wires in the detonating cap are connected by a 
fine platinum filament (fig. 11), embedded in a guncotton priming 
on top of the fulminating mixture, and explosion results from the 
heat generated by the resistance opposed to the passage of the 
current through the filament. Blasting machines are made in 
several sizes, the smaller ones being capable of firing simultaneously 
from ten to twenty holes. The fuzes must obviously be of uniform 
electrical resistance, to ensure that all the connected charges will 
explode simultanefously. The premature explosion of any one of the 
fuzes would break the circuit. 

In the actual queries of blasting, definite rules for the pro-
portioning of the charges are rarely observed, and although the blasts 
made by a skilful miner seldom fail to do their work, it is a common 
fault that too much, rather than too little, explosive is used. The 
high explosives are specially liable to be wasted, probably through 
lack of appreciation of their power as compared with that of black 
powder. Among the indications of excessive charges are the pro- 
duction of much finely broken rock or of crushed and splintered rock 
around the bottom of the hole, and excessive displacement or 
projection of the rock broken by the blast. In beginning any new 
piece of work, such waste may be avoided or reduced by making 



4 8 



BLAUBEUREN— BLAYDES 



trial shots with different charges and depths of hole, and noting the 
results; also by letting contracts under which the workmen pay for 
the explosive. In surface rock excavation the location and deter- 
mination of the depth of the holes and the quantity of explosive 
used, are occasionally put in charge of one or more skilled men, 
who direct the work and are responsible for the results obtained. 

Blasting in surface excavations and quarries is sometimes done 
on an immense scale — called " mammoth blasting." Shafts are 
sunk, or tunnels driven, in the mass of rock to be blasted, and, 
connected with them, a number of chambers are excavated to 
receive the charges of explosive. The preparation for such blasts 
may occupy months, and many tons of gunpowder or dynamite 
are at times exploded simultaneously, breaking or dislodging thou- 
sands, or even hundreds of thousands, of tons of rock. This method 
is adopted for getting stone cheaply, as for building macadamized 
roads, dams and breakwaters, obtaining limestone for blast furnace 
flux, and occasionally in excavating large railway cuttings. It is 
also applied in submarine blasting for the removal of reefs obstructing 
navigation, and sometimes for loosening extensive banks of partly 
cemented gold-bearing gravel, preparatory to washing by hydraulic 
mining. 

Authorities. — For further information on drilling and blasting 
see: — Callon, Lectures on Mining (1876), vol. i. chs. v. and vi.; 
Foster, Text-book of Ore and Stone Mining, (1900), ch. iv. ; Hughes, 
Text-book of Coal Mining (1901), ch. iii. ; H. S. Drinker, Tunnelling, 
Explosive Compounds and Rock Drills (1878) ; M. C. Ihlseng, Manual 
of Mining (1905), pp. 596-696; Kohler, Der Bergbaukunde (1897), 
pp. 104-208; Daw, The Blasting of Rock (1898); Prelini, Earth and 
Rock Excavation (1905), chs. v., vi. and vii.; Gillette, The Excavation 
of Rock (1904); Guttmann, Blasting (1892); Spon's Dictionary of 
Engineering, art. "Boring and Blasting"; Eissler, Modern High 
Explosives (1893), pts. ii. and iii.; Walke, Lectures on Explosives 
(1897), chs. xix.-xxii. Also: Proc. Inst. Civ. Eng. (London), 
vol. Ixxxv. p. 264; Trans. Inst. Min. Eng. (England), vols, xiv., xv. 
and xvi. (arts, by VV. Maurice), vol. xxvi. pp. 322, 348, vol. xxiv. 
p. 526 and vol. xxv. p. 108; Trans. Amer. Soc. Civ. Eng., vol. xxvii. 
P- 53°; Trans. Amer. Inst. Min. Eng., vol. xviii. p. 370, vol. xxix 
p. 405 and vol. xxxiv. p. 871; South Wales Inst. Eng. (1888); 
Jour. Ass. Eng. Socs., vol. vii. p. 58; Jour. Chem. Met. and Mining 
Soc. of South Africa, August 1905 ; School of Mines Quarterly, N. Y., 
vol. ix. p. 308; Colliery Guardian, April 15, 1898, and February 6, 
1903; Mines and Minerals, February 1905, p. 348, January 1906, 
p. 259, and April 1906, p. 393; Eng. and Mining Jour., April 19, 
1902, p. 552; The Engineer, February 24, 1905; Elec. Rev., June 9, 
1899; Eng. News, vol. xxxii. p. 249, and August 3, 1905; Gluckauf, 
September 28, 1901, and July 5, 1902; Osterr. Zeitschr. f. Berg- u. 
Huttenwesen, May 18, 25, 1901, April 18, 1903 and November, 18, 
1905; Annales des mines, vol. xviii. pp. 217-248. (R. P.*) 

BLAUBEUREN, a town of Germany, in the kingdom of 
Wiirttemberg, 12 m. W. of Ulm, with which it is connected by- 
railway. Pop. (1900) 31 14. It is romantically situated in a wild 
and deep valley of the Swabian Alps at an altitude of 1600 ft. and 
is partly surrounded by ancient walls. Of the three churches 
(two Evangelical and one Roman Catholic) the most remarkable 
is the abbey church {Klosterkirche) , a late Gothic building dating 
from 1465-1496, the choir of which contains beautiful 15th 
century carved choir-stalls and a fine high altar with a triptych 
(1496) . The choir only is used for service (Protestant) , the nave 
being used as a gymnasium. The town church (Stadtkirche) also 
has a fine altar with triptych. The Benedictine abbey, founded 
in 1095, was used after the Reformation as a school, and is now 
an Evangelical theological seminary. There are two hospitals 
in the town. 

BLAVATSKY, HELENA PETROVNA (1831-1891), Russian 
theosophist, was born at Ekaterinoslav, on the 31st of July (O.S.) 
183 i,the daughter of Colonel Peter Hahn, a member of a Mecklen- 
burg family, settled in Russia. She married in her seventeenth 
year a man very much her senior, Nicephore Blavatsky, a 
Russian official in Caucasia, from whom she was separated after 
a few months; in later days, when seeking to invest herself with 
a halo of virginity, she described the marriage as a nominal one. 
During the next twenty years Mme Blavatsky appears to have 
travelled widely in Canada, Texas, Mexico and India, with two 
attempts on Tibet. In one of these she seems to have crossed 
the frontier alone in disguise, been lost in the desert, and, after 
many adventures, been conducted back by a party of horsemen. 
The years from 1848 to 1858 were alluded to subsequently as "the 
veiled period " of her life, and she spoke vaguely of a seven years' 
sojourn in " Little and Great Tibet," or preferably of a " Hima- 
layan retreat." Ini8s8 she revisited Russia, where she created 
a sensation as a spiritualistic medium. About 1870 she acquired 



prominence among the spiritualists of the United States, where 
she lived for six years, becoming a naturalized citizen. Her 
leisure was occupied with the study of occult and kabbalistic 
literature, to which she soon added that of the sacred writings of 
India, through the medium of translations. In 1875 she conceived 
the plan of combining the spiritualistic " control " with the 
Buddhistic legends about Tibetan sages. Henceforth she 
determined to exclude all control save that of two Tibetan adepts 
or "mahatmas." The mahatmas exhibited their "astral 
bodies " to her, " precipitated " messages which reached her 
from the confines of Tibet in an instant of time, supplied her with 
sound doctrine, and incited her to perform tricks for the con- 
version of sceptics. At New York, on the 17th of November 
1875, with the aid of Colonel Henry S. Olcolt, she founded the 
" Theosophical Society "with the object of (1) forming a universal 
brotherhood of man,(2) studying and making known the ancient 
religions, philosophies and sciences, (3) investigating the laws of 
nature and developing the divine powers latent in man. The 
Brahmanic and Buddhistic literature supplied the society with 
its terminology, and its doctrines were a curious amalgam of 
Egyptian, kabbalistic, occultist, Indian and modern spiritual- 
istic ideas and formulas. Mme Blavatsky's principal books were 
Isis Unveiled (New York, 1877), The Secret Doctrine, the Synthesis 
of Science, Religion and Philosophy (1888), The Key to Theosophy 
(1891). The two first of these are a mosaic of unacknowledged 
quotations from such books as K. R. H. Mackenzie's Royal 
Masonic Encyclopaedia, C. W. King's Gnostics, Zeller's Plato, the 
works on magic by Dunlop, E. Salverte, Joseph Ennemoser, and 
Des Mousseaux, and the- mystical writings of Eliphas Levi (L. A. 
Constant). A Glossary of Theosophical Terms (1890-1892) was 
compiled for the benefit of her disciples. But the appearance of 
Home's Lights and Shadoivs of Spiritualism (1877) had a pre- 
judicial effect upon the propaganda, and Heliona P. Blavatsky 
(as she began to style herself) retired to India. Thence she con- 
tributed some clever papers, " From the Caves and Jungles of 
Hindostan " (published separately in English, London, 1892) to 
the Russky Vyestnik. Defeated in her object of obtaining em- 
ployment in the Russian secret service, she resumed her efforts 
to gain converts to theosophy. For this purpose the exhibition 
of " physical phenomena " was found necessary. Her jugglery 
was cleverly conceived, but on three occasions was exposed 
in the most conclusive manner. Nevertheless, her cleverness, 
volubility, energy and will-power enabled her to maintain her 
ground, and when she died on the 8th of May 1891 (White 
Lotus Day), at the theosophical headquarters in the Avenue 
Road, London, she was the acknowledged head of a community 
numbering not far short of 100,000, with journalistic organs in 
London, Paris, New York and Madras. 

Much information respecting her will be found in V. S. Solovyov's 
Modern Priestess of Isis, translated by Walter Leaf (1895), in Arthur 
Lillie's Madame Blavatsky and Her Theosophy (1895), and in the 
report made to the Society for Psychical Research by the Cambridge 
graduate despatched to investigate her dpings in India. See also 
the article Theosophy. 

BLAYDES, FREDERICK HENRY MARVELL (1818-1908), 
English classical scholar, was born at Hampton Court Green, on 
the 29th of September 1818, being a collateral descendant of 
Andrew Marvell, the satirist and friend of Milton. He was 
educated at St Peter's school, York, and Christ Church, Oxford. 
He was Hertford scholar in 1838, took a second class in literae 
humaniores in 1840, and was subsequently elected to a student- 
ship at Christ Church. In 1842 he took orders, and from 1843 
to 1886 was vicar of Harringworth in Northamptonshire. During 
a long life he devoted himself almost entirely to the study of the 
Greek dramatists. His editions and philological papers are 
remarkable for bold conjectural emendations of corrupt (and 
other) passages. His distinction was recognized by his being 
made an honorary LL.D. of Dublin, Ph.D. of the university of 
Buda Pest and a fellow of the royal society of letters at Athens. 
He died at Southsea on the 7th of September 1908. 

His works include: — Aristophanes: Comedies and Fragments, 
with critical notes and commentary (1880-1893); Clouds, Knights, 
Frogs, Wasps (1873-1878) ; Opera Omnia, with critical notes (1886); 



BLAYDON— BLEACHING 



49 



Sophocles,; Oedipus Coloneus, Oedipus Tyrannus and Antigone (in 
the Bibliotheca Classica, 1859) ; Philoctetes (1870), Trachiniae (1871), 
Eleclra (1873), Ajax (1875), Antigone (1905) ; Aeschylus : Agamemnon 
(1898), Choephori (1899), Eumenides (1900), Adversaria Critica tn 
Comicorum Graecorum Fragmenta (1890); in Tragicorum Craec. 
Frag. (1894), in Aeschylum (1895), in Varios Poetas Graecos et 
Latinos (1898), in Aristophanem (1899), in Sophoclem (1899), * M 
Euripidem (1901), tw Herodotum (1901); Analecta Comica Graeca 
(1905) ; Analecta Tragica Graeca (1906). 

BLAYDON, an urban district in the Chester-le-Street parlia- 
mentary division of Durham, England, on the Tyne, 4 m. W. of 
Newcastle by a branch of the North-Eastern railway. -Pop. ( 1 88 1 ) 
10,687; (1901) 19,617. The chief industries are coal-mining, 
iron-founding, pipe, fire-brick, chemical manure and bottle 
manufactures. In the vicinity is the beautiful old mansion of 
Stella, and below it Stellaheugh, to which the victorious Scottish 
army crossed from Newburn on the Northumberland bank in 
1640, after which they occupied Newcastle. 

BLAYE-ET-STE LUCE, a town of south-western France, 
capital of an arrondissement in the department of Gironde, on 
the right bank of the Gironde (here over 2 m. wide), 35 m. N. of 
Bordeaux by rail. Pop. (1906) of the town, 3423; of the com- 
mune, 4890. The town has a citadel built by Vauban on a rock 
beside the river, and embracing in its enceinte ruins of an old 
Gothic chateau. The latter contains the tomb of Caribert, king 
of Toulouse, and spn of Clotaire II. Blaye is also defended by 
the Fort Pate on an island in the river and the Fort Medoc on its 
left bank, both of the 17th century. The town is the seat of a 
sub-prefect, and has tribunals of first instance and of commerce 
and a communal college. It has a small river-port, and carries 
on trade in wine, brandy, grain, fruit and timber. The industries 
include the building of small vessels, distilling, flour-milling, and 
the manufacture of oil and candles. Fine red wine is produced 
in the district. 

In ancient times Blaye (Blavia) was a port of the Santones. 
Tradition states that the hero Roland was buried in its basilica, 
which was on the site of the citadel. It was early an important 
stronghold which played an important part in the wars against 
the English and the Religious Wars. The duchess of Berry was 
imprisoned in its fortress in 1832-1833. 

BLAZE (A.-S. Maese, a torch), a fire or bright flame; more 
nearly akin to the Ger. Mass, pale or shining white, is the use 
of the word for the white mark on the face of a horse or cow, 
and the American use for a mark made on a tree by cutting off 
a piece of the bark. The word " to blaze," in the sense of to 
noise abroad, comes from the A.-S. blaesan, to blow, cf. the Ger. 
blasen; in sense, if not in origin, it is confused with " blazon " 
in heraldry. 

BLAZON, a heraldic shield, a coat of arms properly " de- 
scribed " according to the rules of heraldry, hence a proper 
heraldic description of such a coat. The O. Fr. Mason seems 
originally to have meant simply a shield as a means of defence 
and not a shield-shaped surface for the display of armorial 
bearings, but this is difficult to reconcile with the generally 
accepted derivation from the Ger. Masen, to blow, proclaim, 
English " blaze," to noise abroad, to declare. In the 16th 
century the heraldic term, and " blaze " and " blazon " in the 
sense of proclaim, had much influence on each other. 

BLEACHING, the process of whitening or depriving objects 
of colour, an operation incessantly in activity in nature by the 
influence of light, air and moisture. The art of bleaching, of 
which we have here to treat, consists in inducing the rapid 
operation of whitening agencies, and as an industry it is mostly 
directed to cotton, linen, silk, wool and other textile fibres, but 
it is also applied to the whitening of paper-pulp, bees'-wax and 
some oils and other substances. The term bleaching is derived 
from the A.-S. blaecan, to bleach, or to fade, from which also 
comes the cognate German word bleichen, to whiten or render 
pale. Bleachers, down to the end of the 18th century, were 
known in England as " whitsters," a name obviously derived 
from the nature of their calling. 

The operation of bleaching must from its very nature be of 
the same antiquity as the work of washing textures of linen, 



cotton or other vegetable fibres. Clothing repeatedly washed, 
and exposed in the open air to dry, gradually assumes a whiter 
and whiter hue, and our ancestors cannot have failed to notice 
and take advantage of this fact. Scarcely anything is known 
with certainty of the art of bleaching as practised by the nations 
of antiquity. Egypt in early ages was the great centre of textile 
manufactures, and her white and coloured linens were in high 
repute among contemporary nations. As a uniformly well- 
bleached basis is necessary for the production of a satisfactory 
dye on cloth, it may be assumed that the Egyptians were fairly 
proficient in bleaching, and that still more so were the Phoe- 
nicians with their brilliant and famous purple dyes. We learn, 
from Pliny, that different plants, and likewise the ashes of plants, 
which no doubt contained alkali, were employed as detergents. 
He . mentions particularly the Struthium as much used for 
bleaching in Greece, a plant which has been identified by some 
with Gypsophila Struthium. But as it does not appear from 
John Sibthorp's Flora Graeca, edited by Sir James Smith, that 
this species is a native of Greece, Dr Sibthorp's conjecture that 
the Struthium of the ancients was the Saponaria officinalis, a 
plant common in Greece, is certainly more probable. 

In modern times, down to the middle of the 18th century, 
the Dutch possessed almost a monopoly of the bleaching trade 
although we find mention of bleach-works at Southwark near 
London as early as the middle of the 17th century. It was 
customary to send all the brown linen, then largely manufactured 
in Scotland, to Holland to be bleached. It was sent away in the 
month of March, and not returned till the end of October, being 
thus out of the hands of the merchant more than half a year. 

The Dutch mode of bleaching, which was mostly conducted 
in the neighbourhood of Haarlem, was to steep the linen first 
in a waste lye, and then for about a week in a potash lye poured 
over it boiling hot. The cloth being taken out of this lye and 
washed, was next put into wooden vessels containing butter- 
milk, in which it lay under a pressure for five or six days. After 
this\,it was spread upon the grass, and kept wet for several 
months, exposed to the sunshine of summer. 

In 1728 James Adair from Belfast proposed to the Scottish 
Board of Manufactures to establish a bleachfield in Galloway; 
this proposal the board approved of, and in the same year re- 
solved to devote £2900 as premiums for the establishment of 
bleachfields throughout the country. In 1732 a method of 
bleaching with kelp, introduced-by R. Holden, also from Ireland, 
was submitted to the board; and with their assistance Holden 
established a bleachfield for prosecuting his process at Pitkerro, 
near Dundee. 

The bleaching process, as at that time performed, was very 
tedious, occupying a complete summer. It consisted in steeping 
the cloth in alkaline lyes for several days, washing it clean, 
and spreading it upon the grass for some weeks. The steeping 
in alkaline lyes, called bucking, and the bleaching on the grass, 
called crofting, were repeated alternately for five or six times. 
The cloth was then steeped for some days in sour milk, washed 
clean and crofted. These processes were repeated, diminishing 
every time the strength of the alkaline lye, till the linen had 
acquired the requisite whiteness. 

For the first improvement in this tedious process, which was 
faithfully copied from the Dutch bleachfields, manufacturers 
were indebted to Dr Francis Home of Edinburgh, to whom the 
Board of Trustees paid £100 for his experiments in bleaching. 
He proposed to substitute water acidulated with sulphuric acid 
for the sour milk previously employed, a suggestion made in 
consequence of the new mode of preparing sulphuric acid, con- 
trived some time before by Dr John Roebuck, which reduced 
the price of that acid to less than one-third of what it had 
formerly been. When this change was first adopted by x the 
bleachers, there was the same outcry against its corrosive effects 
as arose when chlorine was substituted for crofting. A great 
advantage was found to result from the use of sulphuric acid, 
which was that a souring with sulphuric acid required at the 
longest only twenty-four hours, and often not more than twelve; 
whereas, when sour milk was employed, six weeks, or even two 



50 



BLEACHING 



months, were requisite, according to the state of the weather. 
In consequence of this. improvement, the process of bleaching 
was shortened from eight months to four, which enabled the 
merchant to dispose of his goods so much the sooner, and conse- 
quently to trade with less capital. 

No further modification of consequence was introduced in 
the art till the year 1787, when a most important change was 
initiated by the use of chlorine (q.v.), an element which had been 
discovered by C. W. Scheele in Sweden about thirteen years 
before. The discovery that this gas possesses the property of 
destroying vegetable colours, led Berthollet to suspect that it 
might be introduced with advantage into the art of bleaching, and 
that it would enable practical bleachers greatly to shorten their 
processes. In a paper on chlorine or oxygenated muriatic 
acid, read before the Academy of Sciences at Paris in April 
1785, and published in the Journal de Physique for May of the 
same year (vol. xxvi. p. 325), he mentions that he had tried the 
effect of the gas in bleaching cloth, and found that it answered 
perfectly. This idea is still further developed in a paper on the 
same substance, published in the Journal de Physique for 1786. 
In 1786 he exhibited the experiment to James Watt; who, 
immediately upon his return to England, commenced a practical 
examination of the subject, and was accordingly the person 
who first introduced the new method of bleaching into Great 
Britain. We find from Watt's own testimony that chlorine was 
practically employed in the bleachfield of his father-in-law, 
Mr Macgregor, in the neighbourhood of Glasgow, in March 1787. 
Shortly thereafter the method was introduced at Aberdeen by 
Messrs Gordon, Barron & Co., on information received from 
De Saussure through Professor Patrick Copland of Aberdeen. 
Thomas Henry of Manchester was the first to bleach with chlorine 
in the Lancashire district, and to his independent investigations 
several of the early improvements in the application of the 
material were due. 

In these early experiments, the bleacher had to make his own 
chlorine and the goods were bleached either by exposing them 
in chambers to the action of the gas or by steeping them in its 
aqueous solution. If we consider the inconveniences which must 
have arisen in working with such a pungent substance as free 
chlorine, with its detrimental effect on the health of the work- 
people, it will be readily understood that the process did not at 
first meet with any great amount of success. The first important 
improvement was the introduction in 1792 of eau de Javel, 
which was prepared at the Javel works near Paris by absorbing 
chlorine in a solution of potash (1 part) in water (8 parts) until 
effervescence began. The greatest impetus to the bleaching 
industry was, however, given by the introduction in 1799 of 
chloride of lime, or bleaching-powder, by Charles Tennant of 
Glasgow, whereby the bleacher was supplied with a reagent in 
solid form which contained up to one-third of its weight of avail- 
able chlorine. Latterly frequent attempts have been made to 
replace bleaching-powder by hypochlorite of soda, which is 
prepared by the bleacher as re'quired, by the electrolytic decom- 
position of a solution of common salt in specially constructed 
cells, but up to the present this mode of procedure has met with 
only a limited success (see Alkali Manufacture). 

Bleaching of Cotton. 

Cotton is bleached in the raw state, as yarn and in the piece. 
In the raw state, and as yarn, the only impurities present are 
those which are naturally contained in the fibres and which 
include cotton wax, fatty acids, pectic substances, colouring 
matters, albuminoids and mineral matter, amounting in all to 
some s % of the weight of the material. Both in the raw state 
and in the manufactured condition cotton also contains small 
black particles which adhere firmly to the material and are 
technically known as " motes." These consist of fragments of 
the cotton seed husk, which cannot be completely removed by 
mechanical means. The bleaching of cotton pieces is more 
complicated, since the bleacher is called upon to remove the 
sizing materials with which the manufacturer strengthens the 
warp before weaving (see below). 



In principle, the bleaching of cotton is a comparatively simple 
process in which three main queries are involved, viz. (1)
boiling with an alkali; (2) bleaching the organic colouring matters 
by means of a hypochlorite or some other oxidizing agent; 
(3) souring, i.e. treating with weak hydrochloric or sulphuric 
acid. For loose cotton and yarn these three queries are
sufficient, but for piece goods a larger number of queries is
usually necessary in order to obtain a satisfactory result. 

Loose Cotton.— The bleaching of loose or raw cotton previous to 
spinning is only carried out to a very limited extent, and consists' 
essentially in* first steeping the' material in a warm solution of soda 
for some hours, after which it is washed and treated with a solution 
of bleaching powder or sodium hypochlorite. It is then . again 
washed, soured with weak sulphuric or hydrochloric acid, and 
ultimately washed free from acid. Careful treatment is necessary 
in order to avoid any undue matting of the fibres, while any drastic 
treatment, such as heating with caustic soda and soap, as used for 
other cotton materials, cannot be employed, since the natural wax. 
would thereby be removed, and this would detract from the spinning 
qualities of the fibre. In case the cotton is not intended to be spun, 
but is to serve for cotton wool or for the manufacture of gun cotton, 
more drastic treatment can be employed, and is, in fact, desirable. 
Thus, cotton waste is first extracted with petroleum spirit or some 
other suitable solvent, in order to remove any mineral oil or grease 
which may be present. It is then boiled with dilute caustic soda 
and resin soap, washed, bleached white with bleaching-powder,' 
washed, soured and finally washed free from acid. In these opera- 
tions, a certain amount of matting is unavoidable, and it is conse- 
quently necessary to open out the material after drying, ih 
scutchers. 

Cotton Yarn.— Cotton yarn is bleached in the form of cops, hanks 
or warps. In principle the processes employed are the same in each, 
case, but the machinery necessarily differs. Most yarn is bleached 
in the hank, and it will suffice to give an account of this process 
only, The sequence of queries is the same as in the bleaching of
cotton waste, and these can be conducted for small lots in an ordinary 
rectangular wooden vat as used in dyeing, in which the yarn is 
suspended in the liquor from poles which rest with their ends on 
the two longer sides of the vat. For bleaching yarn in bulk, however, 
this mode of procedure would involve so much manual labour that 
the process would become too expensive. It is, therefore, mainly" 
with the object of economy that machinery has been introduced, 
by means of which large quantities can be dealt with at a time. 

The first operation, viz. that of boiling in alkali, is carried out in 
a " kier," a large, egg-ended, upright cylindrical vessel, constructed 
of boiler-plate and capable of treating, from one to three tons of yarn 
at a time. In construction, the kiers used for yarn bleaching are 
similar in construction to those used for pieces (see below). The 
yarn to be bleached is evenly packed in the kier, and is then boiled 
by means of steam with the alkaline lye (3-4 % of soda ash or 2 % 
caustic soda on the weight of the cotton being usually employed) 
for periods varying from six to twelve hours. It is essential that a 
thorough circulation of the liquor should be maintained during the 
boiling, and this is effected either by means of a steam injector, or 
in other ways. As a rule low pressure kiers (working up to 10 lb 
pressure) are employed for yarn bleaching, though some bleachers 
prefer to use high pressure kiers for the purpose. 

When the boiling has continued for the requisite time (6-8 hours), 
the steam is shut off, and the kier liquor blown off, when the yarn is 
washed in the kier by filling the latter with water and then running 
off, this operation being repeated two or three times. The hanks are, 
now transferred to a stone cistern provided with a false bottom, 
from beneath which a pipe connects the cistern with a well situated 
below the floor line. The well contains a solution of bleaching- 
powder, usually of 2° Tw. strength, and this is drawn up by means 
of a centrifugal brass pump and showered over the top of the goods 
through a perforated wooden tray, passing then by gravitation 
through the goods back into the well. The circulation is maintained 
for one and a half to two hours, when the yarn will be found to be 
white. The bleaching-powder solution is now allowed to drain off, 
and water is circulated through the cistern to wash out what bleach- 
ing powder remains in the goods. The souring is next carried out 
either in the same or in a separate cistern by circulating hydrochloric 
or sulphuric acid of 2° Tw. for about half an hour. This is also 
allowed to drain, and the yarn is thoroughly washed to remove all 
acid, when it is taken out and wrung or hydroextracted. At this 
stage the yarn may be dyed in light or bright shades without further 
treatment, but if it is to be sold as white yarn, it is blued. The 
blueing may either be effected by dyeing or tinting with a colouring 
matter like Victoria blue 4R or acid violet, or by treatment in wash 
stocks with a suspension of ultramarine in weak soap until the colour 
is uniformly distributed throughout the material. The yarn is now 
straightened out and dried. 

The bleaching of cotton yarn is a very straightforward process, 
and it is very seldom that either complications or faults arise, 
providing that reasonable care and supervision are exercised. 

The raison d'etre of the various queries is comparatively simple.



BLEACHING 



Si 



The effect of boiling with alkali is to remove the pectic acid, the fatty 
acids, part of the cotton wax and the bulk of the colouring matter, 
while the albuminoids are destroyed and the motes swelled up. If 
soap be used along with the alkali, the whole of the wax is removed 
by emulsification. In the operation of bleaching proper, the calcium 
hypochlorite of the chloride of lime through coming into contact 
with the carbonic acid of the atmosphere suffers decomposition 
according to the equation, Ca(OCl) 2 +C0 2 +H 2 0->CaC0 3 +2HOCl, 
and the hypochlorous acid thus liberated destroys the colouring 
matter still remaining from the first operation, by oxidation. At 
the same time the motes which were swelled up by the alkali are 
broken up into small fragments and are thus removed. In the 
operation of souring, the lime which has been deposited on the 
fibres during the treatment with bleaching powder is dissolved, 
while at the same time any other metallic oxides (iron, copper, 
&c.) are removed. 

Cotton Pieces. — By far the largest bulk of cotton is bleached in 
the piece, as it can be more conveniently and more economically , 
dealt with in this form than in any other. Though similar in prin- 
ciple to yarn bleaching, the process of piece bleaching is somewhat 
more complex because the pieces contain in addition to the natural 
impurities of the cotton a considerable amount of foreign matter 
in the form of size which has been incorporated with the warp before 
weaving, with the object of strengthening it. This size consists 
essentially of starch (farina), with additions of tallow, zinc chloride, 
and occasionally other substances such as paraffin wax, magnesium 
chloride, soap, &c, all of which .must be removed if a perfect bleach 
is to result. Besides, mineral oil stains from the machinery of the 
weaving-shed are of common occurrence in piece goods. 

Cotton pieces are bleached either for whites, for prints or for dyed 
goods. The processes employed for these different classes vary but 
slightly and only in detail. The most drastic bleach is that required 
for goods which are subsequently to be printed. For dyed goods, 
the main object is not so much to obtain a perfect white as to remove 
any impurities which might interfere with the dyeing, while avoiding 
the formation of any oxycellulose. In bleaching for whites (" market 
bleaching ") it is essential that the white should be as perfect as 
possible, and such goods are consequently invariably blued after 
bleaching. 

For small lots (1-20 pieces) the bleaching can be conducted on 
very simple machinery. Thus many small piece dyers conduct the 
whole of their bleaching on the jigger, a simple form of dyeing 
machine on which most cotton piece goods are dyed (see Dyeing). 
For muslins, laces and other very light fabrics, which will not stand 
rough handling, the queries are conducted mainly by hand,
washing being effected in the dash-wheel (fig. 1), which consists of a 

cylindrical box, revolv- 
ing on its axis. It has 
four divisions, as shown 
by the dotted lines, and 
an opening into each 
division. A number of 
pieces are put into 
each, abundance of 
water is admitted be- 
hind, and the knocking 
of the pieces as they 
alternately dash from 
one side of the division 
to the other during the 
revolution of the wheel 
effects the washing. 
The process lasts from 
four to six minutes. 
For velveteens, cor- 
duroys, heavy drills, pocketings and other fabrics in which creasing 
has to be avoided as much as possible, the so-called " open bleach " 
is resorted to, which differs from the ordinary process chiefly in that 
the goods are treated throughout at full width. 

The great bulk of cotton pieces is bleached in rope form, i.e. 
stitched together end to end and laterally collapsed, so that they 
will pass through a ring of 4 to 5 in. in diameter. 

The first operation which the goods undergo on arriving in the 
grey-room of the bleachworks is that of stamping with tar or some 
other indelible material in order that they may be identified after 
passing through the whole process. They are then stitched together 
end to end by means of special sewing machines, the stitch being of 
such a nature (chain stitch) that the thread can be ripped out at one 
pull at the end of the queries.

Singeing. — In the condition in which the pieces leave the loom 
and come into the hands of the bleacher, the surface of the fabric 
is seen to be covered with a nap of projecting fibres which gives it a 
downy appearance. For some classes of goods this is not a dis- 
advantage, but in the majority of cases, especially for prints where 
a clean surface is essential, the nap is removed before bleaching. 
This is usually effected by running the pieces at full width over a 
couple of, arched copper plates heated to a full red heat by direct 
fire. An arrangement of the kind is shown in fig. 2, in which the 
singe-plates, o and b, are mounted over the flues of a coal fire. The 
plate 6 is most highly heated, a being at the end of the flue farthest 




Fig. 1. — Section of a Dash -wheel. 



removed from the fire. The cloth enters over a rail A, and in passing 
over the plate a is thoroughly dried and prepared for the singeing 
it receives when it comes to the highly-heated plate b. A block d, 
carrying two rails in the space between the plates, can be raised or 
loweredso as to increase or lessen the pressure of the cloth against 
the plates, or, if necessary, to lift it quite free of contact with them. 
The pieces on leaving the singeing machine are passed either 
through a water trough or through a steam box with the object of 
extinguishing sparks, and are then plaited down. The speed at 




Fig. 2. — Section of Singe-stove. 

which the pieces travel over the singe plates is necessarily considerable 
and varies with different classes of material. 1 

In lieu of plates, a cast-iron cylinder is sometimes employed 
( ' roller singeing "), the heating being effected by causing the flame 
of the fire to be drawn through the roller, which is carried on two 
small rollers, at each end and revolves slowly in the reverse direction 
to that followed by the piece, thus exposing continuously a freshly 
heated surface and avoiding uneven cooling. 

For figured pieces which have an uneven surface, it is obvious 
that plate or roller singeing would only affect the portions which 
project most, leaving the rest untouched. For such goods, " gas 
singeing " is employed, which consists in running the pieces over a 
non-luminous gas flame, the breadth of which slightly exceeds that of 
the piece, or in drawing the flame right through the piece. 2 The 
construction of an ordinary gas singeing apparatus is seen in section 
in rig- 3- Coal gas mixed with air is sent under pressure through 
pipe a ino the burners b, b, where the mixture burns with an intense 
heat. The cloth travels in the direction of the arrows, and in 
passing over the 
small nap rollers c 
comes into contact 
with the flame four 
times in succession 
before leaving the 
machjne. 

Gas singeing is 
also used for plain 
goods, and being 
cleaner and under 
better control has 
largely replaced 
plate singeing. 

At this stage the 
goods which have 
been browned on 
the surface by singeing are ready for the bleaching queries. A
great many innovations have been introduced in recent years in 
the bleaching of calico, but although it is generally admitted that 
in point of view of time and economy many of these processes 
offer considerable advantages, the old process, in which a lime boil 
precedes the other queries, is still the one which is most largely
employed by bleachers in England. In this, the sequence of 
queries is the following — ■

_ Grey Washing. — This operation (which is sometimes omitted) 
simply consists in running the pieces through an ordinary washing 
machine (as shown in fig. 5) through water in order to wet them out. 
On leaving the machine they are piled in a heap and left over night, 
when fermentation sets in, which results in the starch being to a 
large extent hydrolysed and rendered soluble in water. 

Lime Boil. — In this operation, which is also known as bowking 
(Ger. beuchen), the pieces are first run through milk of lime 
contained in an ordinary washing machine and of such a strength 

1 Besides being used for cotton goods, plate singeing is also em- 
ployed for certain classes of worsted goods (alpacas, bunting, &c), 
and for most union. goods (cotton warp and worsted weft). 

2 A machine working on this principle has been constructed by 
F. Binder, and the makers of the machine (Messrs Mather & Piatt, 
Ltd.) claim that it does better service than the machines constructed 
on the older principle. 




Fig. 3. — Gas Singeing Apparatus. 



52 



BLEACHING 



that they take up about 4% of their weight of lime (CaO). They 
are then run over winches and guided through smooth porcelain 
rings (" pot-eyes ") into the kier, where they are evenly packed by 
boys who enter the vessel through the manhole at the top. It is 
of the greatest importance that the goods should be evenly packed, 
for, if channels or loosely-packed places are left, the liquor circulating 
through the kier, when boiling is subsequently in progress, will 
follow the line of least resistance, and the result is an uneven treat- 
ment. Of the numerous forms of kier in use, the injector kier is 
the one most generally adopted. This consists of an egg-ended 
cylindrical vessel constructed of stout boiler plate and shown in 
sectional elevation in fig. 4. The kier is from 10 to 12 ft. in height 
and from 6 to 7 ft. in diameter, and stands on three iron legs riveted 
to the sides, but not shown in the figure. The bottom exit pipe E 
is covered with a shield-shaped false bottom of boiler plate, or (and 
this is more usual) the whole bottom of the kier is covered with large 
rounded stones from the river bed, the object in either case being 
simply to provide space for the accumulation of liquor and to prevent 
the pipe E being blocked. The cloth is evenly packed up to within 
about 3 to 4 ft. of the manholes M, when lime water is run in through 
the liquor pipe until the level of the liquid reaches within about 2 ft. 
of the top of the goods. The manholes are now closed, and steam 
is turned on at the injector J by opening the valve v. The effect 
of this is to suck the liquor through E, and to force it up through 
pipe P into the top of the kier, where it dashes against the umbrella- 
shaped shield U and is distributed over the pieces, through which 
it percolates, until on arriving at E it is again carried to the top of 
the kier, a continuous circulation being thus effected. As the 
circulation proceeds, the steam condensing in the liquor rapidly 
heats the latter to the boil, and as soon as, in the opinion of the fore- 
man, all air has been expelled, the blow-through tap is closed and 
the boiling is continued for periods varying from six to twelve 
hours under 20-60 lb pressure. Steam is now turned off, and by 
opening the valve V the liquor, which is of a dark-brown colour, is 
forced out by the pressure of the steam it contains. 

The pieces are now run through a continuous washing machine, 
which is provided with a plentiful supply of water. The machine, 




___-__— Floor Level 

Fig. 4. — High Pressure Blow-through Kier. 

which is shown in fig. 5, consists essentially of a wooden vat, over 
which there is a pair of heavy wooden (sycamore) bowls or squeezers. 
The pieces enter the machine at each end, as indicated by the arrows, 
and pass rapidly through the bowls down to the bottom of the vat 
over a loose roller, thence between the first pair of guide pegs through 
the bowls again, and travel thus in a spiral direction until they arrive 
at the middle of the machine, when they leave at the side opposite 
to that on which they entered. The same type of machine is used 
for liming, chemicking, and souring. 



The next operation is the " grey sour," in which the goods are 
run through a washing machine containing hydrochloric acid of 
2° Tw. strength, with the object of dissolving out the lime which 
the goods retain in considerable quantity after the lime boil. The 
goods are then well washed, and are now boiled again in the ash 
bowking kier, which is similar in construction to the lime kier, with 
soda ash (3%) and a solution of rosin (i|%) in caustic soda (ij%) 




Fig. 5. — Roller Washing Machine. 

for eight to ten hours. For white bleaching the rosin soap is omitted, 
soda ash alone being employed. 

The pieces are now washed free from alkali and the bleaching 
proper or "chemicking" follows. This operation may be effected 
in various ways, but the most efficient is to run the goods in a wash- 
ing machine through bleaching powder solution at j°-i° Tw., 
and allow them to lie loosely piled over night, or in some cases for 
a longer period. They are now washed, run through dilute sulphuric 
or hydrochloric acid at 2° Tw. (" white sour ") and washed again. 
Should the white not appear satisfactory at this stage (and this is 
usually the case with very heavy or dense materials) , they are boiled 
again in soda ash, chemicked with bleaching powder at |° Tw. or 
even weaker, soured and washed. It is of the utmost importance 
that the final washing should be as thorough as possible, in order 
to completely remove the acid, for if only small quantities of the 
latter are left in the goods, they are liable to become tender in the 
subsequent drying, through formation of hydrocellulose. 

The modern processes of bleaching cotton pieces differ from the 
one described above, chiefly in that the lime boil is entirely dispensed 
with, its place being taken by a treatment in the kier with caustic 
soda (or a mixture of caustic soda and soda ash) and resin soap. 
The best known and probably the most widely practised of these 
processes is one which was worked out by the late M. Horace 
Koechlin in conjunction with Sir William Mather, and this differs 
from the old process not only in the sequence of the queries but
also in the construction of the kier. This consists of a horizontal 
egg-ended cylinder, and is shown in transverse and longitudinal 
sections in figs. 6 and 7. One of the ends E constitutes a door 
which can be raised or lowered by means of the power-driven chain 
C. , The goods to be bleached are packed in wagons W outside the 
kier, and when filled these are pushed home into the kier, so that the 
pipes p fit with their flanges on to the fixed pipes at the bottom of 
the kier. The heating is effected by means of steam pipes at the 
lowest extremity of the kier, while the circulation of the liquor is 
brought about by means of the centrifugal pump P, which draws 
the liquor through the pipes p from beneath the false bottoms of the 
wagons and showers it over distributors D on to the goods. By 
this mode of working a considerable economy is effected in point of 
time, as the kier can be worked almost continuously; for as soon 
as one lot of goods has been boiled, the wagons are run out and two 
freshly-packed wagons take their place. The following is the 
sequence of queries: — The goods are first steeped over night in



BLEACHING 



53 



dilute sulphuric acid, after which they are washed and run through 
old kier liquor from a previous operation. They are then packed 
evenly in the wagons which are pushed into the kier, and, the door 
having been closed, they are boiled for about eight hours at 7-15 lb 
pressure with a liquor containing soda ash, caustic soda, resin soap 
and a small quantity of sulphite of soda. The rest of the queries
(chemicking, souring and washing) are the same as in the old process. 
A somewhat different principle is involved in the Thies-Herzig 
process. In this the kier is vertical, and the circulation of the liquor 
is effected by means of a centrifugal or other form of pump, while the 
heating of the liquor is brought about outside the kier in a separate 




The machine consists essentially of a series of copper or tinned iron 
cylinders, which are geared together so as to run at a uniform 
speed. Steam at 10-15 lb pressure is admitted through the iournalled 
bearings at one side of the machine, and the condensed water is 
forced out continuously through the bearings at the other side. 
The pieces pass in the direction of the arrow (fig. 9) over a scrimp 
rail or expanding roller round the first cylinder, then in a zigzag 
direction over all succeeding cylinders, and ultimately leave the 
machine dry, being mechanically plaited down at the other end. 

If the bleaching process has been properly conducted, the pieces 
should not only show a uniform pure white colour, but their strength 
should remain unimpaired. Careful experiments conducted by the 
late Mr Charles O'Neill showed in fact that carefully bleached cotton 
may actually be stronger than in the unbleached condition, and 
this result has since been corroborated by others. Excessive blueing, 
which is frequently resorted to in order to cover the defects of 
imperfect bleaching, can readily be detected by washing a sample of 
the material in water, or, better still, in water containing a little 
ammonia, and then comparing with the original. The formation of 
oxycellulose during the bleaching process may either take place in 
bojling under pressure with lime or caustic soda in consequence of 
the presence of air in the kier, or through excessive action of bleaching 
powder, which may either result from the latter not being properly 
dissolved or being used too strong. Its detection may be effected by 

dyeing a sample of the bleached 
cotton in a cold, very dilute 
solution of methylene blue for 
about ten minutes, when any 
portions of the fabric in which 
the cellulose has been con- 
verted into oxycellulose will 
assume a darker colour than 
the rest. The depth of the 
colour is at the same time an 
indication of the extent to 
which such conversion has taken 
place. Most bleached cotton 
contains some oxycellulose, but 
as long as the formation has not 
proceeded far enough to cause 
tendering, its presence is of no 
importance in white goods. If, 
on the other hand, the cotton 
has to be subsequently dyed 
with direct cotton colours 
(see Dyeing), the presence of 
oxycellulose may result in un- 
even dyeing. Tendering of the 
pieces, due to insufficient wash- 
ing after the final souring 
operation, is a common defect in 
bleached goods. As a rule the 
free acid can be detected by 
extracting the tendered material 
with distilled water and adding 
to the extract a drop of methyl 
orange solution, when the latter 
will turn pink if free acid be 
present. Other defects which 
may occur in bleached goods are 
iron stains, mineral oil stains, 
and defects due to the addition 
of paraffin wax in the size. 



Fig. 7. — The Mather Kier, longitudinal section. 

vessel between the pump and the kier by means of indirect steam. 
The sequence of queries is similar to that adopted in the Mather-
Koechlin process, differing chiefly from the latter in the first opera- 
tion, which consists in running the goods, after singeing, through 
very dilute boiling sulphuric or hydrochloric acid, containing in 
either case a small proportion of hydrofluoric acid, and then running 
them through a steam box, the whole operation lasting from twenty 
to sixty seconds. 

Bleached by any of the above processes, the cloth is next passed 
over a mechanical contrivance known as a " scutcher," which opens 
it out from the rope form to its full breadth, and is then dried on a 
continuous drying machine. Fig. 8 shows the appearance and 
construction of an improved form of the horizontal drying machine, 
which is in more common use for piece goods than the vertical form. 



Bleaching of Linen. 
The bleaching of linen is 
a much more complicated 
and tedious process than the 
bleaching of cotton. This is 
due in part to the fact that in 
linen the impurities amount to 
20% or more of the weight of 
the fibre, whereas in cotton 
they do not usually exceed 5%. Furthermore these im- 
purities, which include colouring matter, intracellular sub- 
stances and a peculiar wax known as "flax wax," are more 
difficult to attack than those which are present in cotton, and 
the difficulty is still further enhanced in the case of piece 
goods owing to their dense or impervious character. 

Till towards the end of the 18th century the bleaching of linen 
both in the north of Ireland and in Scotland was accomplished 
by bowking in cows' dung and souring with sour milk, the pieces 
being exposed to light on the grass between these queries for
prolonged periods. Subsequently potash and later on soda 



54 



BLEACHING 



was substituted for the cows' dmig, while sour milk was replaced 
by sulphuric acid. This " natural bleach " is still in use in 
Holland, a higher price being paid for linen bleached in thisway 
than for the same material bleached with the aid of bleaching 
powder. In the year 1744 Dr James Ferguson of Belfast received 
a premium of £300 from the Irish Linen Board for the application 
of lime in the bleaching of linen. Notwithstanding this reward, 




Fig. 8.— Mather & Piatt's Horizontal Drying Machine. 



the use of lime in the bleaching of linen was for a long time- 
afterwards forbidden in Ireland under statutory penalties, and so 
late as 1815 Mr Barklie, a respectable'; linen bleacher of Linen 
Vale, near Keady, was " prosecuted for using lime in the whiten- 
ing of linens in his bleachyard." 

The methods at present employed fof the bleaching of linen 
are, except in one or two unimportant particulars, the same as 
were used in the middle of the 19th century. In principle they 
resemble those used in cotton bleaching; but require to be fre- 
quently repeated, while an additional operation, 'which is a relic 
of the old-fashioned process, viz. that of '■ "grassing" or "croft- 
ing," is still essential for the production of the finest whites. 
Considerably more care has to be exercised in linen bleaching 
than is the case with cotton, and the process consequently 
necessitates a greater amount of manual labour. The practical 
result of this is that whereas cotton pieces can be bleached and 
finished in less than a week, linen pieces require at least six weeks. 
Many attempts have naturally been made to shorten and cheapen 
the process, but without success. The use of stronger reagents 
and more drastic treatment, which would at first suggest itself, 
incurs the risk of injury to the fibre, not so much in respect to 
actual tendering as to the destruction of its characteristic gloss, 
while if too drastic a treatment is employed at the beginning 
the colouring matter is liable to become set in the fibre, and it is 
then almost impossible to remove it. Among the many modern 
improvements which have been suggested, mention may be made 
of the use of hypochlorite of soda in place of bleaching powder, 
the use of oil in the first treatment in alkali (Cross & Parkes), 
while de Keukelaere suggests the use of sodium sulphide for 
this purpose. With the object of dispensing with the operation 
of grassing, which besides necessitating much manual labour 
is subject to the influences of the atmospheric conditions, Siemens 
& Halske of Berlin have suggested exposure of the goods in a 
chamber to the action of electrolytically prepared ozone. ^ Jardin 
seeks to achieve the same object by steeping the linen in dilute 
nitric acid. 



Since the qualities of linen which are submitted to the bleacher 
vary considerably, and the mode of treatment has to be varied 
accordingly, it is not possible to give more than a bare outline 
of linen bleaching. 

Linen is bleached in the yarn and in the piece. Whenever one 
of the queries is repeated, the strength of the reagent is
successively diminished. In yarn-bleaching the sequence of the 
queries is about as follows:— (1)
Boil in kier with soda ash. (2) Reel 
in bleaching powder. This operation, 
which is peculiar to linen bleaching, 
consists in suspending the hanks from 
a square roller into bleaching powder 
solution contained in a shallow stone 
trough. The roller revolves slowly, so 
that the hanks, while passing continu- 
ously through the bleaching powder, 
are for the greater part of the time 
being exposed to the air. , (3) Sour in 
sulphuric acid. (4) Scald in soda ash. 
(The term " scalding " means boiling 
in a kier.) (5) Reel in bleaching pow- 
der. (6) Sour in sulphuric acid. (7) 
Scald in soda ash. (8) Dip, i.e. steep 
in bleaching powder. (9) Sour in 
sulphuric acid. (10) Scald in soda ash. 
(n) Dip in bleaching powder. (12) 
Sour in sulphuric acid. For a full 
white, two more queries are usually
required, viz. (13) scald in soda ash, 
and (14) dip in bleaching powder. 
Washing intervenes between all these 
queries.

Pieces are not stamped as in the 
case oi, cotton, but thread-marked by 
hand with cotton dyed Turkey red. 
They are then sewn together end to 
end, and subjected to the following 
queries :—

Boil with lime in kier. 
The pieces are now separated and 
made up into bundles (except in the 
case of very light linens, which may 
pass through the whole of the queries in rope form) and soured
with sulphuric acid. 

First lye boil with soda ash and caustic soda. - 
Second lye boil. For some classes of goods no less than six lye 
boils may be required. 

Grass between lye boils (according to their number). 
! Rub with rubbing boards. This is also a speciality in linen 
bleaching, and consists of a mechanical treatment with soft soap, 
the object of which is to remove black stains in the yarn. » 
Bleach with hypochlorite of soda. 

Scald. The two latter treatments are repeated three to five times, 
each series constituting a " turn." Grassing intervenes between 
each turn, and in some instances the pieces are rubbed before the 
last soda boil. 

The pieces are next steeped in large vessels (kiers) in weak hypo- 




FlG. 9.— Diagram showing the Horizontal Drying Machine 
threaded with Cloth. 

chlorite of soda, and then in weak sulphuric acid, these treatments 
being repeated several times. 
Ultimately the goods are mill- washed, blued with smalt and dried. 

Bleaching of other Vegetable Textile Fabrics. 
Hemp may be bleached by a process similar to that used for 
linen, but this is seldom done owing to the expense entailed. 
China grass is bleached like cotton. Jute contains in its raw 
state a considerable amount of colouring matter and intracellular 
substance. Since the individual fibres are very shortj the 



BLEAK 



55 



complete removal of .the latter would be attended by a disin- 
tegration of the material. Although it is possible to bleach jute 
white; this'is seldom if ever carried out on a la,rge scale owing' 
to the great expense involved. ' A half -bleach on jute is obtained 
by steeping the goods alternately in bleaching powder (or hypo- 
chlorite of soda) and sulphuric acid, washing intervening. For 
a cream these treatments are repeated. 

Bleaching of Straw. 
■■■ In the Luton district, straw is bleached principally in the form 
of plait, in which form it is imported. The bleaching is effected 
by steeping the straw for periods varying from twelve hours to 
several days in fairly strong alkaline peroxide of hydrogen. 
The number of baths depends upon the quality of straw and the 
degree of whiteness required. Good whites are thus obtained, 
aijd no further process would be necessary if the hats had not 
subsequently to be "blocked" or pressed at a high temperature 
which brings about a deterioration of the colour. After 
bleaching with peroxide and drying, the straw consequently 
undergoes a further process of sulphuring, i.e. exposure to gaseous 
sulphurous acid. Panama hats are bleached after making up, 
but in this case only peroxide of hydrogen is used and a very 
lengthy treatment entailing sometimes fourteen days' steeping 
is required. 

Bleaching of Wool. 
■ In the Condition in which it is delivered to the manufacturers 
wool is generally a very impure article, even if it has been washed 
on the sheep's back before shearing. The impurities which it 
contains consist in the main of the natural grease (in reality 
a kind of wax) exuded from the skin of the sheep and technically 
known as the " yolk," the dried-up perspiration from the body 
of the sheep, technically called " suint," and dust, dirt, burrs, 
ire, which mechanically adhere to the sticky surfaces of the 
fibres. In this condition wool is quite unfit for any manufacturing 
purposes and must be cleansed before any mechanical queries
can be commenced. Formerly the washing was effected in stale 
urine, which owed its detergent properties mainly to the presence 
of ammonium carbonate. The stale urine or lant was diluted 
with four to five times its bulk of water, and in this liquor, heated 
to 4b°-so° C, the Washing was effected. 

At the present day this method has been entirely abandoned, 
the washing or " scouring " being effected with soap, assisted 
by ammonia, potash, soda or silicate of soda. The finest quali- 
ties of wool are washed with soft soap and potash, while for 
inferior qualities, cheaper detergents are employed. The 
operation is in principle perfectly simple, the wool being sub- 
merged in the warm soap solution, where it is moved about with 
forks arid then taken out and allowed to drain. A second 
treatment in weaker soap serves to complete the process. In 
dealing with large quantities, wocl-washing machines are em- 
ployed, which consist essentially of long cast-iron troughs which 
contain the soap solution. The wool to be washed is fed in at 
one end of the machine and is slowly propelled to the other end 
by means b'f a system of mechanically-driven forks or rakes. As 
it passes from the machine, it is squeezed through a pair of rollers. 
Three such machines are usually required for efficient washing, 
the first containing the strongest and the third the weakest soap. 

The washing of wool is in the main a mechanical process, in 
which the water dissolves out the suint while the soap emulsifies 
the yolk and thus removes it from the fibre. The attendant 
earthy impurities pass mechanically into the surrounding liquid 
and are swilled away. 

In some works the wool is washed first with water alone, the 
aqueous extract thus obtained being evaporated to dryness and 
the residue calcined. A very good quality of potash is thus 
obtained as a by-product. In many works in Yorkshire and 
elsewhere, the dirty soap liquors obtained in wool-washing are 
riot allowed to run to waste, but are run into tanks and there 
treated with sulphuric acid. The effect of this treatment 
is to decompose the soap, and the fatty acids along with the 
wool-grease rise as a rnagma to the surface. The purified product 
is known m fllfc' trade as "Yorkshire grease." 



Attempts have been made from time to time to extract the 
natural grease from wool by means of organic solvents, such as 
carbon bisulphide, carbon tetrachloride, petroleum spirit, &c, 
but have not met with much success. 

Worsted yarn spun on the English system, as well as woollen 
yarn and fabrics made from them, contain oil which has been 
incorporated with the wool to facilitate the spinning. This oil 
must be got rid of previous to bleaching, and this is effected by 
scouring in warm soap with or without the assistance of alkalis. 

The actual bleaching of wool may be effected in two ways, viz. 
by treating the material either with sulphurous acid or with hydrogen 
peroxide. Sulphurous acid may either be applied in the gaseous 
form or in solution as bisulphite of soda. In working by the first 
method, which is technically known as " stoving," the scoured yarn 
is wetted in very weak soap containing a small amount of blue 
colouring matter, wrung or hydro-extracted and then suspended in 
a chamber or stove. Sulphur contained in a vessel on the floor of 
the 'chamber is now lighted, and the door having been closed, is 
allowed to burn itself out. The goods are left thus exposed to the 
sulphur dioxide overnight, when they are taken out and washed 
in water. For piece goods a somewhat different arrangement is 
employed, the pieces passing through a slit into a chamber supplied 
with sulphur dioxide, then slowly up and down over a large number 
of rollers and ultimately emerging again at the same slit. Wool 
may also be bleached by steeping in a fairly strong solution of 
bisulphite of soda and then washing well in water. Wool bleached 
with sulphurous acid or bisulphite is readily affected by alkalis, 
the natural yellow colour returning on washing with soap or soda. 
A more permanent bleach is obtained by steeping the wool in 
hydrogen peroxide (of 12 volumes strength), let down with about 
three times its bulk of water and rendered slightly alkaline with 
ammonia or silicate of soda. Black or brown wools cannot be 
bleached white, but when treated with peroxide they assume a 
golden colour, a change which is frequently desired in human hair. 

Bleaching of Silk. 

In raw silk, the fibre proper is uniformly coated with a proteid 
substance known as silk-gum, silk-glue or sericine which amounts 
to 19-25 % of the weight of the material, and it is only after' the 
removal of this coating that the characteristic properties of the 
fibre become apparent. This is effected by the process of " dis- 
charging " or " boiling-off," which consists in suspending the 
hanks of raw silk over poles or sticks in a vat containing a strong 
hot soap solution (30 % of soap on the weight of the silk). The 
liquor is kept just below boiling point for two or three hours, the 
hanks being turned from time to time. During the process, the 
sericine at first swells up considerably, the fibres becoming 
slippery, but as the operation proceeds it passes into solution. 
It is important that only soft water should be used for boiling-off 
since calcareous impurities are liable to mar the lustre of the silk. 

The silk is now rinsed in weak soda solution and wrung. In this 
condition it is suitable for being dyed, but if it is to be bleached, 
the hanks are tied up loosely with smooth tape, put into coarse 
linen bags to prevent the silk becoming entangled, and boiled 
again in soap solution which is half as strong as that used in the 
first operation. The hanks are now taken out, rinsed in a weak 
soda solution, washed in water and wrung. 

The actual bleaching of silk is usually effected by stoving as in 
the case of wool, with this difference, that the operation is repeated 
several times and blueing or tinting with other colours is effected 
after bleaching. Silk may also be bleached with peroxide of 
hydrogen, but this method is only used for certain qualities of 
spun silk and for tussore. 

Ornamental feathers are best bleached by steeping in peroxide of 
hydrogen, rendered slightly alkaline by the addition of ammonia. 
The same treatment is applied to the bleaching of ivory. If peroxide 
of hydrogen could be prepared at a moderate cost, it would doubtless 
find a much more extensive application in bleaching, since it combines 
efficiency with safety, and gives good results with both vegetable and 
animal substances. (E. K.) 

BLEAK, or Blick (Alburnus lucidus), a small fish of the 
Cyprinid family, allied to the bream and the minnow, but with 
a more elongate body, resembling a sardine. It is found in 
European streams, and is caught by anglers, being also a favourite 
in aquariums. The well-known and important industry of 
" Essence Orientale " and artificial pearls, carried on in France 
and Germany with the crystalline silvery colouring matter of 



56 



BLEEK— BLENDE 



the bleak, was introduced from China about the middle of the 
17 th century. 

BLEEK, FRIEDRICH (1793-1859), German Biblical scholar, 
was born on the 4th of July 1793, at Ahrensbok, in Holstein, a 
village near Liibeck. His father sent him in his sixteenth year 
to the gymnasium at Liibeck, where he became so much inter- 
ested in ancient languages that he abandoned his idea of a legal 
career and resolved to devote himself to the study of theology. 
After spending some time at the university of Kiel, he went to 
Berlin, where, from 1814 to 1817, he studied under De Wette, 
Neander and Schleiermacher. So highly were his merits 
appreciated by his professors — Schleiermacher was accustomed 
to say that he possessed a special charisma for the science of 
" Introduction " — that in 1818 after he had passed the examina- 
tions for entering the ministry he was recalled to Berlin as 
Repetent or tutorial fellow in theology, a temporary post which 
the theological faculty had obtained for him. Besides dis- 
charging his duties in the theological seminary, he published 
two dissertations in Schleiermacher's and G. C. F. Lucke's 
Journal{\ 819-1820,1822), one on the origin and composition of the 
Sibylline Oracles " Uber die Entstehung und Zusammensetzung 
der Sibyllinischen Orakel," and another on the authorship and 
design of the Book of Daniel, " Uber Verfasser und Zweck des 
Buches Daniel." These articles attracted much attention, and 
were distinguished by those qualities of solid learning, thorough 
investigation and candour of judgment which characterized 
all his writings. Bleek's merits as a rising scholar were recog- 
nized by the minister of public instruction, who continued his 
stipend as Repetent for a third year, and promised further 
advancement in due time. But the attitude of the political 
authority underwent a change. De Wette was dismissed from 
his professorship in 18 19, and Bleek, a favourite pupil, incurred 
the suspicion of the government as an extreme democrat. 
Not only was his stipend as Repetent discontinued, but his 
nomination to the office of professor extraordinarius, which 
had already been signed by the minister Karl Altenstein, was 
withheld. At length it was found that Bleek had been con- 
founded with a certain Baueleven Blech, and in 1823 he received 
the appointment. 

During the six years that Bleek remained at Berlin, he twice 
declined a call to the office of professor ordinarius of theology, 
once to Greifswald and once to Konigsberg. In 1829, however, 
he was induced to accept Lucke's chair in the recently-founded 
university of Bonn, and entered upon his duties there in the 
summer of the same year. For thirty years he laboured with 
ever-increasing success, due not to any attractions of manner or 
to the enunciation of novel or bizarre opinions, but to the sound- 
ness of his investigations, the impartiality of his judgments, and 
the clearness of his method. In 1843 he was raised to the office 
of consistorial councillor, and was selected by the university 
to hold the office of rector, a distinction which has not since 
been conferred upon any theologian of the Reformed Church. 
He died suddenly of apoplexy on the 27th of February 1859. 

Bleek's works belong entirely to the departments of Biblical 
criticism and exegesis. His views on questions of Old Testament 
criticism were " advanced " in his own day; for on all the 
disputed points concerning the unity and authorship of the 
books of the Old Covenant he was opposed to received opinion. 
But with respect to the New Testament his position was con- 
servative. An opponent of the Tubingen school, his defence of 
the genuineness and authenticity of the gospel of St John is 
among the ablest that have been written; and although on 
some minor points his views did not altogether coincide with 
those of the traditional school, his critical labours on the New 
Testament must nevertheless be regarded as among the most 
important contributions to the maintenance of orthodox 
opinions. His greatest work, his commentary on the epistle to 
the Hebrews {Brief an die Hebraer erldutert durch Einleitung, 
Ubersetzung, und fortlaufenden Commentar, in three parts, 1828, 
1836 and 1840) won the highest praise from men like De Wette 
and Fr. Delitzsch. This work was abridged by Bleek for his 
college lectures, and was published in that condensed form in 



1868. In 1846 he published his contributions to the criticism, 
of the gospels (Beitrage zur Evangelien Kritik, pt. i.), which 
contained his defence of St John's gospel, and arose out of a 
review of J. H. A. Ebrard's Wissenschaftliche Kritik der Evangeli- 
schen Geschichte (1842). 

After his death were published: — (1) His Introduction to the Old 
Testament (Einleitung in das Alte Testament), (3rd ed., 1869); Eng. 
trans, by G. H. Venables (from 2nd ed., 1869); in 1878 a new 
edition (the 4th) appeared under the editorship of J. Wellhausen, 
who made extensive alterations and additions; (2) his Introduction 
to the New Testament (3rd ed., W. Mangold, 1875), Eng. trans, (from 
2nd German ed.) by William Urwick (1869, 1870) ; (3) his Exposition 
of the First Three Gospels (Synoptische Erklarung der drei ersten 
Evangelien), by H. Holtzmann (1862); (4) his Lectures on the 
Apocalypse (Vorlesungen uber die Apokalyps'e) , (Eng. trans. 1875). 
Besides these there has also appeared a small volume containing 
Lectures on Colossians, Philemon and Ephesians (Berlin, 1865). 
Bleek also contributed many articles to the Studien und Kritiken. 
For further information as to Bleek's life and writings, see Kamp- 
hausen's article in Herzog-Hauck, Realencyklopadie; Frederic 
Lichtenberger's Histoire des idees religieuses en Allemagne, vol. iil. ; 
Diestel's Geschichte des Alten Testamentes (1869) ; and T. K. Cheyne's 
Founders of Old Testament Criticism (1893). 

BLEEK, WILHELM HEINRICH IMMANUEL (1827-1875), 
German philologist, son of Friedrich Bleek, was born in 1827 
at Berlin. He studied first at Bonn and afterwards at Berlin, 
where his attention was directed towards the philological 
peculiarities of the South African languages. In his doctor's 
dissertation (Bonn, 1851), De nominum generibus linguarum 
Africae Australis, he endeavoured to show that the Hottentot 
language was of North African descent. In 1854 his health 
prevented him accompanying Dr W. B. Baikie in the expedition 
to the Niger; but in the following year he accompanied Bishop 
Colenso to Natal, and was enabled to prosecute his researches 
into the language and customs of the Kaffirs. Towards the close 
of 1856 he settled at Cape Town, and in 1857 was appointed 
interpreter by Sir George Grey. In 1859 he was compelled by 
ill-health to visit Europe, and on his return in the following year 
he was made librarian of the valuable collection of books pre- 
sented to the colony by Sir George Grey. In 1869 he visited 
England, where the value of his services was recognized by a 
pension from the civil list. He died at Cape Town on the 17 th 
of August 1875. His works, which are of considerable importance, 
for African and Australian philology, consist of the Vocabulary 
of the Mozambique Language (London, 1856); Handbook of 
African, Australian and Polynesian Philology (Cape Town and; 
London, 3 vols., 1858-1863); Comparative Grammar of the 
South African Languages (vol. i., London, 1869); Reynard the 
Fox in South Africa, or Hottentot Fables and Tales (London, 1864) ; 
Origin of Language (London, 1869). 

BLENDE, or Sphalerite, a naturally occurring zinc sulphide, 
ZnS, and an important ore of zinc. The name blende was used 
by G. Agricola in 1546, and is from the German blenden, to 
blind, or deceive, because the mineral resembles lead-ore in r 
appearance but contains no lead, and was consequently often 
rejected as worthless. Sphalerite, introduced by E. F. Glocker 
in 1847, has the same meaning (Gr. o-<ba\epos, deceptive), and 
so have the miners' terms "mock ore," " false lead," and 
" blackjack." The term " blende " was 
at one time used in a generic sense, and 
as such enters into the construction of 
several old names of German origin; 
the species under consideration is there- 
fore sometimes distinguished as zinc- 
blende. 

Crystals of blende belong to that sub- 
class of the cubic system in which there 
are six planes of symmetry parallel to 
the faces of the rhombic dodecahedron 
and none parallel to the cubic faces; in other words, the, 
crystals are cubic with inclined hemihedrism, and have no 
centre of symmetry. The fundamental form is the tetrahedron. 
Fig. 1 shows a combination of two tetrahedra, in which the 
four faces of one tetrahedron are larger than the four faces of 
the other: further, the two sets of faces difer in surface 




BLENHEIM 



57 



characters, those of one set being dull and striated, whilst 
those of the other set are bright and smooth. A common 
' form, shown in fig. 2, is a combination of the rhombic 
dodecahedron with a three-faced tetrahedron y (311); 
the six faces meeting in each triad axis are often rounded 
together into low conical forms. The crystals are frequently 
twinned, the twin-axis coinciding with a triad axis; a rhombic 
dodecahedron so twinned (fig. 3) has no re-entrant angles. An 
important character of blende is the perfect dodecahedral 
cleavage, there being six directions of cleavage parallel to the 
faces of the rhombic dodecahedron, and angles between which 
are 6o°. 

When chemically pure, which is rarely the case, blende is 
colourless and transparent; usually, however, the mineral is 
yellow, brown or black, and often opaque, the depth of colour 
and degree of transparency depending on the amount of iron 
present. The streak, or colour of the powder, is brownish or 
light yellow, rarely white. The lustre is resinous to adamantine, 
and the index of refraction high (2-369 for sodium light). The 
substance is usually optically isotropic, though sometimes it 
exhibits anomalous double refraction; fibrous zinc sulphide 
which is doubly refracting is to be referred to the hexagonal 





Fig. 2. 



Fig. 3. 



species wurtzite. The specific gravity is 4-0, and the hardness 
4. Crystals exhibit pyroelectrical characters, since they possess 
four uniterminal triad axes of symmetry. 

Crystals of blende are of very common occurrence, but owing 
to twinning and distortion and curvature of the faces, they are 
often rather complex and difficult to decipher. For this reason 
the mineral is not always readily recognized by inspection, 
though the perfect dodecahedral cleavage, the adamantine 
lustre, and the brown streak are characters which may be relied 
upon. The mineral is also frequently found massive, with a 
coarse or fine granular structure and a crystalline fracture; 
sometimes it occurs as a soft, white, amorphous deposit resem- 
bling artificially precipitated zinc sulphide. A compact 
variety of a pale liver-brown colour and forming concentric 
layers with a reniform surface is known in Germany as Schalen- 
blende or Leberblende. 

A few varieties of blende are distinguished by special names, 
these varieties depending on differences in colour and chemical 
composition.' A pure white blende from Franklin in New Jersey 
is known as cleiophane; snow-white crystals are also found at 
Nordmark in Vermland, Sweden. Black blende containing 
ferrous sulphide, in amounts up to 15 or 20 % isomorphously 
replacing zinc sulphide, is known as marmatite (from Marmato 
near Guayabal in Colombia, South America) and christophite 
(from St Christophe mine at Breitenbrunn near Eibenstock in 
Saxony). Transparent blende of a red or reddish-brown colour, 
such as that found near Holywell in Flintshire, is known as 
" ruby-blende " or " ruby-zinc." Pftbramite is the name 
given to a cadmiferous blende from Pribram in Bohemia. 
Other varieties contain small amounts of mercury, tin, man- 
ganese or thallium. The elements gallium and indium were 
discovered in blende. 

Blende occurs in metalliferous veins, often in association with 
galena, also with chalcopyrite, barytes, fluorspar, &c. In ore- 
deposits containing both lead and zinc, such as those filling 
cavities in the limestones of the north of England and of Missouri, 
the galena is usually found in the upper part of the deposit, the 
blende not being reached until the deeper parts are worked. 



Blende is also found sporadically in sedimentary rocks; for 
example, in nodules of clay-ironstone in the Coal Measures, in the 
cement-doggers of the Lias, and in the casts of fossil shells. It 
has occasionally been found on the old timbers of mines. In 
these cases the zinc sulphide has probably arisen from the 
reduction of sulphate by organic matter. 

Localities for fine crystallized specimens are numerous. 
Mention may be made of the brilliant black crystals from Alston 
Moor in Cumberland, St Agnes in Cornwall and Derbyshire. 
Yellow crystals are found at Kapnik-Banya, near Nagy-Banya 
in Hungary. Transparent yellow cleavage masses of large 
size occur in limestone in the zinc mines at Picos de 
Europa in the province of Santander, Spain. Beautiful 
isolated tetrahedra of transparent yellow blende are found 
in the snow-white crystalline dolomite of the Binnenthal in 
the Valais, Switzerland. (L. J. S.) 

BLENHEIM (Ger. Blindheim), a village of Bavaria, Germany, 
in the district of Swabia, on the left bank of the Danube, 30 m. 
N.E. from Ulm by rail, a few miles below Hochstadt. Pop. 700. 
It was the scene of the defeat of the French and Bavarians under 
Marshals Tallard and Marsin, on the 13th of August 1704, by the 
English and the Austrians under the duke of Marlborough and 
Prince Eugene. In consideration of his military services and 
especially his decisive victory, a princely mansion was erected by 
parliament for the duke of Marlborough near Woodstock in 
Oxfordshire, England, and was named Blenheim Palace after 
this place. 

The battle of Blenheim is also called Hochstadt, but the title 
accepted in England has the advantage that it distinguishes this 
battle from that won on the same ground a year previously, by 
the elector of Bavaria over the imperial general Styrum (9-20 
September 1703), and from the fighting between the Austrians 
under Krag and the French under Moreau in June 1800 (see 
French Revolutionary Wars). The ground between the 
hills and the marshy valley of the Danube forms a defile through 
which the main road from Donauworth led to Ulm; parallel 
streams divide the narrow plain into strips. On one of these 
streams, the Nebel, the French and Bavarians (somewhat 
superior in numbers) took up their position facing eastward, 
their right flank resting on the Danube, their left in the under- 
features of the hilly ground, and their front covered by the Nebel, 
on which were the villages of Oberglau, Unterglau and Blenheim. 
The imperialist army of Eugene and the allies under Marlborough 
(52,000 strong) encamped 5 m. to the eastward along another 
stream, their flanks similarly protected. On the 2nd-i3th of 
August 1704 Eugene and Marlborough set their forces in motion 
towards the hostile camps; several streams had to be crossed on 
the march, and it was seven o'clock (five hours after moving off) 
when the British of Marlborough's left wing, next the Danube, 
deployed opposite Blenheim, which Tallard thereupon garrisoned 
with a large force of his best infantry, aided by a battery of 
24-pounder guns. The French and Bavarians were taken 
somewhat by surprise, and were arrayed in two separate armies, 
each with its cavalry on the wings and its foot in the centre. 
Thus the centre of the combined forces consisted of the cavalry 
of Marsin's right and of Tallard's left. 

Here was the only good ground for mounted troops, and 
Marlborough followed Tallard's example when forming up to 
attack, but it resulted from the dispositions of the French 
marshal that this weak point of junction of his two armies was 
exactly that at which decisive action was to be expected. 
Tallard therefore had a few horse on his right between the 
Danube and Blenheim, a mass of infantry in his centre atBlenheim 
itself, and a long line of cavalry supported by a few battalions 
forming his left wing in the plain, and connecting with the right 
of Marsin's army. This army was similarly drawn up. The 
cavalry right wing was in the open, the French infantry near 
Oberglau, which was strongly held, the Bavarian infantry next 
on the left, and finally the Bavarian cavalry with a force of foot 
on the extreme left in the hills. The elector of Bavaria com- 
manded his own troops in person. Marlborough and Eugene on 
their part were to attack respectively Tallard and Marsin. The 



58 



BLENNERHASSETT— BLIDA 



right wing under Eugene had to make a difficult march over 
broken ground before it could form up for battle, and Marl- 
borough waited, with his army in order of battle between 
Unterglau and Blenheim, until his colleague should be ready. 
At 12.30 the battle opened. Lord Cutts, with a detachment of 
Marlborough's left wing, attacked Blenheim with the utmost 
fury. A third of the leading brigade (British) was killed ^nd 
wounded in the vain attempt to break through the strong defences 
of the village, and some French squadrons charged upon it as it 
retired; a colour was captured in the melee, but a Hessian 
brigade in second line drove back the cavalry and retook the 
colour. After the repulse of these squadrons, in which some 
British cavalry from the centre took part, Cutts again moved 
forward. The second attack, though pressed even more fiercely, 
fared no better than the first, and the losses were heavier than 
before. The duke then ordered Cutts to observe the enemy in 
Blenheim, and concentrated all his attention on the centre. 
Here, between Unterglau and Blenheim, preparations were being 
made, under cover of artillery, for the crossing of the Nebel, and 
farther up-stream a corps was sent to attack Oberglau. This 
attack failed completely, and it was not until Marlborough 
himself, with fresh battalions, drove the French back into 
Oberglau that the allies were free to cross the Nebel. 
' In the meanwhile the first line of Marlborough's infantry had 
crossed lower down, and the first line of cavalry, following them 
across, had been somewhat severely handled by Tallard's cavalry. 
The squadrons under the Prussian general Bothmar, however, 
made a dashing charge, and achieved considerable temporary 
success. Eugene was now closely engaged with the elector of 
Bavaria, and both sides were losing heavily. But Eugene carried 
out his holding attack successfully. Marsin dared not reinforce 
Tallard to any extent, and the duke was preparing for the grand 
attack. His whole force, except the detachment of Cutts, was 
now across the Nebel, and he had formed it in several lines with 
the cavalry in front. Marlborough himself led the cavalry; 
the French squadrons received the attack at the halt, and were 
soon broken. Marsin's right swung back towards its own army.: 
Those squadrons of Tallard's left which retained their order fell 
back towards the Danube, and a great gap was opened in the 
centre of the defence, through which the victorious squadrons 
poured. Wheeling to their left the pursuers drove hundreds of 
fugitives into the Danube, and Eugene was now pressing the 
army of Marsin towards Marlborough, who re-formed and faced 
northward to cut off its retreat. Tallard was already a prisoner, 
but in the dusk and confusion Marsin slipped through between 
the duke and Eugene. General Churchill, Marlborough's brother, 
had meanwhile surrounded the French garrison of Blenheim; 
and after one or two attempts to break out, twenty-four ba ttalions 
of infantry and four regiments of dragoons, many of them the 
finest of the French army, surrendered. 

The losses of the allies are stated at 4500 killed and 7500 
wounded (British 670 killed and 1500 wounded). Of the French 
and Bavarians 11,000 men, 100 guns and, 200 colours and 
standards were taken; besides the killed and wounded, the 
numbers of which were large but uncertain — many were drowned 
in the Danube. Marsin's army, though it lost heavily, was 
drawn off in good order; Tallard's was almost annihilated. 

BLENNERHASSETT, HARMAN (1765-1831), Irish-American 
lawyer, son of an Irish country gentleman of English stock 
settled in Co. Kerry, was born on the 8th of October 1765. He 
was educated at Trinity College, Dublin, and in 1790 was called 
to the Irish bar. After living for several years on the continent, 
he married in 1796 his niece, Margaret Agnew, daughter of 
Robert Agnew, the lieutenant-governor of the Isle of Man. 
Ostracised by their families for this step the couple decided to 
settle in America, where Blennerhassett in 1798 bought an 
island in the Ohio river about 2 m. below Parkersburg, West 
Virginia. Here in 1805 he received a visit from Aaron Burr (q.v.), 
in whose conspiracy he became interested, furnishing liberal funds 
for its support, and offering the use of his island as a rendezvous 
for the gathering of arms and supplies and the training of 
volunteers. Wkn the conspiracy collapsed, the mansion and 



island were occupied and plundered by the Virginia militia. 
Blennerhassett fled, was twice arrested and remained a prisoner 
until after Burr's release; The island was then abandoned, and 
Blennerhassett was in. turn a cotton planter in Mississippi, and 
a lawyer (1819-1822) in Montreal, Canada. After returning to 
Ireland, he died in the island of Guernsey on the 2nd of February 
1831. His wife, who had considerable literary talent and who 
published The Deserted Isle (1822) and The Widow of the Rock 
and Other Poems (1824), returned to the United States in 1840, 
and died soon afterward in New York City while attempting to 
obtain through Congress payment for property destroyed on the 
island. 

See William H. Safford, Life ofHarman Blennerhassett (Cincinnati, 
1853) ; W. H. Safford (editor), The Blennerhassett Papers (Cincinnati, 
1864); and "The True Story of Harman Blennerhassett," by 
Therese Blennerhassett-Adams, in the Century Magazine for July 
1 90 1, vol. lxii. 

BLERA (mod. Bieda), an ancient Etruscan town on the Via 
Clodia, about 3 2 m. N.N. W. of Rome. It was of little importance, 
and is only mentioned by geographers and. in inscriptions. It 
is situated on a long, narrow tongue of rock at the junction of 
two deep glens. Some remains of the town walls still exist, and 
also two ancient bridges, both belonging to the Via Clodia, and 
many tombs hewn in the rock — small chambers imitating the 
architectural forms of houses, with beams and rafters represented 
in relief. See G, Dennis, Cities and Cemeteries of Etruria, i. 207. 
There was another Blera in Apulia, on the road from Venusia to 
Tarentum. 

BLESSINGTON, MARGUERITE, Countess of (1789-1849), 
Irish novelist and miscellaneous writer, daughter of Edmund 
Power, a small landowner, was born near Clonmel, Co. Tipperary, 
Ireland, on the 1st of September 1789. Her childhood was made 
unhappy by her father's character and poverty, and her early 
womanhood wretched by her compulsory marriage at the age 
of fifteen to a Captain Maurice St Leger Farmer, whose drunken 
habits brought him at last as a debtor to the king's bench prison, 
where, in October 181.7, he died. His wife had left him some 
time before, and in February 1818 she married Charles John 
Gardiner, earl of Blessington. Of rare beauty, charm and wit, 
she was no less distinguished for her generosity and for the 
extravagant tastes which she shared with her husband, which 
resulted in encumbering his estates with a load of debt. In the 
autumn of 1822 they went abroad, spent four months of the next 
year at Genoa in close intimacy with Byron, and remained on 
the continent till Lord Blessington's deathin May 1829. Some 
time before this they had been joined by Count D'Orsay, who in 
1827 married Lady Harriet Gardiner, Lord Blessington's only 
daughter by a former wife. D'Orsay, who had soon separated 
from his wife, now accompanied Lady Blessington to England 
and lived with her till her death. Their home, first at Seamore 
Place, and afterwards Gore House, Kensington, became a centre 
of attraction for whatever was distinguished in literature, 
learning, art, science and fashion. After her husband's death 
she supplemented her diminished income by contributing to 
various periodicals as well as by writing novels. She was for 
some years editor of The Book of Beauty and The Keepsake, 
popular annuals of the day. In 1834 she published her Conversa- 
tions with Lord Byron. Her Idler in Italy (1839-1840), and 
Idler in France (1841) were popular for their personal gossip and 
anecdote, descriptions of nature and sentiment. Early in 1849, 
Count D'Orsay left Gore House to escape his creditors; the 
furniture and decorations were sold, and Lady Blessington joined 
the count in Paris, where she died on the 4th of June 1849. 

Her Literary Life and Correspondence (3 vols.), edited by R. R. 
Madden, appeared in 1855. Her portrait was painted in 1808 by 
Sir Thomas Lawrence. 

BLIDA, a town of Algeria, in the department of Algiers, 
32 m. by railway S.W. from Algiers, on the line to Oran. 
Pop. (1906) 16,866. It lies surrounded with orchards and 
gardens, 630 ft. above the sea, at the base of the Little Atlas, 
on the southern edge of the fertile plain of the Metija, and the 
right bank of the Wad-el-Kebir affluent of the Chiffa. The 
abundant water of this stream provides power for large corn 



BLIGH— BLINDNESS 



59 



mills and several factories, and also supplies the town, with its 
numerous fountains and irrigated gardens. Blida is surrounded 
by a wall of considerable extent, pierced by six gates, and is 
further defended by Fort Mimieh, crowning a steep hill on the 
left bank of the river. The present town, French in character, 
has well-built modern streets with many arcades, and numbers 
among its buildings several mosques and churches, extensive 
barracks and a large military hospital. The principal square, 
the place d'Armes, is surrounded by arcaded houses and shaded 
by trees. The centre of a fertile district, and a post on one of 
the main routes in the country, Blida has a flourishing trade, 
chiefly in oranges and flour. The orange groves contain over 
50,000 trees, and in April the air for miles round is laden with 
the scent of the orange blossoms. In the public gardens is a 
group of magnificent olive trees. The products of the neigh- • 
bouring cork trees and cedar groves are a source of revenue 
to the .town. In the vicinity are the villages of Joinville and 
Montpensier, which owe their origin to military camps estab- 
lished by Marshal Valee in 1838; and on the road to Medea 
are the tombs of the marabout Mahommed-el-Kebir, who died 
in 1580, and his two sons. 

Blida, i.e. boleida, diminutive of the Arab word belad, city, 
occupies the site of a military station in the time of the Romans, 
but the present town appears to date from the 16th century. 
A mosque was built by order of Khair-ed-din Barbarossa, and 
under the Turks the town was of some importance. In 1825 
it was nearly destroyed by an earthquake, but was speedily 
rebuilt on a site about a mile distant from the ruins. It was not 
till 1838 that it was finally held by the French, though they had 
been in possession for a short time eight years before. In 
April 1906 it was chosen as the place of detention of Behanzin, 
the ex-king of Dahomey, who died in December of that 
year. 

Blida is the chief town of a commune of the same name, 
having (1906) a population of 33, 332. 

BLIGH, WILLIAM (1754-1817), English admiral, was born 
of a good Cornish family in 1754. He accompanied Captain 
Cook in his second expedition (177 2-1 774) as sailing-master of 
the " Resolution." During the voyage, the bread-fruit, already 
known to Dampier, was found by them at Otaheite; and after 
seeing service under Lord Howe and elsewhere, " Bread-fruit 
Bligh," as he was nicknamed, was despatched at the end of 1787 
to the Pacific in command of H.M.S. " Bounty," for the purpose 
of introducing it into the West Indies from the South Sea Islands. 
Bligh sailed from Otaheite, after remaining there about six 
months; but, when near the Friendly Islands, a mutiny (April 
28, 1789) broke out on board the "Bounty," headed by 
Fletcher Christian, the master's mate, and Bligh, with eighteen 
others, was set adrift in the launch. The mutineers themselves 
settled on Pitcairn Island (q.v.), but some of them were after- 
wards captured, brought to England and in three cases executed. 
This mutiny, which forms the subject of Byron's Island, did 
not arise so much from tyranny on the part of Bligh as from 
attachments contracted between the seamen and the women 
of Otaheite. After suffering severely from hunger, thirst 
and storms, Bligh and his companions landed at Timor in the 
East Indies, having performed a voyage of about 4000 m. in 
an open boat. Bligh returned to England in 1790, and he was 
soon afterwards appointed to the " Providence," in which he 
effected the purpose of his former appointment by introducing 
the bread-fruit tree into the West India Islands. He showed 
great courage at the mutiny of the Nore in 1797, and in the same 
year took part in the battle of Camperdown, where Admiral 
Duncan defeated the Dutch under De Winter. In 1801 he 
commanded the " Glatton " (54) at the battle of Copenhagen, 
and received the personal commendations of Nelson. In 1805 
he was appointed " captain general and governor of New South 
Wales." As he made himself intensely unpopular by the 
harsh exercise of authority, he was deposed in January 1808 
by a mutiny headed by Major George Johnston of the 102nd 
foot, and was imprisoned by the mutineers till 1810. He re- 
turned to England in 1811, was promoted to rear-admiral in 



that year, and to vice-admiral in 1814. Major Johnston was 
tried by court martial at Chelsea in 181 1, and was dismissed the 
service. Bligh, who was an active, persevering and courageous 
officer, died in London in 18 1 7. 

BLIND, MATHILDE (1841-1896), English author, was born 
at Mannheim on the 21st of March 1841. Her father was a 
banker named Cohen, but she took the name of Blind after her 
step-father, the political writer, Karl Blind (1 826-1 907), one 
of the exiled leaders of the Baden insurrection in 1 848-1 849, 
and an ardent supporter of the various 19th-century movements 
for the freedom and autonomy of struggling nationalities. The 
family was compelled to take refuge in England, where Mathilde 
devoted herself to literature and to the higher education of 
women. She produced also three long poems, " The Prophecy 
of St Oran " (1881), " The Heather on Fire" (1886), an in- 
dignant protest against the evictions in the Highlands, and 
" The Ascent of Man " (1888), which was to be the epic of the 
theory of evolution. She wrote biographies of George Eliot 
(1883) and Madame Roland (1886), and translated D.F. Strauss's 
The Old Faith and the New (1873-1874) and the Memoirs 
of Marie Bashkirtsefi (1890). She died on the 26th of Nov- 
ember 1896, bequeathing her property to Newnham College, 
Cambridge. 

A complete edition of her poems was edited by Mr Arthur Symons 
in 1900, with a biographical introduction by Dr Richard Garnett. 

BUND HOOKEY, a game of chance, played with a full pack 
of cards. The deal, which is an advantage, is decided as at 
whist, the cards being shuffled and cut as at whist. The dealer 
gives a parcel of cards to each player including himself. Each 
player puts the amount of his stake on his cards, which he must 
not look at. The dealer has to take all bets. He then turns up 
his parcel, exposing the bottom card. Each player in turn does 
the same, winning or losing according as his cards are higher 
or lower than the dealer's. Ties pay the dealer. The cards rank 
as at whist. The suits are of no importance, the cards taking 
precedence according to their face-value. 

BLINDING, a form of punishment anciently common in many 
lands, being inflicted on thieves, adulterers, perjurers and other 
criminals. The inhabitants of Apollonia (Illyria) are said to 
have inflicted this penalty on their " watch " when found asleep 
at their posts. It was resorted to by the Roman emperors in 
their persecutions of the Christians. The method of destroying . 
the sight varied. Sometimes a mixture of lime and vinegar, or 
barely scalding vinegar alone, was poured into the eyes. Some- 
times a rope was twisted round the victim's head till the eyes 
started out of their sockets. In the middle ages the punishment 
seems to have been changed from total blindness to a permanent 
injury to the eyes, amounting, however, almost to blindness, 
produced by holding a red-hot iron dish or basin before the face. 
Under the forest laws of the Norman kings of England blinding 
was a common penalty. Shakespeare makes King John order 
his nephew Arthur's eyes to be burnt out. 

BLINDMAN'S-BUFF (from an O. Fr. word, buffe, a blow, 
especially a blow on the cheek), a game in which one player is 
blindfolded and made to catch and identify one of the others, 
who in sport push him about and " buffet " him. 

BLINDNESS, the condition of being blind (a common Teutonic 
word), i.e. devoid of sight (see also Vision; and Eye: Diseases). 
The data furnished in various countries by the census of 1901 
showed generally a decrease in blindness, due to the progress in 
medical science, use of antiseptics, better sanitation, control of 
infectious diseases, and better protection in shops and factories. 
Blindness is much more common in hot countries than in 
temperate and cold regions, but Finland and Iceland are excep- 
tions to the general rule. 1 In hot countries the eyes are affected 
by the glaring sunlight, the dust and the dryness of the air. 
From statistics in Italy, France and Belgium, localities on the 
coast seem to have more blind persons than those at a distance 
from the sea. 

1 There are no late returns for Iceland, but the last available 
statistics gave 3400 per million. A paper written in 1903 on blindness 
in Egypt stated that 1 in every 50 of the population was blind. 



6o 



BLINDNESS 



The following table gives the number of blind persons as reported 
in the census of each country. Unless otherwise stated, it refers to 
the statistics of 1900. 



Country. 



Austria 

Belgium 

Canada 

Denmark 

England 

France 

Finland l 

Germany 

Hungary 

Ireland 

Italy 

Holland (1890) 

Norway 

Portugal 

Sweden 

Switzerland (1895) .... 

Scotland 

Spain (1877) 

Russia 

United States (corrected census) 



Total 
Number. 



Number 

per Million 

of Population. 



14.582 
3448 
3279 
1047 

25.317 

27.174 

3229 

34.334 

19.377 

4 2 63 

38,160 

2114 

1879 

5650 

3413 

2107 

3253 
24,608 

85,662 



540 

487 

610 

427 

778 

698 
1191 

609 
1006 

954 
1 175 

414 

838 
1040 

664 

722 

727 

1006 

about 2000 

1125 



Causes and Prevention 
There are many cases of complete or partial blindness which 
might have been prevented, and a knowledge of the best methods 
of prevention and cure should be spread as widely as possible. 
Magnus, Bremer, Steffen and Rossler are of opinion that 40 % of 
the cases of blindness might have been prevented. Hayes gives 
33.35% as positively avoidable, 38-75% possibly avoidable, 
and 46 • 2 7 % as a conservative estimate. Cohn regards blindness 
as certainly preventable in 33 %, as probably preventable in 
43 %, and as quite unpreventable in only 24 %. If we take the 
lowest of these figures, and assume that 400 out of every 1000 
blind persons might have been saved from such a calamity, 
we realize the importance of preventative measures. For the 
physiology and pathology of the eye generally, see Vision and 

Eye. 

The great majority of these cases are due to infantile purulent 
ophthalmia. This arises from inoculation of the eyes with 
hurtful material at time of birth. If the contagious 
Ophthal- discharges are allowed to remain, violent inflammation 
mia ' is set up which usually ends in the loss of sight. It 

depends on the presence of a microbe, and the effective applica- 
tion of a weak solution of nitrate of silver is curative, if made in a 
proper manner at an early period of the case. In Germany, 
midwives are expressly prohibited by law from treating any 
affection of the eyes or eyelids of infants, however slight. On the 
appearance of the first symptoms, they are required to represent 
to the parents, or others in charge, that medical assistance is 
urgently needed, or, if necessary, they are themselves to report 
to the local authorities and the district doctor. Neglect of 
these regulations entails liability to punishment. Eleven of the 
United States of America have enacted laws requiring that, if 
one or both eyes of an infant should become inflamed, swollen or 
reddened at any time within two weeks of its birth, it shall be the 
duty of the midwife or nurse having charge of such infant to 
report in writing within six hours, to the health officer or some 
legally qualified physician, the fact that such inflammation, 
swelling or redness exists. The penalty for failure to comply is 
fine or imprisonment. 

The following weighty words, from a paper prepared by Dr 
Park Lewis, of Buffalo, N.Y., for the American Medical Associa- 
tion, show that laws are not sufficient to prevent evil, unless 
supported by strong public sentiment: — 

" When an enlightened, civilized and progressive nation quietly 
and passively, year after year, permits a multitude of its people un- 
necessarily to become blind, and more especially when one-quarter 

1 Previous returns from Finland have shown a much larger number 
of blind persons, but these statistics were supplied by the British 
consul in St Petersburg from the last census. 



of these are infants, the reason for such a startling condition of 
affairs demands explanation. That such is the fact, practically all 
reliable ophthalmologists agree. • 

" From a summary of carefully tabulated statistics it has been 
demonstrated that at least four-tenths of all existing blindness 
might have been avoided had proper preventative or curative 
measures been employed, while one-quarter of this, or one-tenth of 
the whole, is due to ophthalmia neonatorum, an infectious, prevent- 
able and almost absolutely curable disease. Perhaps this statement 
will take on a new meaning when it is added that there are in the 
state of New York alone more than 6000, and in the United States 
more than 50,000 blind people; of these 600 in the one state, and 
5000 in the country, would have been saved from lives of darkness 
and unhappiness, in having lost all the joys that come through sight, 
and of more or less complete dependence — for no individual can be 
as self-sufficient without as with eyes — if a simple, safe and easily 
applied precautionary measure had been taken at the right time 
and in the right way to prevent this affliction. The following three 
vital facts are not questioned, but are universally accepted by those 
qualified to know : — 

" 1. The ophthalmia of infancy is an infectious germ disease. 
" 2. By the instillation of a silver salt in the eyes of a new-born 
infant the disease is prevented from developing in all but an exceed- 
ingly small number of the cases in which it would otherwise have 
appeared. . 

" 3. In practically all those few exceptional cases the disease is 
absolutely curable, if like treatment is employed at a sufficiently 
early period. < . 

" Since these facts are no longer subjects of discussion, but are 
universally accepted by all educated medical men, the natural 
inquiry follows: Why, as a common-sense proposition, are not 
these simple, harmless, preventive measures invariably employed} 
and why, in consequence of this neglect, does a nation sit quietly 
and indifferently by, making no attempt to prevent this enormous 
and needless waste of human eyes ? _ 

" The reasons are three-fold, and lie — first, with the medical 
profession; second, with the lay public; third, with the state. 

" For the education of its blind children annually New York alone 
pays per capita at least $350, and a yearly gross sum amounting to 
much more than $100,000. If, as sometimes happens, the blind 
citizen is a dependent throughout a long life, the cost of maintenance 
is not less than $10,000, and the mere cost in money will be multi- 
plied many times in that a productive factor, by reason of blindness, 
has been removed from the community. ,,■•■' 

" If, therefore, as an economic proposition, it were realized how 
vitally it concerns the state that not one child shall needlessly 
become blind, thereby increasing the public financial burden, there 
is no doubt that early and effective measures would be instituted to 
protect the state from this unnecessary and extravagant expenditure 
of public funds. ... 

" Eleven states have passed legislative enactments requiring that 
the midwife shall report each case to the proper health authority, 
and affixing a penalty for the failure to do so. As has been intimated, 
however, it is not by any means always under the ministration of 
midwives that these cases occur, and, like all laws behind which is 
not a strong and well-informed public sentiment, this law is rarely 
enforced. A more effective method must be devised. Every 
physician having to do with the parturient woman, every obstet- 
rician, every midwife, must be frequently and constantly advised 
of the dangers and possibilities of this disease, the necessity of 
prevention, and the value of early and correct treatment. They 
must then have placed in their hands, ready for instant use, a safe 
and efficient preparation, issued by the health authorities as a 
guarantee as to its quality and efficiency. 

" An important step was taken in this direction when a resolution 
was passed by the House of Delegates at the annual meeting of the 
New York State Medical Society, requesting the various health 
officers of the state to include ophthalmia neonatorum among 
contagious diseases which must be reported to the local boards of 
health. ..... 

" The second essential, in order that the cause of infantile 
ophthalmia be abolished, is that a solution of the necessary silver 
salt be prepared under the authority of somebody capable of in- 
spiring universal confidence, and that it be distributed by the health 
department of every state gratuitously to every obstetrician, 
physician or midwife qualified to care for the parturient woman. 
The nature of the solution, together with the character of the 
descriptive card which should accompany it, should be determined 
by a committee, chosen by the president of the American Medical 
Association, which should have among its members at least one 
representative ophthalmologist, one obstetrician and one sanitarian; 
The conclusions of this committee should be reported back to the 
House of Delegates, so that the preparation and its text should carry 
with it, on the great authority of this association, the assurance that 
the solution is entirely safe and necessary, and that its use should 
invariably be part of the toilet of every new-born child, lne 
solution, probably silver nitrate, could be put up either by the state 
itself or by some trustworthy pharmacist, at an insignificant cost; 
its purity and sterility should be vouched for by the board of health 
of the state. It should be enclosed in specially prepared receptacles, 



BLINDNESS 



61 



each containing a special quantity, and so arranged that it may 
be used drop by drop. These, properly enclosed, accompanied by a 
brief lucid explanation of the danger of the disease, the necessity of 
this germicide, the method of its employment, and the right subse- 
quent care of the eyes, should be sent to the obstetrician on the 
receipt of each birth certificate. 

" I have said that responsibility for the indifference that is annu- 
ally resulting in such frightful disaster lies primarily with the state, 
the public and the medical profession. 

" The state is already aroused to the necessity of taking effective 
measures to wipe out this controllable plague. Bills have been 
introduced in the legislature of Massachusetts and of New York, 
providing for the appointment of commissions for the blind, one of 
whose duties w i" De to study the causes of unnecessary blindness 
and to suggest preventative measures." 

One of the most common diseases of the eye is trachoma, often 
dalled "granular lids," because the inner surface of the lid 
_ . seems to be covered with little granulations. The 

' disease sometimes lasts for years without causing 
blindness, though it gives rise to great irritation. It is generally 
attended by a discharge, which is highly contagious, producing 
the same disease if it gets into other eyes. Want of cleanliness 
is one of the most important factors in the propagation of 
trachoma, hence its great prevalence in Oriental countries. 
Trachoma is very prevalent in Egypt, where those suffering 
from total or partial blindness are said to amount to 10% 
of the population. During Napoleon's Egyptian campaign, 
nearly every soldier, out of an army of 32,000 men, was affected. 
During the following twenty years the disease spread through 
almost all European armies. In the Belgian army, there was 
one trachomatous soldier out of every five, and up to 1834 no 
less than 4000 soldiers had lost both eyes and 10,000 one eye. 
It is a disease which is very common in workhouse schools, 
orphan asylums and similar establishments. Unlike ophthalmia 
of riew-born children, it is difficult to cure, and a total separation 
of the diseased from the healthy children should be effected. 

About one-half of those who are blinded by injuries lose the 
second eye by sympathetic ophthalmia. It is a constant source 
of danger to those who retain an eye blinded by 
thetic injury. Blindness from this cause can be prevented 

Inflamma- by the removal of the injured eye, but unfortunately 
ilon ' the proposal often meets with opposition from the 

patient. 

Glaucoma is a disease which almost invariably leads to total 

blindness; but in most cases it can be arrested by 
Glaucoma. . ' . . _ 

a simple operation if the case is seen suffi- 
ciently early. 

Myopia, or " short-sight," makes itself apparent in children 
between the ages of seven and nine. Neglect of a year or two 
may do serious mischief. Short-sight, when not 
inherited, is produced by looking intently and con- 
tinuously at near objects. Children should be 
encouraged to describe objects at a distance, with which they are 
unacquainted, and parents should choose out-door occupations 
and amusements for children who show a tendency to short- 
sightedness. 

A report was issued in 1906, by the school board of Glasgow, 
as to an investigation by Dr H. Wright Thomas, ophthalmic 
surgeon, regarding the eyesight of school children, which in- 
cludes the following passage. Dr Wright Thomas states that 
the teachers tested the visual acuteness of 52,493 children, and 
found 18,565, or 35%, to be below what is regarded as the 
normal standard. He examined the 18,565 defectives by retino- 
scopy, and found that 11,209, or 21 % of the whole, had ocular 
defects. The proportion of these cases was highest in the poor 
and closely-built districts and in old schools, and was lowest 
in the better-class schools and those near the outskirts of the 
city. Defective vision, apart from ocular defect, seems to be 
due partly to want of training of the eyes for distant objects 
and partly to exhaustion of the eyes, which is easily induced 
when work is carried on in bad light, or the nutrition of the 
children is defective from bad feeding and unhealthy surround- 
ings. Regarding training of the eyes for distant objects, much 
might be done in the infant department by the total abolition 
of sewing, which is definitely hurtful to such young eyes, and 



Short- 
sight. 



the substitution of competitive games involving the recognition 
of small objects at a distance of 20 ft. or more. An annual testing 
by the teachers, followed by medical inspection of the children 
found defective, would soon cause all existing defects to be 
corrected, and would lead to the detection of those which 
develop during school life. 

History of Institutions 

Although there is a record of a hospital established by St Basil 
at Caesarea, Cappadocia, in the 4th century, a refuge by the 
hermit St Lymnee (d. c. 455) at Syr, Syria, in the 5th century, 
and an institution by St Bertrand, bishop of Le Mans, in the 
7th century, the first public effort to benefit the blind was the 
founding of a hospital at Paris, in 1260, by Louis IX., for 300 
blind persons. The common legend is that he founded it as an 
asylum for 300 of his soldiers who had become blinded in the 
crusade in Egypt, but the statutes of the founder are preserved, 
and no mention is made of crusaders. This Hospice des Quinze- 
Vingts, increased by subsequent additions to its funds, still 
assists the adult blind of France. The pensioners are divided 
into two classes — those who are inmates of the hospital (300), and 
those who receive pensions in the form of out -door relief. All 
appointments to inmates or pensions are vested in the minister 
of the Interior, and applicants must be of French nationality, 
totally blind and not less than forty years of age. 

From the time of St Louis to the 18th century, there are 
records of isolated cases of blind persons who were educated, 
and of efforts to devise tangible apparatus to assist them. 

Girolamo Cardan, the 16th-century Italian physician, con- 
ceived the idea that the blind could be taught to read and write 
by means of touch. About 1517 Francesco Lucas in Spain, 
and Rampazetto in Italy, made use of large letters cut in wood 
for instructing the blind. In 1646 a book, on the condition of 
the blind, was written by an Italian, and published in Italian 
and French, under the title of L'Aveugle afflige et consols. In 
1670 a book was written on the instruction of the blind by 
Lana Terzi, the Jesuit. In 1676 Jacques Bernoulli, the Swiss 
savant, taught a blind girl to read, but the means of her in- 
struction were not made known. In 1749 D. Diderot wrote his 
Leltre'sur Us aveugles a I' usage de ceux qui voient, to show how 
far the intellectual and moral nature of man is modified by 
blindness. Dr S. G. Howe, who many years after translated 
and printed the "Letter" in embossed type, characterizes it as 
abounding with errors of fact and inference, but also with 
beauties and suggestions. The heterodox speculations contained 
in his "Letter on the Blind " caused Diderot to be imprisoned 
three months in the Bastille. He was released because his services 
were required for the forthcoming Encyclopaedia. Rousseau 
visited Diderot in prison, and is reported to have suggested a 
system of embossed printing. J. Locke, G. W. Leibnitz, 
Molineau and others discussed the effect of blindness on the 
human mind. In Germany, Weissembourg had used signs in 
relief and taught Mile Paradis. 

Prior to the 18th century, blind beggars existed in such 
numbers that they struggled for standing room in positions 
favourable for asking alms. Their very affliction led to their 
being used as spectacles for the amusement of the populace. 
The degraded state of the masses of the blind in France attracted 
the attention of Valentin Hauy. In 1 771, at the annual fair of 
St Ovid, in Paris, an innkeeper had a group of blind men attired 
in a ridiculous manner, decorated with peacock tails, asses' ears, 
and pasteboard spectacles without glasses, in which condition 
they gave a burlesque concert, for the profit of their employer. 
This sad scene was repeated day after day, and greeted with 
loud laughter by the gaping crowds. Among those who gazed 
at this outrage to humanity was the philanthropist Valentin 
Hauy, who left the disgraceful scene full of sorrow. " Yes," 
he said to himself, " I will substitute truth for this mocking 
parody. I will make the blind to read, and they shall be enabled 
to execute harmonious music." Hauy collected all the infor- 
mation he could gain respecting the blind, and began teaching 
a blind boy who had gained his living by begging at a church 



62 



BLINDNESS 



door. Encouraged by the success of his pupil, Hatty collected 
other blind persons, and in 1785 founded in Paris the first school 
for the blind (the Institution Nationale des Jeunes Aveugles), 
and commenced the first printing in raised characters. In 1786, 
before Louis XVI. and his court at Versailles, he exhibited the 
attainments of his pupils in reading, writing, arithmetic, geo- 
graphy and music, and in the same year published an account 
of his methods, entitled Essai sur V education des aveugles. As 
the novelty wore off, contributions almost came to an end, and 
the Blind School must have ceased to exist, had it not been taken, 
in 1 791, under the protection of the state. 

The emperor of Russia, and later the dowager empress, having 
learned of Hatty's work, invited him to visit St Petersburg 
for the purpose of establishing a similar institution in the Russian 
capital. On his journey Haiiy was invited by the king of 
Prussia to Charlottenburg. He took part in the deliberations 
of the Academy of Sciences in Berlin, and as a result a school 
was founded there. 

Edward Rushton, a blind man, was the projector of the first 
institution for the blind in England — the School for the Indigent 
Blind, Liverpool. In 1790 Rushton suggested to the literary 
and philosophical society of which he was a member, the estab- 
lishment of a benefit club for the indigent blind. The idea was 
communicated to his friend, J. Christie, a blind musician, and 
the latter thought the scheme should also include the instruc- 
tion of young blind persons. They circulated letters amongst 
individuals who would be likely to give their assistance, and the 
Rev. Henry Dannett warmly advocated the undertaking. It 
was mainly due to his co-operation and zeal that Messrs Rushton 
and Christie's plan was carried out, and the Liverpool asylum 
was opened in 1791. Thomas Blacklock of Edinburgh, a blind 
poet and scholar, translated Hatty's work on the Education 
of the Blind. He interested Mr David Millar, a blind gentle- 
man, the Rev. David Johnston and others in the subject, and 
after Blacklock's death the Edinburgh Asylum for the Relief 
of the Indigent and Industrious Blind was established (1793). 
Institutions were established in the United Kingdom in the 
following order : — 

School for the Indigent Blind, Liverpool . . . 1791 

Royal Blind Asylum, Edinburgh .... 1793 

Bristol Asylum 1793 

School for the Indigent Blind, Southwark (now 

removed to Leatherhead) 1799 

Norwich Asylum and School 1805 

Richmond Asylum, Dublin 1810 

Aberdeen Asylum 1812 

Molyneux Asylum, Dublin 1815 

Glasgow Asylum and School 1827 

Belfast School 1 83 1 

Wilberforce School, York 1833 

Limerick Asylum 1834 

London Society for Teaching the Blind to Read, St 

John's Wood, N 1838 

Royal Victoria School for the Blind, Newcastle-on- 

Tyne 1838 

West of England Institute for the Blind, Exeter . 1838 

Henshaw's Blind Asylum, Manchester . . . 1839 

County and City of Cork Asylum .... 1840 

Catholic Asylum, Liverpool. ..... 1841 

Brighton Asylum 1842 

Midland Institute for the Blind, Nottingham . . 1843 

General Institute for the Blind, Birmingham . . 1848 

Macan Asylum, Armagh ...... 1854 

St Joseph's Asylum, Dublin 1858 

St Mary's Asylum, Dublin . . . . . 1858 

Institute for the Blind, Devonport i860 

South Devon and Cornwall Institute for the Blind, 

Plymouth i860 

School for the Blind, Southsea 1864 

Institute for the Blind, Dundee 1865 

South Wales Institute for the Blind, Swansea . 1865 

School for the Blind, Leeds 1866 

College for the Sons of Gentlemen, Worcester . 1866 

Northern Counties Institute for the Blind, Inverness 1866 
Royal Normal College and Academy of Music for the 

Blind, Upper Norwood 1872 

School for the Blind, Sheffield . . . . . 1879 

Barclay Home and School for Blind Girls, Brighton 1893 

Homes for Blind Children, Preston . . . . 1895 
North Stafford School, Stoke-on-Trent . . .1897 



Many of the early institutions were asylums, and to the present 
day schools for the blind are regarded by the public as asylums 
rather than as educational establishments. With nearly all 
these schools workshops were connected. In 1856 Miss Gilbert, 
the blind daughter of the bishop of Chichester, established a 
workshop in Berners Street, London, and since that date 
workshops have been started in many of the provincial 
towns. ...... 

After the beginning of the 19th century, institutions for the 
blind were established in various parts of Europe. The iristitur 
tion at Vienna was founded in 1804 by Dr W; Klein, a blind man, 
and he remained at its head for fifty years. That of Berlin was 
established in 1806, Amsterdam, Prague and Dresden in 1808, 
Copenhagen in 181 1. There are more than 150 on the European 
continent, most of them receiving aid from the government, 
and being under government supervision. 

The first school for the blind in the United States was founded 
in Boston, Mass., chiefly through the efforts of DrJohnD. Fisher, 
a young physician who visited the French school. It was 
incorporated in 1829, and in honour of T.H. Perkins (1764-1854) 
who gave his mansion to the institution was named the Perkins In r 
stitution and Massachusetts Asylum (now School) for the Blind. 
Aid was granted by the state from the beginning. In 183 1 Dr 
Samuel G. Howe (q.v.) was appointed director, and held that 
position for nearly forty-four years, being succeeded by his 
son-in-law Michael Anagnos (d. 1906), who established a kinder- 
garten for the blind at Jamaica Plain, in connexion with the 
Perkins Institution. Dr Howe was interested in many charitable 
and sociological movements, but his life-work was on behalf of 
the blind. One of his most notable achievements was the 
education of Laura Bridgman (q.v.), who was deaf, dumb and 
blind, and this has since led to the education of Helen Keller 
and other blind deaf-mutes. The New York Institution was 
incorporated in 183 1, and the Pennsylvania Institution was 
founded at Philadelphia by the Society of Friends in 1833. The 
Ohio was founded at Columbus in 1837, Virginia at Staunton in 
1839, Kentucky at Louisville in 1842, Tennessee at Nashville 
in 1844, and now every state in the Union makes provision for 
the education of the blind. 

Statistics 

In England and Wales the total number of persons returned 
in 1901 as afflicted with blindness was 25,317, being in the 
proportion of 778 per million living, or 1 blind persdn • 
in every 1285 of the population. The following table England 
shows that the proportion of blind persons to popula- Wahs. ' 
tion has diminished at each successive enumeration 
since 1851, in which year particulars of those afflicted in this 
manner were ascertained for the first time. It will, however, 
be noted that, although the decrease in the proportion of blind 
in the latest intercensal period was still considerable, yet the 
rate of decrease which had obtained between 1871 and 1891 was 
not maintained. - 





Number of 


Blind per Million 


Persons Living to 


Year. 


Blind. 


of the Population. 


one Blind Person,; 


1851 


18,306 


1 02 1 


979 


1861 


19.352 


964 


1037 


1871 


21,590 


951 


1052 


1881 


22,832 


879 


.■• 1138 : - 


1891 


23.467 


809 


1236 . 


1901 


.25,317 


778 


1285 



The following table, which gives the proportions of blind 
per million living at the earlier age-groups, shows that in the 
decennium 1891-1901, as also in recent previous intercensal 
periods, there was a decrease in the proportion of blind children 
in England and Wales generally; it thus lends support to the 
contention, in the General Report for 1891, that the decrease was 
due either to the lesser prevalence, or to the more efficient 
treatment, of purulent ophthalmia and other infantile maladies 
which may result in blindness. 



BLINDNESS 



63 



Age-Period. 


1851 


1861 


1871 


1881 


1891 


1901 


Under 5 years 

5-10 

10-15 

15-20 

20-25 


198 
297 

365 
416 
481 


196 
256 
366 
415 

443 


185 
259 } 
359) 
404 

45i 


166 

288 

388 
422 


, *55 

( 188 

( 290 

370 

385 


129 
192 
323 
329 
359 


Total under 25 


339 


322 


317 


298 


269 


261 



In 1886 a royal commission on the Wind, deaf and dumb was 
appointed by the government, and, after taking much valuable 
evidence, issued an exhaustive and instructive report. Following 
on the practical recommendations submitted by this commission, 
the Elementary Education (Blind and Deaf Children) Act 1893, 
was passed, under which the education of the blind became for 
the first time compulsory. In terms of this statute, the school 
authorities were made responsible for the provision of suitable 
elementary education for blind children up to sixteen years of 
age, and grants. of £3, 3s. for elementary subjects, and of £2, 2s. 
for industrial training, were contributed by the state towards 
the cost of educating children in schools certified as efficient 
within the meaning of the. Elementary Education Act 1876. 
The principal aim of the Education Act of 1893 was to supply 
education in some useful profession or trade which will enable 
the blind to earn their livelihood and to become useful citizens; 
but the weak spot was that no provision was made therein for 
the completion of their education and industrial training after 
the age of sixteen. 

In England and Wales, in 1907, there were twenty-four 
resident schools and forty-three workshops for the blind. In 
many of the large towns, day classes for the education of blind 
children have been established by local education authorities. 
There are forty-six home teaching societies, who send teachers 
to visit the blind in their homes, to teach adults who wish to 
learn to read, to act as colporteurs, to lend and exchange useful 
books, and to act as Scripture readers to those who are aged and 
infirm. All the home teaching societies for the blind and many 
public . libraries lend embossed books. The public library at 
Oxford has nearly 400 volumes of classical works for the use of 
university students. 

A society was instituted in 1847 by ^ r W. Moon for stereo- 
typing and embossing the Scriptures and other books in 
" Moon " type. The type has been adapted to over 400 
languages and dialects. After Dr Moon's death in 1884 the work 
was carried on by his daughter, Miss Adelaide Moon, and the 
books are much used by the adult blind. 

In 1868 Dr T. R. Armitage, being aware of the great improve- 
ments which had been made in the education of the blind in 
other countries, founded the British and Foreign Blind Associa- 
tion. This association was formed for the purpose of promoting 
the education and employment of the blind, by ascertaining 
what had been done in these respects in various countries, by 
endeavouring to supply deficiencies where these were found to 
exist, and by attempting to bring about greater harmony of 
action between the different existing schools and institutions. 
It gave a new impetus to the education and training of the blind 
in the United Kingdom. At that time their education was in 
a state of chaos. The Bible, or a great part of it, had been 
printed in five different systems. The founders took as an axiom ; 
that the relative merits of .the various methods of education 
through the sense of touch should be decided by those and those 
only who have to rely on this sense. The council, who were all 
totally or partially blind, spent two years in comparing the 
different systems of embossed print. In 1869 and 1870 Dr 
Armitage corresponded with Dr J. R. Russ in regard to the New 
York Point. No trouble was spared to arrive at a right conclu- 
sion. The Braille system was finally adopted, and the association 
at once became a centre for supplying frames for writing Braille, 
printed books, maps, music and other educational apparatus 
for the blind. All books printed by the association are printed 
from stereotyped plates embossed by blind copyists. About 
3000 separate works, varying in length from 1 to 12 volumes, 



have been copied by hand to meet the requirements of public 
libraries and individuals. About 700 ladies, who give their 
services, make the first Braille copy of these books, and they are 
recopied by "blind scribes, chiefly women and girls, who are paid 
for their work. 

The National Lending library, London, was founded in 1882. 
It has over 5500 volumes in Braille and other types. Books are 
forwarded to all parts of the United Kingdom. 

There are fourteen magazines published in embossed type in 
the United Kingdom. ■• 

There are thirty-six pension societies — the principal are 
Hetherington's, Day's, the Qothworkers', the Cordwainers', 
the National Blind Relief Society, Royal Blind Pension Society 
and Indigent Blind Visiting Society. 

The Gardner Trust administers the income of £300,000 left 
by Henry Gardner in 1879. The income is used for in- 
structing the blind in the profession of music, in suitable 
trades, handicrafts and professions other than music, for 
pensions, and free grants to institutions and individuals for 
special purposes. 

According to the census of 1901, Scotland had ^253 (or 727 per 
million) blind persons, as against 2797 in 1891, but in a paper read 
at the conference in Edinburgh, 1906, the superintendent . 

of the Glasgow Mission to the Out-door Blind' stated Scotiana - 
that there were 758 employed or being educated in institutions, and 
3238 known as " out-door blind," making a total of 3996. . There are 
in Scotland ten missions, so distributed as to cover the whole country, 
and regular visits are made as far north as the Orkney and Shetland 
Islands. In carrying on the work, there are twenty-four paid 
missionaries or teachers and a large number of voluntary helpers. 
These societies originated in a desire to teach the blind to read 
in their own homes, and to provide them with the Scriptures and 
other religious books, but the social, intellectual and temporal needs 
of the blind also receive a large share of attention. These teachers 
afford the best means of circulating embossed literature, therefore 
the library committee of the Glasgow corporation has agreed to 
purchase books and place them in the mission library instead of in 
the public library. As the institutions provide for only a small 
number of the blind, strenuous efforts are made by the committee 
and teachers of missions to find some employment for the many 
adults who come under their care. 

In Glasgow, a ladies' auxiliary furnishes work for 150 knitters, 
and takes the responsibility of disposing of their work. In Scotland 
there are five schools for the young blind, and in connexion with 
each is a workshop for adults. In Edinburgh the school is at West 
Craigmillar, and the workshop in the city, but both are under the 
same board of directors. 

According to the census of 1901, there were 4253 totally blind 
persons in Ireland, a proportion of 954 per million, as against 1 135 
in 1891. Of these, 2430 were over 60 years of age and 
II over 100. These figures do not include the partially Ireland. 
blind, who numbered 12 17. The fact that so many aged blind 
persons are to be found in Ireland is doubtless due to an ophthalmic 
epidemic which occurred during the Irish famine. There are twelve 
institutions, a home mission and home teaching society; nine of 
these institutions are asylums, that system having been largely 
adopted in Ireland. The scarcity of manufacturing industries, 
except in a few northern counties, entails a lack of work suited to 
the blind. The Elementary Education Act (Blind and Deaf) does 
not extend to Ireland. 

The following table gives the number of blind in age-groups in 
1901 : — 



Age-Period. 


Number. 


Age-Period. 


Number. 


Under 5 years 


10 


50-55 


392 


5-10 


38 


55-6o 


314 


10-15 


64 


60-65 


617 


15-20 


73 


65-70 


382 


20-25 


95 


70-75 


540 


25-30 


116 


75-80 


306 


30-35 


146 


80-85 


37 2 


35-40 


146 


85-90 


118 


40-45 


205 


95 and upwards 


95 


45-50 


224 







In the Dominion of Canada, South Africa, the states of the 
Australian Commonwealth and New Zealand, provision is made by 
the government for the education of the young blind, and 
in some cases for training the adults in handicrafts. 
Embossed literature is carried free of expense, and on the 
Victorian railways no charge is made for the guide who accompanies 
a blind person. 



British 
Colonies. 



6 4 



The following were the census returns for 1901 : — 



Victoria 


. 1082 


Tasmania . 


173 


New South Wales 


. 884 


New Zealand . 


274 (1891) 


South Australia 


• 315 


Natal . . . 


68 


Queensland 


. 209 


Cape Colony . 


2802 (1904) 


West Australia 


. 121 


Canada 


3279 



United 
States. 



In Australia there are institutions for the blind at Melbourne, 
Sydney, Adelaide, Brighton, Brisbane and Maylands near Perth. In 
New Zealand the institution is at Auckland. 

InCapeColony, between 1875 and 1891, there was an extraordinary 
increase in blindness, but between 1891 and 1904 the rate per 10,000 
has decreased 23-78 %. There is an institution at 
Worcester for deaf-mutes and blind, founded in 
1 88 1. It is supported by a government grant, 
fees and subscription. 

Schools for the blind were established by the 
Dominion government at Brantford, Ontario 
(1871), and Halifax, Nova Scotia (1867). 

In Montreal there are two private institutions, 
the M'Kay Institute for Protestant Deaf-Mutes 
and Blind, and a school for Roman Catholic 
children under the charge of the Sisters of Char- 
ity. 

In the United States the education of the 
blind is not regarded as a charity, but forms 

part of the educational system of the 

country, and is carried on at the 

public expense. According to the 
A nnualReporloi the Commissioner of Education 
for 1908, there were 40 state schools, with 
4340 pupils. The value of apparatus, grounds 
and buildings was $9,201,161. For salaries 
and other expenditure, the aggregate was 
$1,460,732. The United States government 
appropriates $10,000 annually for printing em- 
bossed books, which are distributed among the 
different state schools for the blind. Beside 
these state schools, there are workshops for the 
blind subsidized by the state government or the 
municipality. Commissions composed of able 
men have recently been appointed in several 
of the states to take charge of the affairs of 
the blind from infancy to old age. The ex- 
haustive summary of the 12th census enables these commissions 
to communicate with every blind person in their respective states. 
At the 1 2th census a change was made in the plan for securing 
the returns, and the work of the enumerators was restricted to a 
brief preliminary return, showing only the name, sex, age, post 
office address, and nature of the existing defects in all persons 
alleged to be blind or deaf. Dr Alexander Graham Bell, of 
Washington, D.C., was appointed expert special agent of the 
census office for the preparation of a report on the deaf and blind. 
He was empowered to conduct in his own name a correspondence 
relating to this branch of the census inquiry. A circular con- 
taining eighteen questions was addressed to every blind person 
given in the census, and from the data contained in the replies 
the following tables (I., II., III., IV.) have been compiled. 

Table I. — The Blind, by Degree of Blindness and Sex. 



BLINDNESS 

The enumerators reported a total of 101,123 persons alleged to be 
blind as defined in the instructions contained in the schedules, but 
this number was greatly reduced as a result of the correspondence 
directly with the individuals, 8842 reporting that the alleged defect 
did not exist, and 6544 that they were blind only in one eye but 
were able to see with the other, and hence did not come within the 
scope of the inquiry. No replies were received in 19,884 cases in 
which personal schedules were sent, although repeated inquiries 
were made; consequently these cases were dropped. In 380 cases 
the personal schedules returned were too incomplete for use, and 
in 75 cases duplication was discovered. The number of cases 
remaining for statistical treatment, after making the eliminations 

Table II. — The Blind, by Degree of Blindness, Age-Periods, Colour and Nativity. 



Degree of Blindness and 
Age- Period. 


All Classes. 


White. 


Coloured. 


Total. 


Native. 


Foreign- 
born. 


Number — ■ 
The blind . . 
Under 20 years . 
20 years and over 
Age unknown. 


64,763 

8,308 

56,165 

290 


56,535 

7,252 

49,067 

216 


45,479 

6,937 

38,388 

154 


10,694 

231 

10,420 

43 


8228 

1056 

7098 

74 


The totally blind 
Under 20 years . 
20 years and over 
Age unknown. 


35,645 

4,123 

31,363 

159 


30,359 

3,543 

26,704 

112 


23,636 

3,377 

20,179 

80 


6,511 

129 

6,363 

19 


5286 

580 

4659 

47 


The partially blind 
Under 20 years . 
20 years and over 
Age unknown. 


29,118 

4,185 
24,802 

131 


26,176 

3,709 

22,363 

104 


21,843 

3,56o 

18,209 

74 


4,i83 
102 

4,057 
24 


2942 
476 

2439 

27 


Number per 1 ,000,000 

population of same age — ■ 

The blind .... 

Under 20 years . 

20 years and over 


852 

247 

1,334 


846 

250 

1,305 


804 

248 

1,348 


1,047 

215 

i,H3 


896 

229 

1574 


The totally blind 
Under 20 years . 
20 years and over 


469 
123 

745 


454 
122 
710 


418 
121 
708 


637 
120 
698 


576 

126 

1033 


The partially blind 
Under 20 years . 
20 years and over 


-383 
124 

589 


392 

128 

595 


386 
127 
639 


410 
95 

445 


320 
103 
54i 



Sex. 


The 
Blind. 


The 

Totally 

Blind. 


The 

Partially 

Blind. 


Number — 

Total 

Male 


64,763 
37,°H 
27,709 


35,645 
20,144 
15,501 


29,n8 
16,910 
12,208 


Per cent distribution — 

Total 

Male 


1000 

57-2 
42-8 


ioo-o 
56-5 

43-5 


IOO-O 

58-i 
41-9 


Number per 1,000,000 population 
of same sex — 

Male 


852 
955 
745 


469 
519 

417 


383 
436 
328 



and corrections, was 64,763, representing 35,645 totally blind, and 
29,118 partially blind. This number, however, can be considered 
only as the minimum, as an unknown proportion of the blind were 
not located by the enumerators, and doubtless a considerable 
porportion of the 19,884 persons who failed to return the personal 
schedules should be included in the total. 

" Blindness, either total or partial, is so largely a defect of the 
aged, and occurs with so much greater frequency as the age advances 
and the population diminishes, that in any comparison of the pro- 
portion of the blind in the general population of different classes, 
such as native and foreign-born whites, or white and coloured, the 
age distribution of the population of each class should be constantly 
borne in mind. The differences in this respect account for many of 
the differences in the gross ratios, and it is only when ratios are 
compared for classes of population of identical ages that their relative 
liability to blindness can be properly inferred." 

Table II. shows the classification, by degree of blindness, of the 
blind under twenty years of age, twenty years of age and over, and of 
unknown age, with respect to colour and nativity, with the number 
at the specified ages per million of population in the same age-group. 

The relationship or consanguinity of parents of the 64,763 blind 
was reported in 56,507 cases, in 2527 (or 4-5 %) of which the parents 
were related as cousins. 

In 57,726 cases the inquiry as to the existence of blind relatives 
was answered; 10,967 (or 19%) of this number reported that they 
had blind relatives. 

Of the 2527 blind persons whose parents were cousins, 993 (or 
39-3%) had blind relatives, — 844 having blind brothers, sisters or 
ancestors, and 149 having blind collateral relatives or descendants. 

Of the 53,980 blind whose parents were not related, 9490 (or 
17-6%) had blind relatives, 7395 having blind brothers, sisters or 
ancestors, and 2095 having blind collateral relatives or descendants. 

It was found that, of the 2527 blind whose parents were cousins, 
632 (or 25%) were congenitally blind, of whom 350 (or 55-4%) 
had also blind relatives of the classes specified ; while, among the 
53,980 whose parents were not so related, the number of congenitally 
blind was 3666 (or but 6-8%), of whom only 1023 (or 27-9%) had 
blind relatives. 

In 1883 the number of blind in France was estimated at 32,056, 
the total population of the country being 38,000,000; 2548 of the 



BLINDNESS 



65 



blind were under, and 29,568 above, 21 years of age; of the former 
857 were receiving instruction in 21 schools supported by the state, 
p by the city of Paris, by some of the departments, and by 

P"""*- some religious bodies. The four Parisian institutions 
are the Institution Nationale des Jeunes Aveugles, the Ecole Braille 
(founded in 1883), the Etablissement des Sceurs Aveugles de St Paul 



Table III.— The Blind, by Degree of Blindness and Ag 


e-Periods. 






The 


The 


Age-Period. 


The 
Blind. 


Totally 


Partially 




Blind. 


Blind. 


Number — 








All ages 


64,763 


35,645 


29,118 


Under 10 years . 






2,307 


1,262 


1,045 


10-19 ,, 






6,001 


2,861 


3.HO 


20-29 


. 






4,861 


2,851 


2,010 


30-39 


» 






5.024 


3,o77 


1,947 


40-49 


. 






6,504 


3,778 


2,726 


50-59 


1 






8,530 


4,79i 


3.739 


60-69 


> 






10,507 


5,835 


4.672 


70-79 


» 






11,421 


6,132 


5.289 


80-89 


1 






7,49o 


3,885 


3.605 


90-99 


. 






i,596 


851 


•745 


100 years and over . 






232 


163 


69 


Age unknown 






290 


159 


131 


Number per 1,000,000 population 








of same age — 








All ages 


852 


469 


383 


Under 10 years . 






128 


70 


58 


10-19 .. 






384 


183 


201 


20-29 >. 






35i 


206 


145 


30-39 .. • • 






478 


293 


185 


40-49 .. • • 






845 


491 


354 


5o-59 >. • • 






1,655 


930 


725 


60-69 « ■ 






3,396 


1,886 


1,510 


70-79 .. • • 






8,136 


4,368 


3,768 


80-89 „ . . 






22,022 


11,423 


io,599 


90-99 „ . . 






52,746 


28,125 


24,621 


100 years and over . 






66,210 


46,518 


19,692 


Age unknown 






1,446 


793 


653 



(founded in 1852), and that of the Freres de Saint Jean de Dieu 
(founded in 1875). 

The number of the blind in Germany was about 39,000, or 870 per 
million in 1885. The number of institutions was 28, nearly all 
being educational, with a total of 2139 pupils. All these 



Oermaay. 



institutions, except two which are supported entirely by 



private munificence, are largely assisted by the state, the communes 
or the provinces. Seventeen of them derive their entire require- 
ments from the state, so that they are quite inde- 
pendent of private charity, while the remainder 
are only supplemented from public funds so far 
as the private contributions fall short of the 
expenses. 

The following extracts were made from an official 
communication from Hofrath Buttner, director of 
the institution for the blind in Dresden, 
Saxony tQ tne rova | commission, concerning the 
system. care anc j SU p erv ; s ; on (pjirsorge) of the 
blind after their discharge from the institution : — 

" When twenty years of age, the blindare usually 
discharged from the institution. Long experience 
has taught us that the care and supervision of 
the blind after their discharge from the institution 
are quite as important as their education and 
training in the institution. It would, inouropinion, 
be unjust to remove them from their sad surround- 
ings, educate and accustom them to higher wants, 
and then allow them to sink backward into their 
former miserable way of life. After much delibera- 
tion it was decided to remain in connexion with the 
discharged blind, to visit them in their places of 
abode, to learn their wants, to study the difficulties 
which they experienced in supporting themselves 
independently, and, as far as possible, to remove 
their grievances. Director Georgi began this 
work in 1843. Director Reinhard continued it 
from 1867 to 1879, and the present director has 
followed the same path. With the knowledge of 
these difficulties the Fiirsorge (care) for discharged 
blind steadily advanced, and has won the con- 
fidence of the Saxon people. It was decided 
that, on the discharge of the blind person, the director should select 
a trustworthy person, residing in his future place of abode, to give 
him advice and practical help, to protect him from imposition, and 
to keep up communication with the director. If this guardian is 
unable to advise or help, he then writes to the director, who, if 
necessary, comes to the place, and this is all the easier as he travels 

rv. 3 



free on all railways in Saxony. The result of these visits, as well as all 
communications from the guardian, the letters from the blind person, 
and every document relating to him, are entered in a register kept 
at the institution. These guardians are respectable, benevolent, 
practical men, capable of procuring custom for their wards. But 
there was no doubt that, in spite of these arrangements, the dis- 
charged blind were unable to support themselves without the assist- 
ance of capital, whether in money or outfit. The blind man can do 
as good work as the man who can see; but as a rule he does not 
work so quickly, and if the man who is not blind has to use every 
exertion to support himself and his family, the blind man to do 
the same requires some special help, without which he will 
either not be able to compete, or will have to lead a life of great 
privation. 

" The first difficulty when a blind pupil is starting in life is to 
provide himself with the necessary tools and material. These the 
institution supplies to him, and continues through life to afford him 
moral and material help ; and by this means the greater part of the 
blind are enabled to save money for sickness and old age. Those 
who cannot return to their relations cannot at once meet all their 
expenses, and the weak and old need special help. A part of the 
money for their board and lodging is paid for those who have to be 
settled in other places on account of the death or untrustworthiness 
of their relatives. 

" The fund for the discharged blind is administered by the director 
of the institution. The number of those assisted amounts at present 
to about 400, who live respectably in all parts of Saxony, are almost 
self-supporting, and feel themselves free men. For, just as a son 
does not feel galled by a gift from his father, so they are not ashamed 
to receive assistance from their second paternal ' home, the 
institution." 

The number of the blind in Holland, according to the census of the 
1st of December 1869, was 1593, or one in every 2247 of the general 
population. The Protestants and Roman Catholics were „ .. 
about equally balanced. No cognizance was taken of the nouaaa. 
blind in the census of 1879. There is only one blind institution, 
that of Amsterdam, with 60 pupils, with a preparatory school at 
Benuchem (with 20 pupils) and an asylum for adults with 52 inmates 
(unmarried). Besides these, there are workshops at Amsterdam, 
Rotterdam, the Hague, Utrecht and Middelburg. 

According to the census of 1870, there were in Denmark 1249 blind 
(577 males and 672 females), or one blind for every 1428 persons. 
One institution has been established by government, _ 
i.e. the Royal Institution for the Blind, at Copenhagen; Uel " nark - 
100 children, aged 10 and upwards, are here educated. There is a 
preparatory school for blind children under 10 years of age, and an 
asylum for blind females, most of whom are former pupils of the 
royal school. An association for promoting the self-dependence of 
the blind assists not only former pupils of the school but every blind 
man or woman willing and able to work. 

The number of blind persons in Sweden, according to the census 

Table IV. — The Blind, by Consanguinity of Parents, Degree of Blindness, and Blind 

Relatives of Other Classes. 



Consanguinity of Parents. 


Total. 


Blind 
Brothers, 
Sisters or 
Ancestors. 


Collateral 
Relatives 

or De- 
scendants 
alone, 
Blind. 


No Blind 
Relatives 
or Rela- 
tives by 
Marriage 
alone, 
Blind. 


Not 
Stated. 


All classes — 
The blind 
Totally blind 
Partially blind . 


64,763 
35,645 
29,118 


8629 
4378 
4251 


2338 
1215 
1123 


46,759 
26,349 
20,410 


7037 
3703 
3334 


Parents cousins — 
The blind 

Totally blind . . 
Partially blind . 


2,527 
1,291 
1,236 


844 
435 
409 


149 

78 
7i 


1,456 
739 
717 


78 
39 
39 


Parents not cousins — 
The blind .... 
Totally blind . . 
Partially blind . 


53,98o 
29,892 

24,088 


7395 
3720 

3675 


2095 
1090 
1005 


43,368 

24,541 
18,827 


1 122 

54i 

58i 


Consanguinity of parents 
not stated — • 
The blind 

Totally blind, . . 
Partially blind . 


8,256 
4,462 
3,794 


390 

223 
167 


94 

47 
47 


1.935 

1,069 

866 


5837 
3123 
2714 



of December 1880, was 3723, being at the rate of one blind person 
for every 1226 of the general population. At the beginning of the 
year 1879, the instruction of the blind in Sweden was com- 
pletely separated from that of the deaf and dumb, on the weaen. 
grounds that it hindered the intellectual development of the blind — 
a conclusion which experience shows to be tolerably correct. Since 

11 



66 



BLINDNESS 



July 1888 the Royal Institution of the Blind has obtained a new 
building at Tomteboda, near Stockholm. 

The law of the 8th of July 1881, concerning the instruction of 
abnormal children, has imposed on the state the duty of establishing 
Norway. a sufficient number of schools for the blind in Norway, 
as well as for the other abnormal children. All the blind 
of the country, from 9 years of age until the age of 21 , are compelled 
to be educated, with a maximum of 8 years of instruction for each 
pupil. 

The census of 1873 showed that in Finland there were 7959 blind 
in a total population of about 2,000,000 inhabitants, the proportion 
Finland. reaching the very high figure of one for every 251 of the 
total population. Nevertheless there were only 160 of 
school age. For these there are two institutions, one at Helsingfors, 
where the instruction is given in the Swedish language, and where 
there are about 12 pupils, and another at Kuopio, where the in- 
struction is given in the Finnish language, and where the pupils 
number about 30. 

According to information received from the I.R. Central Commis- 
sion for Statistics, the number of blind in the provinces represented 
Austria. m tne Austrian Reichsrath amounted to 15,582 in the year 
1884. Of these, 2345 were children up to 15 years of age, 
namely 433 below 5, 779 from 5 to 10, and 11 13 from 10 to 15 years. 
The total number of institutions for blind children in Austria amounts 
to 8. The blind children of school age who are not placed in special 
institutions are compulsorily taught in the public general free schools, 
as far as practicable. The number of blind in the whole dominion 
of the crown of St Stephen was 208,391; 

The number of blind persons in Italy was 21,718, according to the 

census of 1881, and those of school age were estimated to form 25 % 

Italy. ■ °f the whole, or about 5429 in number. But no special 

; cognizance of the blind is taken in the government census. 

There are 20 institutions, schools and workshops for the blind. 

Statistics with regard to the number and condition of the blind 
in the Russian empire are of a very limited character, and it is only 
Russia. °f l ate y ears that any attempt has been made to draw 
up any accurate returns with regard to them. The total 
number of the blind throughout the ernpire is generally reckoned at 
from 160,000 to 200,000, thus making 1600 to 2000 per million 
inhabitants. In Russia there are 21 institutions for the support of 
the blind. 

"In Egypt the blind are very numerous in comparison with other 
countries, and although no exact statistics are at present obtainable 
tjgypt on this point, it is computed that the proportion is at 
least one totally blind person to every 50 of the population.' 
This is principally the result of acute ophthalmia occurring in infancy, 
and it is fostered by the superstitious observance which prevents the 
mothers from washing their children from the time of birth until' 
they are two years old, at which late date only they are weaned. 
There is also a great deal of infection carelessly and ignorantly 
conveyed direct from eye to eye, by means of unwashed fingers, and 
this is accountable for the occurrence of much more eye-disease than 
any that may be caused by the' proverbial flies. The only employ- 
ment followed by the blind, both Mahommedan and Coptic (or native 
Christian), and' that only to a limited extent, is recitation aloud — 
the former repeating portions of the Koran at funerals, and the latter 
chanting the church-ritual in their services; the blind girls and 
women are without occupation. Practically no edupatioh is given 
to the blind as a class, and anything which they learn has to be 
acquired orally by frequent repetition. The blind were not always 
so completely neglected, as the native ecclesiastical authorities 
(Wakf) gave an annual grant of £2000 for the continued maintenance 
of a school for the blind and the deaf and dumb in Cairo, which taught 
about 80 day-pupils; the latter years of the school were passed 
under the ministry of education, and it was ultimately discontinued. 
Such a condition of affairs appealed to Dr T. R. Armitage, and 
explains his motive in trying to establish some proper means for 
affording the blind in Egypt the necessary scholastic instruction and 
other training. In Egypt, as in other countries, it is occasionally 
very difficult, and takes some time, to start any enterprise such as 
this on a satisfactory and practical footing, and it was left for 
Mrs T. R. Armitage to be the means of successfully carrying out her 
husband's wishes in this particular. In 1900 Mrs Armitage asked 
Dr Kenneth Scott to prepare a scheme for the education and welfare 
of the blind in Egypt, on lines suggested to her. This, through the 
British and Foreign Blind Association, was submitted to Queen 
Victoria, who graciously commanded it to be sent, through the 
foreign office, to the khedive, who in mark of approbation and 
encouragement generously gave a handsome donation towards its 
realization. The Institution for the Blind was established at 
Zeitoun, Cairo, early in the year 1901, through funds provided by 
Mrs T. R. Armitage. The object of the institution, which is wholly 
unsectarian in character, is to educate and train the blind mentally 
and physically and in industrial occupations, and at the same time 
to improve their moral standard, so that eventually they may 
become in great measure, or even completely, self-supporting. 
(Dr Kenneth Scott.) 

India has a large proportion of blind inhabitants, ranging from 
one in 600 in some provinces, to one in 400 in others, with a total 
of more than half a million. Until recently, little had been done in 



the way of organized effort to educate them, though many of the 
missionaries had helped individual cases. At Amritsar a large and 
well-organized work for the blind has been carried on India. 

for many years. This school has now been moved to 
Rajpur, and helps 70 blind women and children. In 1903 a govern- 
ment school and hospital were established at Bombay as a memorial 
to Queen Victoria. Reading, writing, arithmetic, tailoring, type- 
writing, carpentering, lathe-work and carpet-weaving are taught. 
There are small schools at Parantij, Calcutta, Palancottah, Calicut, 
Coorg, Chota-Nagpur, and at Moulmein in Burma. The memorial 
to Queen Victoria in Ceylon took the form of work for the blind. 
J. Knowles, with the help of L. Garthwaite of the Indian Civil 
Service, devised a scheme of oriental Braille, which has been adopted 
by the British and Foreign Bible Society for the production of the 
Scriptures in Eastern languages. 

Blindness is very prevalent in China, and to eye-diseases, neglect 
and dirt, must be added leprosy and smallpox as causes. Blind 
beggars may be seen on every highway, clamouring for china. 
alms. A s i n India their pitiful condition attracted the 
attention of the v missionaries. W. H. Murray, a Scottish missionary 
in Peking, made a simple and ingenious adaptation of the Braille 
symbols to the complicated system of Chinese printing, in which over 
4000 characters are required.' It was necessary to represent at least 
408 sounds, and each one was given a corresponding Braille number. 
When a pupil reads the number he knows instantly the sound for 
which it stands. A school for the blind was established at Peking, 
and the version of the Scriptures printed at Peking can be read in all 
the provinces where the Northern Mandarin dialect is spoken(see Miss 
Gordon Cumming, The Inventor of the Numeral Type for China). 
A Braille code has recently been arranged for Mand.arin, based on a 
system of initials and finals, by Miss Garland of tne China Inland 
Mission. At Foochow there is a large school for boys and girls in 
connexion with the Church Missionary Society. At Ningpo, Amoy, 
Canton and Fukien work for the blind is carried on by the 
missionaries. 

The blind in Japan have long been trained in massage, acupuncture 
and music, and until recently, with few exceptions, none but the 
blind engaged in these occupations. From three to five Japan 
years are required to become proficient in massage, but a 
blind person is then able to support himself. In Yokohama, with a 
population of half a million, there are 1000 men and women engaged 
in massage, and all but about 100 of these are blind. In 1878 a 
school for the blind and deaf-mutes was established in Kyoto, and 
soon after one in Tokyo. Japan has four schools for the blind, and 
seven combined schools for the blind and deaf-mutes. 

As in other Eastern countries, blindness is very prevalent in 
Palestine. Ophthalmic hospitals and medical attendance are now 
available in the larger towns, and the missionary schools pj,jg S ti ae . 
have done much to inculcate habits of cleanliness, therefore 
there is a slight decrease in the number of the blind. The home 
and school for blind girls in Jerusalem is the outcome of a day school 
opened in 1896 by an American missionary. There is also a small 
school at Urfa under the auspices of the American mission in that town. ' 

Education 

As more sensations are received through the eye than through 
any other organ, the mind of a blind child is vacant* and the 
training should begin early or the mind will degenerate. 
Indirectly the loss of sight results in inaction. If no ^/2w. 
one encourages a blind child to move, he will sit .' 

quietly in a corner, and when he leaves his seat will move timidly 
about. This want of activity produces bad physical effects, and 
further delays mental growth. The blind are often injured, 
some of them ruined for life, through the ignorance and mistaken 
kindness of their friends during early childhood. They should 
be taught to walk, to go up and down stairs, to wash, dress and 
feed themselves. 

They should be carefully taught correct postures and attitudes, 
and to avoid making grimaces. They should be told the require- 
ments of social conventions which a seeing child learns through 
watching his elders. They have no consciousness that their 
habits are disagreeable, and the earlier unsightly mannerisms are 
corrected the better. It is a fallacy to suppose that the other 
senses of the blind are naturally sharper than those of the seeing. 
It is only when the senses of hearing and touch have been 
cultivated that they partially replace sight, and such cultivation 
can begin with very young children. 

Blind children have a stronger claim upon the public for 
education than other children, because they start at a dis- 
advantage in life, they carry a burden in their infirmity, they 
come mostly of poor parents, and without special instruction and 
training they are almost certain to become a public charge 
during life. 



BLINDNESS 



6? 



Public authorities should adopt the most efficient plan for 
preparing blind children to become active, independent men 
and women, rather than consider the cheapest and easiest 
method of educating them. We cannot afford to give the blind 
an education that is not the best of its kind in the trade or 
profession they will have to follow. There are many seeing 
persons with little education who are useful citizens and successful 
in various industries, but an uneducated blind person is helpless, 
and must become dependent. 

The surroundings of the blind do not favour the development 
of activity, self-reliance and independence. Parents and friends 
find it easier to attend to the wants and requirements of their 
blind children than to teach them to be self -helpful in the common 
acts of everyday life. A mistaken kindness leads the friends to 
guard every movement and prevent physical exertion. As a rule, 
the vitality of the blind is much below the average vitality of 
seeing persons, and any system of education which does not 
recognize and overcome this defect will be a failure. It is the 
lack of energy and determination, not the want of sight, that 
causes so many failures among the blind. 

A practical system of education, which has for its object to 
make the blind independent and self-sustaining, must be based 

upon a comprehensive course of physical development. 
trailing. A blind man who has received mechanical training, 

general education, or musical instruction, without 
physical development, is like an engine provided with everything 
necessary except motive power. 

Schools for the blind should be provided with well-equipped 
gymnasia, and the physical training should include various kinds 
of mass and apparatus work. Large and suitable playgrounds 
are also essential. Besides a free space where they can run and 
play, it should have a supply of swings, tilts, jumping-boards, 
stilts, chars-a-bancs, skittle-alleys, &c. Any game that allows 
of sides being taken adds greatly to the enjoyment, and is a 
powerful incentive to play. The pupils should be encouraged to 
enter into various competitions, as walking, running, jumping, 
leap-frog, sack-racing, shot-pitching, tug-of-war, &c. Cycling, 
rowing, swimming and roller-skating are not only beneficial but 
most enjoyable. 

The subjects in the school curriculum should be varied 
according to the age and capacity of the pupils, but those 

which cultivate the powers of observation and the 
training, perceptive faculties should have a first place. Object 

lessons or nature study should have a large share of 
attention. Few people realize that a blind child knows nothing 
of the size, shape and appearance of common objects that lie 
beyond the reach of his arm. When he has once been shown how 
to learn their characteristics, he will go on acquiring a knowledge 
of his surroundings unaided by a teacher. Again, a careful drill 
in mental arithmetic, combining accuracy with rapidity, is 
essential. A good command of English should be cultivated 
by frequent exercises in composition, and by committing to 
memory passages of standard prose and poetry. In his secondary 
course, the choice of subjects must depend upon his future 
career. Above all, stimulate a love of good reading. 

From the earliest years manual dexterity should be cultivated 
by kindergarten work, modelling, sewing, knitting and sloyd. 

Blind children who have not had the advantage of 

aI this early handwork find much more difficulty when 

training, they begin a regular course in technical training. 

Early manual training cultivates the perceptive 

faculties, gives activity to the body, and prepares the hands and 

fingers for pianoforte-playing, pianoforte-tuning and handicrafts. 

Besides a good general education, the blind must have careful 

and detailed training in some handicraft, or thorough preparation 

for some profession. The trades and professions open 
C o ceo to t j lem are £ ew anc j jf t jj e y f a jj j n one f thggg they 

Hon. cannot turn quickly to some other line of work. Those 

who have charge of their education should avail 
themselves of the knowledge that has been gained in all countries, 
in order to decide wisely in regard to the trade or occupation 
for which each pupil should be prepared. It may be some kind 



of handicraft, pianoforte-tuning, school-teaching, or the pro- 
fession of music; the talent and ability of each child should be 
carefully considered before finally deciding his future occupation, 
The failure to give the blind a practical education often means 
dependence through life. 

Pianoforte-tuning as an employment for the blind originated 
in Paris. About 1830 Claud Montal and a blind fellow-pupil 
attempted to tune a piano. The seeing tuner in charge 
of the school pianos complained to the director, and ^£°" 
they were forbidden to touch the works, but the two tuning, 
friends procured an old piano and continued their 
efforts. Finally, the director, convinced of their skill, gave 
them charge of all the school pianos, and classes were soon 
started for the other pupils. When Montal left the institution 
he encountered great prejudice, but his skill in tuning became 
known to the professors of the Conservatoire, and his work 
rapidly increased and success was assured. Montal afterwards 
established a manufactory, and remained at its head for many 
years. Tuning is an excellent employment for the blind, and 
one in which they have certain advantages. The seeing who 
excel in the business go through a long apprenticeship, and one 
must give the blind even more careful preparation. They must 
work a number of hours daily, under suitable tuition, for several 
years. After a careful examination by an expert pianoforte- 
tuning authority, every duly qualified tuner should be furnished 
with an official certificate of proficiency, and tuners who cannot 
take the required examinations ought not to be allowed to 
impose upon the public. 

Music in its various branches, when properly taught, is the 
best and most lucrative employment for the blind. To become 
successful in the profession, it is necessary for the 
blind to have opportunities of instruction, practice, training. 
study, and hearing music equal to those afforded the 
seeing, with whom they will have to compete in the open market. 
If the blind musician is to rise above mediocrity, systematic 
musical instruction in childhood is indispensable, and good 
instruction will avail little unless the practice is under constant 
and judicious supervision. The musical instruction, in its 
several branches of harmony, pianoforte, organ and vocal 
culture, must be addressed to the mind, not merely to the ear. 
This is the only possible method by which musical training 
can be made of practical .use to the blind. The blind music 
teacher or organist must have a well-disciplined mind, capable 
of analysing and dealing with music from an intellectual point 
of view. If the mental faculties have not been developed and 
thoroughly disciplined, the blind musician, however well he may 
play or sing, will be a failure as a teacher. The musical in- 
struction must be more thorough, more analytical, more com- 
prehensive, than corresponding instruction given to seeing 
persons. In 187 1 Dr Armitage published a book on the 
education and employment of the blind, in which he stated that 
of the blind musicians trained in the United Kingdom not more 
than one-half per cent were able to support themselves, whereas 
of those trained in the Paris school $0 % supported themselves 
fully, and 30 % partially, by the profession of music. 

To provide a better education and improve the musical 
training of the blind, the Royal Normal College was established 
in 1872. 1 Its object was to afford the young blind 
a thorough general and musical education, to qualify ^ oyaI . 
them to earn a living by various intellectual pursuits, College. 
especially as organists, pianists, teachers and piano- 
forte-tuners. From the first, the founders of the college main- 
tained that the blind could only be made self-sustaining by 
increasing their intelligence, bodily activity and dexterity, 
by inculcating business habits, by arousing their self-respect, 
and by creating in their minds a belief in the possibility 

1 Its principal (responsible, with Dr Armitage, the duke of West- 
minster and others, for its foundation) was Sir F. J. Campbell, 
LL.D., F.R.G.S., F.S.A., himself a blind man, who, born in Tennes- 
see, U.S.A., in 1832, and educated at the Nashville school, and after- 
wards in music at Leipzig and Berlin, had from 1858 to 1869 been 
associated with Dr Howe at the Perkins Institution, Boston. He 
was knighted in 1909. 



68 



BLINDNESS 



of future self-maintenance. A kindergarten department was 
opened in 1881. In July 1896 Queen's Scholarship examina- 
tions were held at the Royal Normal College, for the first time, 
for blind students, and the institution recognized by the Educa- 
tion Department as a training college for blind school-teachers. 

From the first day a pupil enters school until he finishes his 
course of training, care must be taken to implant business habits. 
Blind children are allowed to be idle and helpless at 
tioaal home; they do not learn to appreciate the value of 
needs. time, and in after years this is one of the most difficult 
lessons to inculcate. Having drifted through child- 
hood, they are content to drift through life. The important 
habits of punctuality, regularity and precision should be culti- 
vated in all the arrangements and requirements. A great effort 
should be made to lift the blind from pauperism. As soon as 
pupils enter a school, all semblance of pauper origin should be 
removed. They must be inspired with a desire for independence 
and a belief in its possibility. In the public mind blindness has 
been so long and closely associated with dependence and pauper- 
ism that schools for the blind, even the most progressive, have 
been regarded hitherto as asylums rather than educational 
establishments. A sad mistake in the training of the blind is 
the lack of an earnest effort to improve their social condition. 
The fact that their education has been left to charity has helped 
to keep them in the ranks of dependents. 

The question of day-classes versus boarding-schools has been 
much discussed. It is claimed by some that a blind child gains 
more independence if kept at home and educated in a school 
with the seeing. This theory is not verified by practical ex- 
perience. At home its blindness makes the child an exception, 
and often it takes little or no part in the active duties of every- 
day life. Again, in a class of seeing children the blind member 
is treated as an exception. The memory is cultivated at the 
expense of the other faculties, and the facility with which it 
recites in certain subjects causes it to make a false estimate 
of its attainments. The fundamental principles in different 
branches are imperfectly understood, from the failure to follow 
the illustrations of the teacher. In the playgrounds, a few 
irrepressibles join in active games, but most of the blind children 
prefer a quiet corner. 

For the sake of economy, schools for deaf-mutes and the 
blind are sometimes united. As the requirements of the two 
classes are entirely separate and distinct, the union is undesirable, 
whether for general education or industrial training. The plan 
was tried in America, but has been given up in most of the 
states. To meet the difficulty of proper classification with small 
numbers, blind boys and girls are taught in the same classes. 
The acquaintances then made lead to intimacy in later years 
and foster intermarriage among the blind. Intermarriage among 
the blind is a calamity, both for them and for their children; 
some who might have been successful business men are to-day 
begging in the streets in consequence of intermarriage. 

In every school or class there will be a certain number of 
young blind children who, from neglect, want of food, or other 
causes, are feeble in body and defective in intellect; such 
children are a great burden in any class or school, and require 
special treatment and instruction. Educational authorities 
should unite and have one or two schools in a healthful locality 
for mentally defective blind children. 

More and more, in educational work for the seeing, there is 
a tendency to specialize, and thus enable each student to have 
the best possible instruction in the subjects that bear most 
directly on his future calling. To prepare the blind for self- 
maintenance, there should be an equally careful study of the 
ability of each child. 

A scheme of education which has for its object to make 
the blind a self-sustaining class should include: kindergarten 
schools for children from 5 to 8 years of age; preparatory 
schools from 8 to n; intermediate schools from n to 14. At 
14 an intelligent opinion can be formed in regard to the future 
career of the pupils. They will fall naturally into the follow- 
ing categories: — (a) A certain number will succeed better in 



handicraft than in any other calling, and should be drafted into a 
suitable mechanical school. (6) A few will have special gifts for 
general business, and should be educated accordingly, (c) A 
few will have the ability and ambition to prepare for the 
university, and the special college should afford them the most 
thorough preparation for the university examinations, (d) 
Some will have the necessary talent, combined with the requisite 
character and industry, to succeed in the musical profession; 
in addition to a liberal education, these should have musical 
instruction, equal to that given to the seeing, in the best 
schools of music, (e) Some may achieve excellent success as 
pianoforte-tuners, and in a pianoforte-tuning school strict 
business habits should be cultivated, and the same attention 
to work required as is demanded of seeing workmen in well- 
regulated pianoforte factories. 

The United Kingdom stands almost alone in allowing the 
education of the blind to depend upon charity. In the United 
States, each state government not only makes liberal provision 
for the education and training of the blind, but most of them 
provide grounds, buildings and a complete equipment in all de- 
partments. Although it costs much more per capita, from £40 to 
£60 per annum, the blind are as amply provided with the means 
of education as the seeing. The government of the United 
States appropriates $10,000 per annum for printing embossed 
books for the blind. Most of the European countries and the 
English colonies provide by taxation for the education of the blind. 

Types 

The earliest authentic records of tangible letters for the blind 
describe a plan of engraving the letters upon blocks of wood, the 
invention of Francesco Lucas, a Spaniard, who dedicated it to 
Philip II. of Spain in the 16th century. In 1640 Pierre Moreau, 
a writing-master in Paris, cast a movable leaden type for the use 
of the blind, but being without means to carry out his plan, 
abandoned it. Pins inserted in cushions were next tried, and 
large wooden letters. After these came a contrivance of Du 
Puiseaux, a blind man, who had metal letters cast and set them 
in a small frame with a handle. Whilst these experiments were 
going on in France, attempts had also been made in Germany. 
R. Weissembourg (a resident of Mannheim), who lost his sight 
when about seven years of age, made use of letters cut in card- 
board, and afterwards pricked maps in the same material. By 
this method he taught Mile Paradis, the talented blind musician 
and the friend of Valentin Haiiy. 

To Haiiy belongs the honour of being the first to emboss paper 
as a means of reading for the blind; his books were embossed in 
large and small italics, from movable type set by his pupils. The 
following is an account of the origin of his discovery. Haiiy's 
first pupil was Francois Lesueur, a blind boy whom he found 
begging at the porch door of St Germain des Pres. While 
Lesueur was sorting the papers on his teacher's desk, he came 
across a card strongly indented by the types in the press. The 
blind lad showed his master he could decipher several letters on 
the card. Immediately Haiiy traced with the handle of his pen 
some signs on paper. The boy read them, and the result was 
printing in relief, the greatest of Haiiy's discoveries. In 1821 
Lady Elizabeth Lowther brought embossed books and types from 
Paris, and with the types her son, Sir Charles Lowther, Bart., 
printed for his own use the Gospel of St Matthew. The work of 
Haiiy was taken up by Mr Gall of Edinburgh, Mr Alston of 
Glasgow, Dr Howe of Boston, Mr Friedlander of Philadelphia, 
and others. In 1827 James Gall of Edinburgh embossed some 
elementary works, and published the Gospel of St John in 1834. 
His plan was to use the common English letter and replace 
curves by angles. 

In 1832 the Edinburgh Society of Arts offered a gold medal for 
the best method of printing for the blind, and it was awarded to 
Dr Edmond Fry of London, whose alphabet consisted of ordinary 
capital letters without their small strokes. In 1836 the Rev. W. 
Taylor of York and John Alston in Glasgow began to print with 
Fry's type. Mr Alston's appeal for a printing fund met with a 
hearty response, and a grant of £400 was made by the treasury; 



BLINDNESS 



69 



in 1838 he completed the New Testament, and at the end of 1840 
the whole Bible was published in embossed print. In 1833 
printing for the blind was commenced in the United States at 
Boston and Philadelphia. Dr S. G. Howe in Boston used small 
English letters without capitals, angles being employed instead 
of curves, while J. R. Friedlander in Philadelphia used only 



h 



o 



V 



b 


c 


D 


E 


f 


V.3 


i 


c 


5 


^jimwnlj 


P 


1 


1 


J 


.< 


L 


m 


KJ 


a 


<J 


c 


.&= 


"1 


^ 


c_ 


_o 


R 


>fl 


T 


u 


0=3 


<=£> 


% 


/ 


=3 


y 


w 




X 


Y 


z 


^ 


n 


< 


^> , 


— — II -J 


^ 


f 3 


3 D 




1 s 


L 


v 


E 


3>2> 


Fig. 


0/ L@vr 

1. — Moon Alphabet. 



Roman capitals. About 1838 T. M. Lucas of Bristol, a shorthand 
writer, and J. H. Frere of Blackheath, each introduced an 
alphabet of simpler forms, and based their systems on steno- 
graphy. In 1847 Dr Moon of Brighton brought out a system 
which partially retains the outline of the Roman letters. This 
type is easily read by the adult blind, and is still much used by 
the home teaching societies. The preceding methods are all 
known as line types, but the one which is now in general use is a 
point type. 

In the early part of the 19th century Captain Charles Barbier, 



right-hand row in which vertical line, of the printed table the 
speech sound is to be found. 

Louis Braille, a pupil and afterwards a professor of the Institu- 
tion Nationale des Jeunes Aveugles, Paris, studied all the various 
methods in which arbitrary characters were used. Barbier's 
letter, although it gave a large number of combinations, was too 
long to be covered by the finger in reading, and Louis Braille 
reduced the number of dots. In 1834 Braille perfected his 
system. Dr Armitage considered it was the greatest advance 
that had ever been made in the education of the blind. 

The Braille alphabet consists of varying combinations of six 
dots in an oblong, of which the vertical side contains three, and the 

horizontal two dots 



e • 




•- 



C 



L M 

•- — 



X 



Apparatus for writing Braille. 



a French officer, substituted embossed dots for embossed lines. 
The slate for writing was also invented by him. 

Barbier arranged a table of speech sounds, consisting of six 
lines with six sounds in each line. His rectangular cell contained 
two vertical rows of six points each. The number of points in the 
left-hand row indicates in which horizontal line, and that in the 



There are 63 possible combinations 

of these six dots, and after the letters of the alphabet have been 
supplied, the remaining signs are used for punctuation, con- 
tractions, &c. 

" For writing, a ruler is used, consisting of a metal bed either 
grooved or marked by groups of little pits, each group consisting of 
six; over this bed is fitted a brass guide, punched with oblong 
holes whose vertical diameter is three-tenths of an inch, while the 
horizontal diameter is two-tenths. The pits are arranged in two 
parallel lines, and the guide is hinged on the bed in such a way that 
when the two are locked together the openings in the guide corre- 
spond exactly to the pits in the bed. The brass guide has a double 
row of openings, which enables the writer to write two lines; when 
these are written, he shifts his guide downwards until two little pins, 
which project from the under surface at its ends, drop into corre- 
sponding holes of a wooden board ; then two more lines are written, 
and this operation is repeated until the bottom of the page is reached. 
The paper is introduced between the frame and the metal bed. The 
instrument for writing is a blunt awl, which carries a little cap of 
paper before it into the grooves or pits of the bed, thereby producing 
a series of little pits in the paper on the side next the writer. When 
taken out and turned over, little prominences are felt, corresponding 
to the pits on the other side. The reading is performed from left to 
right, consequently the writing is from right to left ; but this reversal 
presents no practical difficulty as soon as the pupil had caught the 
idea that in reading and writing alike he has to go forwards. 

" The first ten letters, from ' a ' to ' j,' are formed in the upper 
and middle grooves; the next ten, from ' k ' to ' t,' are formed by 
adding one lower back dot to each letter of the first series ; the third 
row is formed from the first by adding two lower dots to each letter; 
the fourth row, similarly, by adding one lower front dot. 

" The first ten letters, when preceded by the prefix for numbers, 

stand for the nine 
numbers and the 
cipher. The same 
signs, written in the 
lower and middle 
grooves, instead of 
the tipperand middle, 
serve for punctua- 
tion. The seven last 
letters of each series 
stand for the seven 
musical notes — the 
first series represent- 
ing quavers, the 
second minims, the 
third semibreves, the 
fourth crotchets. 

Rests, accidentals, 
and every other sign 
used in music can be 
readily and clearly 
expressed without 
having recourse to 
the staff of five lines 
which forms the basis 
of ordinary musical 
notation, and which, 
though it has been 
reproduced for the 
blind, can only be 
considered as serv- 
ing to give them an 
idea of the method employed by the seeing, and cannot, of course, be 
written. By means of this dotted system, a blind man is able to 
keep memoranda or accounts, write his own music, emboss his own 
books from dictation, and carry on correspondence/' 

The Braille system for literature and music was brought into 
general use in England by Dr T. R. Armitage. Through his wise, 



D 

*• 



F 






H 

• - 



I 



J 

-• 



N 



-• 



O 

•- 



and 

a* 



Q R 

•• •- 
»• •• 



for of 






gh sh th wh ed er 



•• 



ou 






the 



ow 



•e 

•- 

with 

-• 



W 
-• 



Braille Alphabet. The black dots represent the raised points of 
the sign in their position in relation to the group of six. 



Fig. 2. 



7o 



BLINDNESS 



untiring zeal and noble generosity, every blind man, woman and 
child throughout the English-speaking world can now obtain 
not only the best literature, but the best music. 

In America there are two modifications of the point type, 
known as New York point and American braille. In each of 
these the most frequently recurring letters are represented by 
the least number of dots. 

The original Braille is used by the institutions for the blind in 
the British empire, European countries, Mexico, Brazil and 
Egypt. 

Appliances for Educational Work 

The apparatus for writing point alphabets has already been 
described. Frank H. Hall, former superintendent of the School 
for the Blind, Jacksonville, 111., U.S.A., has invented a Braille 
typewriter and stereotype maker; the latter embosses metal plates 
from which any number of copies can be printed. An automatic 
Braille-writer has been brought out in Germany, and William 
B. Wait (principal of the Institution for the Blind in New York 
City) has invented a machine for writing New York point. These 
machines are expensive, but A. Wayne of Birmingham has brought 



***** 

***** 
***** 
***** 
***** 
***** 
J *•••• 
] «•••* 
***** 
***** 
***** 
***** 
***** 
***** 
***** 
*•••• 
***** 



• **• 
*««* 
**** 
***• 

• **• 
»•*« 
**.*» 

• «** 

• *•* 
**»* 
»••* 
*»*• 

• ••* 

• *•• 

• ••• 

• •»• 



******* 
******* 
**«**•• 

**•**»• 
****«*• 
«***•*« 
******* 
******* 
******* 
******* 
*»*•••» 
•**•••* 
•*•*••* 
•**««*• 
•••*»*• 
•*•••** 




**•* 

**** 
«**• 
*•** 

• «*» 

• «** 
**»« 
**** 

• *»• 

• •*« 
*•** 
*•** 
*•*• 

• •»• 

• *** 

• *»* 



OnOnOaOa 

9 + - X -s- : :: - 

OdOaOaOa 

Fig. 3. — Arithmetic Board, Pin and Characters. A, Shape of 
opening in the board for pin; B and C, pin. 

out a cheap and effective Braille- writer. H. Stainsby, secretary of 
the Birmingham institution, and Wayne have invented a machine 
for writing Braille shorthand. 

Many boards have been constructed to enable the blind to 
work arithmetical problems. The one which is most used was 
invented by the Rev. W. Taylor. The board has star-shaped 
openings in which a square pin fits in eight different positions. 
The pin has on one end a plain ridge and on the other a notched 
ridge; sixteen characters can be formed with the two ends. 
The board is also used for algebra, another set of type furnishing 
the algebraic symbols. 

Books are prepared with raised geometrical diagrams; figures 
can be formed with bent wires on cushions, or on paper with a 
toothed wheel attached to one end of a pair of compasses. 

Geography is studied by means of relief maps, manufactured 
in wood or paper. The physical maps and globes prepared for 
seeing children are used also for the blind. 

Chiefly owing to the unremitting energy and liberality of 
Dr T. R. Armitage, in connexion with the British and Foreign 
Blind Association, all school appliances for the blind have been 
greatly improved and cheapened. 



Employment 



Reference has been made to the fact that music in its various 
branches furnishes the best and most lucrative employment for 
the blind. But those who have not the ability, or are too old 
to be trained for music or some other profession, must depend 
upon handicrafts for their support. The principal ones taught 
in the various institutions are the making of baskets, brushes, 
mats, sacks, ships' fenders, brooms and mattresses, upholstery, 
wire-work, chair-caning, wood-chopping, &c. Females are 
taught to make fancy baskets and brushes, chair-caning, knitting, 
netting, weaving, sewing — hand and machine — crocheting, &c. 
It is difficult to find employment for blind girls. It is hoped 
that typewriting and massage will prove remunerative. 

The blind, whether educated for the church, trained as teachers, 
musicians, pianoforte-tuners, or for any other trade or occupation, 
generally require assistance at the outset. They need help in 
finding suitable employment, recommendations for establishing 
a connexion, pecuniary assistance in providing outfits of books, 
tools, instruments,. &c, help in the selection and purchase of the 
best materials at the lowest wholesale rates, in the sale of their 
manufactured goods in the best markets, and if overtaken by 
reverses, judicious and timely help towards a fresh start. Every 
institution should keep in touch with its old pupils. The super- 
intendent who carefully studies the successes and failures of his 
pupils when they go into the world, will more wisely direct the 
work and energies of his present and future students. 

Within recent years great improvements have been made in 
some of the progressive workshops for the blind. At the con- 
ference in London in 1902 Mr T. Stoddart gave the following 
information in regard to the work in Glasgow: — " We are build- 
ing very extensive additions to our workshops, which will enable 
us to accommodate 600 blind people. We mean to employ the 
most up-to-date methods, and are introducing electric power 
to drive the machinery and light the workshops. We have to do 
with the average blind adult recently deprived of sight after he 
has attained an age of from 2 5 to 40 or even 50 years. In Glasgow 
we have developed an industry eminently suitable for the 
employment of the blind, namely, the manufacture of new and 
the remaking of old bedding. There are industries which are 
purely local, where certain articles of manufacture largely used 
in one district are useless, or nearly so, in another; but the field 
in which this industry may be promoted is practically without 
limit. It is perhaps the employment par excellence for the blind, 
and among other advantages it has the following to recommend 
it: employment 1 is provided for the blind of both sexes and of 
all ages; there is no accumulation nor deterioration of stock; 
it yields an excellent profit, and its use is universal. We have 
been pushing this industry for years, our annual turnover in 
this particular department having exceeded £7000, and as we 
find it so suited to the capabilities of all grades of blind people, 
it is our intention to provide facilities for doing a turnover of 
three times that amount. Instead of the thirty sewing-machines 
which we have at present running by power, we hope to employ 
100 blind women. At cork-fender-making, also an industry of 
the most suitable kind, we are at present employing about 
thirty workers. It is also our intention to greatly develop and 
extend our mat -making department." 

In the United States many blind persons are engaged in 
agricultural pursuits, and some are very successful in com- 
mercial pursuits. When a man loses his sight in adult life, 
if he can possibly follow the business in which he has previously 
been engaged, it is the best course for him. In the present day, 
work in manufactories is subdivided to such an extent that often 
some one portion can be done by a blind person; but it needs 
the interest of some enthusiastic believer in the capabilities of 
the blind to persuade the seeing manager that blind people can 
be safely employed in factories. 

In England, at the time of the royal commission of 1889, 
upwards of 8000 blind persons, above the age of 21, were in 
receipt of relief from the guardians, of whom no less than 3278 
were resident in workhouses or workhouse infirmaries. The 



BLINDNESS 



7i 



census returns for 1901 indicate that the number at that time 
was equally large. It would certainly be more economical to 
establish workshops where the able-bodied adult blind can 
be trained in some handicraft and employed. 

The papers read at the various conferences show that, even 
under the most favourable circumstances, some are not able 
to earn enough for their support; nevertheless, employment 
improves their condition; there is no greater calamity than 
to live a life of compulsory idleness in total darkness. The cry 
of the blind is not alms but work. One of the workshops 
in western America has adopted the motto, " Independence 
through Industry," and it should be the aim of every civilized 
country to hasten the time when blindness and pauperism shall 
no longer be synonymous terms. 

Biography 
It may be interesting, in conclusion, to mention some of the 
names of prominent blind people in history: — 

Timoleon (c. 410-336 B.C.), a Greek general. 

Aufidius, a Roman senator. 

Bela II. (d. 1141), king of Hungary. 

John, king of Bohemia (1296-1346), killed in the battle of Crecy. 

John Zizca (c. 1376-1424), Bohemian general. 

Basil III. (d. 1462), prince of Moscow. 

Shah Alam (d. 1806), the last of the Great Moguls. 

Diodorus, the instructor of Cicero. 

Didymus of Alexandria (c. 308-395), mathematician, theo- 
logian and linguist. 

Nicase of Malines (d. 1492), professor of law in the university 
of Cologne. The degree of doctor of divinity was conferred 
on him by the university of Louvain, and the pope granted 
a dispensation suspending the law of the Church, that he 
might be ordained as a priest. 

Ludovico Scapinelli (b. 1585), professor at the universities of 
Bologna, Modena and Pisa. 

James Schegkius (d. 1587), professor of philosophy and medicine 
at Tubingen. 

Franciscus Salinas, professor of music at the university of 
Salamanca, in the 16th century. - 

Nicholas Bacon (16th century), doctor of laws in the university 
of Brussels. 

Count de Pagan of Avignon (b. 1604), mathematician of note. 

John Milton (1608-1674), the poet. 

Rev. Richard Lucas (1648-1715), prebendary of Westminster. 

Nicholas Saunderson (q.v.; 1682-1739). 

John Stanley (1713-1786), Mus. Bac. Oxon., was born in London 
in 1713. At seven he began to study music, and made such 
rapid progress that he was appointed organist of All-Hallows, 
Bread Street, at the age of eleven. He graduated as Mus. 
Bac. at Oxford when sixteen, and was organist of the 
Temple church at the age of twenty-one. He composed a 
number of cantatas, and after the death of Handel he 
superintended the performance of Handel's oratorios at 
Covent Garden. He received the degree of doctor of 
music, and was master of the king's band. 

Leonard Euler (1707-17S3), -the celebrated mathematician and 
astronomer. 

■John Metcalf (b. 1717), road-builder and contractor. 

Sir John Fielding (d. 1780), eminent lawyer and magistrate. 

Thomas Blacklock (q.v. ; 1721-1791), Scottish scholar and poet. 

Francois Huber (1 750-1831), Swiss naturalist, noted for his 
observations on bees. 

Edward Rushton (b. 1756). At six years of age he entered the 
Liverpool free grammar school, and at eleven shipped for 
his first voyage in a West India merchantman. On a later 
voyage he was shipwrecked, and owed his life to the self- 
sacrifice of a negro. Rushton and the black man swam for 
their lives to a floating cask; the negro reached it first, 
saw Rushton about to sink, pushed the cask to the failing 
lad, and struck out for the shore, but never reached it. 
This incident made Rushton an enthusiastic champion 
through life of the cause of the negro. During a voyage to 
Dominica malignant ophthalmia broke out among the slave 
cargo, and Rushton caught the disease by attending them 
in the hold when all others refused help. This attack 
deprived him of sight, and cut short a promising nautical 
career at the age of nineteen. He struggled bravely against 
difficulties, and besides entering successfully into various 
literary engagements, maintained himself and family as a 
bookseller. A volume of his poems containing a memoir 
was published in 1824. 

Marie Therese von Paradis (b. 1759), the daughter of an imperial 
councillor in Vienna. She was a godchild of the empress 
Marie Therese, and as her parents possessed rank and 
wealth, no expense was spared in her education. Weissem- 



bourg, a blind man, was her tutor, and she learned to spell 
with letters cut out of pasteboard, and read words pricked 
upon cards with pins. She studied the piano with Richter 
(of Holland) and Kozeluch. She was a highly esteemed 
pianist, and Mozart wrote a concerto for her; she ako 
attained considerable skill on the organ, in singing and in 
composition. She made a concert tour of Europe, visiting 
the principal courts and everywhere achieving great success. 
She remained four months in England, under the patronage 
of the queen. On her return to Vienna, through Paris, she 
met Valentin Hatiy. Towards the close of her life she 
devoted herself to teaching singing and the pianoforte with 
great success. 
James Holman {q.v.; 1786-1857), traveller. 
William H. Prescott {q.v. ; 1796-1859), the American historian. 
Several early 19th-century musicians held situations as organ- 
ists in London ; among them Grenville, Scott, Lockhart, 
Mather, Stiles and Warne. 
Louis Braille (1809-1852). In 1819 he went to the school fo. 
the blind in Paris. He became proficient on the organ, and 
held a post in one of the Paris churches. While a professor 
at the Institution Nationale des Jeunes Aveugles, he 
perfected his system of point writing. 
Alexander Rodenbach, Belgian statesman. When a member of 
the chamber of deputies, in 1836, he introduced and 
succeeded in establishing by law the right of blind and 
deaf-mute children to an education. 
Dr William Moon (1818-1894), the inventor of the type for the 

blind which bears his name. 
Rev. W. H. Milburn, D.D. (1823-1903), the American chaplain, 
known in the United States as " The Blind Man Eloquent." 
He often travelled from thirty to fifty thousand miles a 
year, speaking and preaching every day. He was three 
times chaplain of the House of Representatives, and in 1893 
was chosen to the chaplaincy of the senate. 
Dr T. R. Armitage (b. 1824). After spending his youth on the 
continent, he became a medical student, first at King's 
College, and afterwards at Paris and Vienna. His career 
promised to be a brilliant one, but at the age of thirty-six 
failing sight caused him to abandon his profession. For 
the rest of his life he devoted his time and fortune to the 
interests of the blind. He reorganized the Indigent Blind 
Visiting Society, endowed its Samaritan fund, founded the 
British and Foreign Blind Association, and, in conjunction 
with the late duke of Westminster and others, founded the 
Royal Normal College. 
Elizabeth Gilbert _(b. 1826), daughter of the bishop of Chichester. 
She lost her sight at the age of three. She was educated at 
home, and took her full share of household duties and cares 
and pleasures. When she was twenty-seven, she began to 
consider the condition of the poor blind of London. She 
saw some one must befriend those who had been taught 
trades, some one who could supply material, give employ- 
ment or dispose of the articles manufactured. In 1854 her 
scheme was started, and work was given to six men in their 
own homes, but the number soon increased. In 1856 a 
committee was formed, a house converted into a factory, 
and the Association for Promoting the General Welfare of 
the Blind was founded. 
Rev. George Matheson, D.D. (b. 1842), preacher and writer of 
the Church of Scotland. The degree of D.D. was conferred 
on him by the university of Edinburgh in 1879, and he was 
appointed Baird Lecturer in 1881, and St Giles' Lecturer 
in 1882. 
Henry Fawcett (1833-1884), professor of political economy at 

Cambridge, and postmaster-general. 
W. H. Churchman of Pennsylvania, who was instrumental in 
establishing the schools for the blind in Tennessee, Indiana 
and Wisconsin. 
H. L. Hall, founder of the workshops and home for the blind 
in Philadelphia; by his energetic management he raised 
the standard of work for the adult blind throughout 
America. 
Bibliography. — See also W. H. Levy, Blindness and the Blind 
(1872) ; J. Wilson, Biography of the Blind (1838) ; Dr T. R. Armitage, 
Education and Employment of the Blind (2nd ed., 1882); R. H. Blair, 
Education of the Blind (1868) ; M. Anagnos, Education of the Blind 
(1882); H. J. Wilson, Institutions, Societies and Classes for the Blind 
in England and Wales (1907); Guillie, Instruction and Amusements 
of the Blind (1819); Dr W. Moon, Light for the Blind (1875); R- 
Meldrum, Light on Dark Paths (2nd ed., 1891) ; Dr H. Roth, Preven- 
tion of Blindness (1885), and his Physical Education of the Blind 
(1885); Report of Royal Commission (1889); Gavin Douglas, 
Remarkable Blind Persons (1829); John Bird, Social Pathology 
(1862); M. de la Sizeranne, The Blind in Useful Avocations (Paris, 
1881), True Mission of Smaller Schools (Paris, 1884), The Blind in 
France (Paris, 1885), Two Years' Study and Work for the Blind 
(Paris, 1890), and The Blind as seen by a Blind Man [translated 
by Dr Park Lewis] (Paris, 1893); Dr Emile Javal, The Blind 



72 



BLISS— BLOCKADE 



Man's World [translated by Ernest Thomson] (Paris, 1904) ; 
Prof. A. Mell, Encyklopddisches Handbuch des Blindenwesens 
(Vienna, 1899). (F. J. C.) 

BLISS, CORNELIUS NEWTON (1833- ), American mer- 
chant and politician, was born at Fall River, Massachusetts, on 
the 26th of January 1833. He was educated in his native city 
and in New Orleans, where he early entered his step-father's 
counting-house. Returning to Massachusetts in 1849, he 
became a clerk and subsequently a junior partner in a prominent 
Boston commercial house. Later he removed to New York 
City to establish a branch of the firm. In 1881 he organized 
and became president of Bliss, Fabyan & Company, one of the 
largest wholesale dry -goods houses in the country. A consistent 
advocate of the protective tariff, he was one of the organizers, 
and for many years president, of the American Protective 
Tariff League. In politics an active Republican, he was chair- 
man of the Republican state committee in 1887 and 1888, and 
contributed much to the success of the Harrison ticket in New 
York in the latter year. He was treasurer of the Republican 
national committee from 1892 to 1904, and was secretary of the 
interior in President McKinley's cabinet from 1897 to 1899. 

BLISTER (a word found in many forms in Teutonic languages, 
cf. Ger. Blase; it is ultimately connected with the same root as 
in "blow," cf. "bladder"), a small vesicle filled with serous 
fluid raised on the skin by a burn, by rubbing on a hard surface, 
as on the hand in rowing, or by other injury; the term is also 
used of a similar condition of the skin caused artificially, as a 
counter-irritant in cases of inflammation, by the application of 
mustard, of various kinds of fly (see Canthaeides) and of 
other vesicatories. Similar small swellings, filled with fluid or 
air, on plants and on the surface of steel or paint, &c, are also 
called" blisters." 

BLIZZARD (origin probably onomatopoeic, cf. " blast," 
"bluster"), a furious wind driving fine particles of choking, 
blinding snow whirling in icy clouds. The conditions to which 
the name was originally given occur with the northerly winds 
in rear of the cyclones crossing the eastern states of America 
during winter. 

BLOCH, MARK ELIEZER (c. 17 23-1 799), German naturalist, 
was born at Ansbach, of poor Jewish parents, about 1723. After 
taking his degree as doctor at Frankfort-on-Oder he established 
himself as a physician at Berlin. His first scientific work of 
importance was an essay on intestinal worms, which gained a 
prize from the Academy of Copenhagen, but he is best known 
by his important work on fishes (see Ichthyology). Bloch 
was fifty-six when he began to write on ichthyological subjects. 
To begin at his time of life a work in which he intended not 
only to give full descriptions of the species known to him from 
specimens or drawings, but also to illustrate each species in a 
style truly magnificent for his time, was an undertaking the 
execution of which most men would have despaired of. Yet he 
accomplished not only this task, but even more than he at first 
contemplated. He died at Carlsbad on the 6th of August 1799. 

BLOCK, MAURICE (1816-1901), French statistician, was 
born in Berlin of Jewish parents on the 18th of February 1816. 
He studied at Bonn and Giessen, but settled in Paris, becoming 
naturalized there. In 1844 he entered the French ministry of 
agriculture, becoming in 1852 one of the heads of the statistical 
department. He retired in 1862, and thenceforth devoted him- 
self entirely to statistical studies, which have gained for him 
a wide reputation. He was elected a member of the Academie 
des Sciences Morales et Politiques in 1880. He died in Paris on 
the gth of January 1901. His principal works are: Dictionnaire 
de I' administration franqaise (1856); Statistique de la France 
(i860); Dictionnaire general de la politique (1862); L' Europe 
politique et sociale (1869); Traile theorique et pratique de statis- 
tique (1878); Les Progres de I'lconomie politique depuis Adam 
Smith (1890); he also edited from 1856 L' Annuaire de Veconomie 
politique et de la statistique, and wrote in German Die Bevolke- 
rung des franzosischen Kaiserreichs (1861); Die Bevolkerung 
Spaniens und Portugals (1861); and Die Machtstellung der 
europdischen Staaten (1862). 



BLOCK (from the Fr. bloc, and possibly connected with an Old 
Ger. Block, obstruction, cf . " baulk ") , a piece of wood. The word 
is used in various senses, e.g. the block upon which people were 
beheaded, the block or mould upon which a hat is shaped, a 
pulley-block, a printing-block, &c. From the sense of a solid 
mass comes the expression, a "block" of houses, i.e. a rect- 
angular space covered with houses and bounded by four streets. 
From the sense of "obstruction" comes a "block" in traffic, a 
block in any proceedings, and the block system of signalling on 
railways. 

BLOCKADE (Fr. blocus, Ger. Blokade), a term used in 
maritime warfare. Originally a blockade by sea was probably 
nothing more than the equivalent in maritime warfare of a 
blockade or siege on land in which the army investing the 
blockaded or besieged place is in actual physical possession of a 
zone through which it can prevent and forbid ingress and egress. 
An attempt to cross such a zone without the consent of the 
investing army would be an act of hostility against the besiegers. 
A maritime blockade, when it formed part of a siege, would 
obviously also be a close blockade, being part of the military 
cordon drawn round the besieged place. Even from the first, 
however, differences would begin to grow up in the conditions 
arising out of the queries on land and on sea. Thus whereas
conveying merchandise across military lines would be a deliberate 
act of hostility against the investing force, a neutral ship which 
had sailed in ignorance of the blockade for the blockaded place 
might in good faith cross the blockade line without committing 
a hostile act against the investing force. With the development 
of recognition of neutral rights the involuntary character of the 
breach would be taken into account, and notice to neutral states 
and to approaching vessels would come into use. With the 
employment in warfare of larger vessels in the place of the more 
numerous small ones of an earlier age, notice, moreover, would 
tend to take the place of de facto investment, and at a time when 
communication between governments was still slow and pre- 
carious, such notice would sometimes be given as a possible 
measure of belligerent tactics before the blockade could be 
actually carried out. Out of these circumstances grew up the 
abuse of "paper blockades." 

The climax was reached in the " Continental Blockade " 
decreed by Napoleon in 1806, which continued till it was abolished 
by international agreement in 181 2. This blockade forbade all 
countries under French dominion or allied with France to have 
any communication with Great Britain. Great Britain replied 
in 1807 by a similar measure. The first nation to protest against 
these fictitious blockades was the United States. Already in 
1800 John Marshall, secretary of state, wrote to the American 
minister in Great Britain pointing out objections which have 
since been universally admitted. In the following interesting 
passage he said: — 

" Ports not effectually blockaded by a force capable of completely 
investing them have yet been declared in a state of blockade. . . . 
If the effectiveness of the blockade be dispensed with, then every port 
of the belligerent powers mayat all times be declared in that state, 
and the commerce of neutrals be thereby subjected to universal 
capture. But if this principle be strictly adhered to, the capacity 
to blockade will be limited by the naval force of the belligerent, and, 
in consequence, the mischief to neutral commerce cannot be very 
extensive.^ It is, therefore, of the last importance to neutrals that 
this principle be maintained unimpaired. I observe that you have 
pressed this reasoning on the British minister, who replies that an 
occasional absence of a fleet from a blockaded port ought not to 
change the state of the place. Whatever force this observation may 
be entitled to, where that occasional absence has been produced by 
an accident, as a storm, which for a moment blows off a fleet and 
forces it from its station, which station it immediately resumes, I 
am persuaded that where a part of the fleet is applied, though only 
for a time, to other objects or comes into port, the very principle 
requiring an effective blockade, which is that the mischief can only be 
coextensive with the naval force of the belligerent, requires that 
during such temporary absence the commerce to the neutrals to the 
place should be free." 1 

1 John Marshall, secretary of state, to Rufus King, minister to 
England, 20th of September 1800, Am. State Papers, Class I, For. Rel. 
II, No. 181, J. B. Moore, Digest of International Law, vii. 788. 



BLOCKADE 



73 



Again in 1803 James Madison wrote to the then American 
minister in London : — 

" The law of nations requires to constitute a blockade that there 
should be the presence and position of a force rendering access to 
the prohibited place manifestly difficult and dangerous." ' 

In 1826 and 1827 Great Britain as well as the United States 
asserted that blockades in order to be binding must be effective. 
This became gradually the recognized view, and when in 1856 
the powers represented at the congress of Paris inserted in the 
declaration there adopted that " blockades in order to be 
binding must be effective, that is to say, maintained by a force 
sufficient really to prevent access to the coast of an enemy," they 
were merely enunciating a rule which neutral states had already 
become too powerful to allow belligerents to disregard. 

Blockade is universally admitted to be a belligerent right to 
which under international law neutrals are obliged to submit. It 
is now also universally admitted that the above-quoted rule of 
the Declaration of Paris forms part of international law, in- 
dependently of the declaration. Being, however, exclusively a 
belligerent right, it cannot be exercised except by a belligerent 
force. Even a de facto belligerent has the right to institute a 
blockade binding on neutrals if it has the means of making it 
effective, though the force opposed to it may treat the de facto 
belligerent as rebels. 

It is also admitted that, being exclusively a belligerent right, 
it cannot be exercised in time of peace, but there has been some 
inconsistency in practice (see Pacific Blockade) which will 
probably lead governments, in order to avoid protests of neutral 
powers against belligerent rights being exercised in mere coercive 
proceedings, to exercise all the rights of belligerents and carry on 
de facto war to entitle them to use violence against neutral in- 
fringers. This was done in the case of the blockade of Venezuela 
by Great Britain, Germany and Italy in 1 902-1903. 

The points upon which controversy still arises are as to what 
constitutes an " effective " blockade and what a sufficient 
notice of blockade to warrant the penalties of violation, viz. 
confiscation of the ship and of the cargo unless the evidence 
demonstrates the innocence of the cargo owners. A blockade 
to be effective must be maintained by a sufficient force to 
prevent the entrance of neutral vessels into the blockaded port 
or ports, and it must be duly proclaimed. Subject to these 
principles being complied with, " the question of the legitimacy 
and effectiveness of a blockade is one of fact to be determined in 
each case upon the evidence presented " (Thomas F. Bayard, 
American secretary of state, to Messrs Kamer & Co., 19th of 
February 1889). The British manual of naval prize law sums 
up the cases in which a blockade, validly instituted, ceases to be 
effectively maintained, as follows: — (1) If the blockading force 
abandons its position, unless the abandonment be merely 
temporary or caused by stress of weather, or (2) if it be driven 
away by the enemy, or (3) if it be negligent in its duties, or 
(4) if it be partial in the execution of its duties towards one ship 
rather than another, or towards the ships of one nation rather 
than those of another. These cases, however, are based on 
decisions of the British admiralty court and cannot be relied on 
absolutely as a statement of international law. 

As regards notice the following American instructions were 
given to blockading officers in June 1898 : — 

" Neutral vessels are entitled to notification of a blockade before 
they can be made prize for its attempted violation. The character 
of this notification is not material. It may be actual, as by a vessel 
of the blockading force, or constructive, as by a proclamation of the 
government maintaining the blockade, or by common notoriety. If a 
neutral vessel can be shown to have had notice of the blockade in 
any way, she is good prize, and should be sent in for adjudication; 
but should formal notice not have been given, the rule of constructive 
knowledge arising from notoriety should be construed in a manner 
liberal to the neutral. 

" Vessels appearing before a blockaded port, having sailed without 
notification, are entitled to actual notice by a blockading vessel. 

1 James Madison, secretary of state, to Mr Thornton, 27th of 
October 1803, 14 MS. Dom. Let. 215. Moore, Digest of International 
Law, vii. 789. 



They should be boarded by an officer, who should enter in the ship's 
log the fact of such notice, such entry to include the name of the 
blockading vessel giving notice, the extent of the blockade, the date 
and place, verified by his official signature. The vessel is then to be 
set free; and should she again attempt to enter the same or any 
other blockaded port as to which she has had notice, she is good 
prize. Should it appear from a vessel's clearance that she sailed after 
notice of blockade had been communicated to the country of her 
port of departure, or after the fact of blockade had, by a fair presump- 
tion^ become commonly known at that port, she should be sent in as 
a prize." 

The passages in italics are not in accordance with the views 
held by other states, which do not recognize the binding char- 
acter of a diplomatic notification or of constructive notice from 
notoriety. 

The subject was brought up at the second Hague Conference 
(1907) . The Italian and Mexican delegations submitted projects, 
but after a declaration by the British delegate in charge of the 
subject (Sir E. Satow) that blockade not having been included 
in the Russian programme, his government had given him no in- 
structions upon it, the subject, at his suggestion, was dropped. 
A Voeu, however, was adopted in favour of formulating rules 
on all branches of the laws and customs of naval war, and a con- 
vention was agreed to for the establishment of an international 
Prize Court (see Prize). Under Art. 7 of the latter convention 
the Court was to apply the " rules of international law," and in 
their absence the " general principles of justice and equity." 
As soon as possible after the close of the second Hague Con- 
ference the British government took steps to call a special 
conference of the maritime powers, which sat from December 4, 
1908 to February 26, 1909. Among the subjects dealt with 
was Blockade, the rules relating to which are as follow: — 

Art._ 1. A blockademust not extend beyond the ports and coasts 
belonging to or occupied by the enemy. 

Art. 2. In accordance with the Declaration of Paris of 1856, a 
blockade, in order to be binding, must be effective — that is to say, 
it must be maintained by a force sufficient really to prevent access 
to the enemy coastline. 

Art. 3. The question whether a blockade is effective is a question 
of fact. 

Art. 4. A blockade is not regarded as raised if the blockading force 
is temporarily withdrawn on account of stress of weather. 

Art. 5. A blockade must be applied impartially to the ships of all 
nations. 

Art. 6. The commander of a blockading force may give permission 
to a warship to enter, and subsequently to leave, a blockaded port. 

Art. 7. In circumstances of distress, acknowledged by an officer 
of the blockading force, a neutral vessel may enter a place under 
blockade and subsequently leave it, provided that she has neither 
discharged nor shipped any cargo there. 

Art. 8. A blockade, in order to be binding, must be declared in 
accordance with Article 9, and notified in accordance with Articles 
11 and 16. 

Art. 9. A declaration of blockade is made either by the blockading 
power or by the naval authorities acting in its name. It specifies (1) 
the date when the blockade begins; (2) the geographical limits of 
the coastline under blockade; (3) the period within which neutral 
vessels may come out. 

Art. _ 10. If the queries of the blockading power, or of the naval
authorities acting in its name, do not tally with the particulars, which, 
in accordance with Article 9 (1) and (2), must be inserted in the 
declaration of blockade, the declaration is void, and a new declaration 
is necessary in order to make the blockade operative. 

Art. 11. A declaration of blockade is notified: (1) to neutral 
powers, by the blockading power by means of a communication 
addressed to the governments direct, or to their representatives 
accredited to it ; (2) to the local authorities, by the officer command- 
ing the blockading force. The local authorities will, in turn, inform 
the foreign consular officers at the port or on the coastline under 
blockade as soon as possible. 

Art. 12. The rules as to declaration and notification of blockade 
apply to cases where the limits of a blockade are extended, or where 
a blockade is re-established after having been raised. 

Art. 13. The voluntary raising of a blockade, as also any re- 
striction in the limits of a blockade, must be notified in the manner 
prescribed by Article 11. 

Art. 14. The liability of a neutral vessel to capture for breach of 
blockade is contingent on her knowledge, actual or presumptive, of 
the blockade. 

Art. 15. Failing proof to the contrary, knowledge of the blockade 
is presumed if the vessel left a neutral port subsequently to the 
notification of the blockade to the power to which such port belongs, 
provided that such notification was made in sufficient time. 



74 



BLOCKHOUSE— BLOET 



Art. 1 6. If a vessel approaching a blockaded port has no know- 
ledge, actual or presumptive, of the blockade, the notification must 
be made to the vessel itself by an officer of one of the ships of the 
blockading force. This notification should be entered in the vessel's 
logbook, and must state the day and hour, and the geographical 
position of the vessel at the time. If through the negligence of the 
officer commanding the blockading force no declaration of blockade 
has been notified to the local authorities, or if in the declaration, as 
notified, no period has been mentioned within which neutral vessels 
may come out, a neutral vessel coming out of the blockaded port 
must be allowed to pass free. 

Art. 17. Neutral vessels may not be captured for breach of 
blockade except within the area of queries of the warships
detailed to render the blockade effective. 

Art. 18. The blockading forces must not bar access to neutral 
ports or coasts. 

Art. 19. Whatever may be the ulterior destination of a vessel 
or of her cargo, she cannot be captured for breach of blockade, if, at 
the moment, she is on her way to a non-blockaded port. 

Art. 20. A vessel which has broken blockade outwards, or 
which has attempted to break blockade inwards, is liable to capture 
so long as she is pursued by a ship of the blockading force. If 
the pursuit is abandoned, or if the blockade is raised, her capture 
can no longer be effected. 

Art. 21. A vessel found guilty of breach of blockade is liable 
to condemnation. The cargo is also condemned, unless it is 
proved that at the time of the shipment of the goods the shipper 
neither knew nor could have known of the intention to break the 
blockade. (T. Ba.) 

BLOCKHOUSE, in fortification, a small roofed work serving 
as a fortified post for a small garrison. The word, common 
since 1500, is of uncertain origin, and was applied to what is now 
called a fort d'arrct, a detached fort blocking the access to a 
landing, channel, pass, bridge or defile. The modern blockhouse 
is a building, sometimes of two storeys, which is loopholed on all 
sides, and not infrequently, in the case of two-storey blockhouses, 
provided with a m&chicoulis gallery. Blockhouses are built of 
wood, brick, stone, corrugated iron or any material available. 
During the South African War (1899-1902) they were often sent 
from England to the front in ready-made sections. 

BLOEMAERT, ABRAHAM (1564-1651), Dutch painter and 
engraver, was born at Gorinchem, the son of an architect. He 
was first a pupil of Gcrrit Splinter (pupil of Frans Floris) and of 
Joos de Beer, at Utrecht. He then spent three years in Paris, 
studying under several masters, and on his return to his native 
country received further training from Hieronymus Francken. 
In 1591 he went to Amsterdam, and four years later settled 
finally at Utrecht, where he became dean of the Gild of St Luke. 
He excelled more as a colourist than as a draughtsman, was 
extremely productive, and painted and etched historical and 
allegorical pictures, landscapes, still-life, animal pictures and 
flower pieces. Among his pupils are his four sons, Hendrick, 
Frederick, Cornelis and Adriaan (all of whom achieved consider- 
able reputation as painters or engravers), the two Honthorsts 
and Jacob G. Cuyp. 

BLOEMEN, JAN FRANS VAN (1662-1740), Flemish painter, 
was born at Antwerp, and studied and lived in Italy. At Rome 
he was styled Orizonte, on account of his painting of distance 
in his landscapes, which are reminiscent of Gaspard Poussin and 
much admired. His brothers Pieter (1657-1719), styled Stan- 
daart (from his military pictures), and Norbert (1670-1746), 
were also well-known painters. 

BLOEMFONTEIN, capital of the Orange Free State, in 
29 8' S., 26 18' E. It is situated on the open veld, surrounded 
by a few low kopjes, 4518 ft. above the sea, 105 m. by rail E. 
by S. of Kimberley, 750 N.E. by E. of Cape Town, 450 N. by E. 
of Port Elizabeth, and 257 S.W. of Johannesburg. 

Bloemfontein is a very pleasant town, regularly laid out with 
streets running at right angles and a large central market square. 
Many of the houses are surrounded by large wooded gardens. 
Through the town runs the Bloemspruit. After a disastrous 
flood in 1904 the course of this spring was straightened and six 
stone bridges placed across it. There are several fine public 
buildings, mostly built of red brick and a fine-grained white 
stone quarried in the neighbourhood. The Raadzaal, a building 
in the Renaissance style, faces Market Square. Formerly the 
meeting-place of the Orange Free State Raad, it is now the seat 



of the provincial council. In front of the old Raadzaal (used 
as law courts) is a statue of President Brand. In Douglas Street 
is an unpretentious building used in turn as a church, a raadzaal, 
a court-house and a museum. In it was signed (1854) the 
convention which recognized the independence of the Free 
State Boers (see Orange Free State: History). Among 
the churches the most important, architecturally, are the 
Dutch Reformed, a building with two spires, and the Anglican 
cathedral, which has a fine interior. The chief educational 
establishment is Grey University College, built 1 906-1 908 at 
a cost of £125,000. It stands in grounds of 300 acres, a mile 
and a half from the town. In the town is the original Grey 
College, founded in 1856 by Sir George Grey, when governor of 
Cape Colony. The post and telegraph office in Market Square 
is one of the finest buildings in the town. The public library 
fs housed in a handsome building in Warden Street. Opposite 
it is the new national museum. 

Bloemfontein possesses few manufactures, but is the trading 
centre of the province. Having a dry healthy climate, it is a 
favourite residential town and a resort for invalids, being recom- 
mended especially for pulmonary disease. The mean maximum 
temperature is 76-7° Fahr., the mean minimum 45-8°; the mean 
annual rainfall about 24 in. There is an excellent water-supply, 
obtained partly from Bloemspruit, but principally from the 
Modder river at Sanna's Post, 22 m. to the east, and from 
reservoirs at Moches Dam and Magdcpoort. 

The population in 1904 was 33,883, of whom, including the 
garrison of 3487, 15,501 were white, compared with a white 
population of 2077 in 1890. The coloured inhabitants are mostly 
Bechuana and Basuto. Most of the whites are of British origin, 
and English is the common language of all, including the Dutch. 

The spruit or spring which gives its name to the town was 
called after one of the emigrant farmers, Jan Bloem. The town 
dates from 1846, in which year Major H. D. Warden, then 
British resident north of the Orange, selected the site as the 
seat of his administration. When in 1854 independence was 
conferred on the country the town was chosen by the Boers as 
the seat of government. It became noted for the intelligence 
of its citizens, and for the educational advantages it offered at 
the time when education among the Boers was thought of very 
lightly. In 1892 the railway connecting it with Cape Town and 
Johannesburg was completed. During the Anglo-Boer War 
of 1899-1902 it was occupied by the British under Lord Roberts 
without resistance (13th of March 1900), fourteen days after the 
surrender of General Cronje at Paardeberg. In Market Square 
on the 28th of the following May the annexation of the Orange 
Free State to the British dominions was proclaimed. - In 1907 
the first session of the first parliament elected under the con- 
stitution granting the colony self-government was held in 
Bloemfontein. In 1910 when the colony became a province 
of the Union of South Africa under its old designation of Orange 
Free State, Bloemfontein was chosen as the seat of the Supreme 
Court of South Africa. Its growth as a business centre after the 
close of the war in 1902 was very marked. The rateable value 
increased from £709,000 in 1901 to £2,400,000 in 1905. 

BLOET, ROBERT (d. n 23), English bishop, was chancellor 
to William I. and Rufus. From the latter he received the see 
of Lincoln (1093) in succession to Remigius. His private char- 
acter was indifferent; but he administered his see with skill 
and prudence, built largely, and kept a magnificent household, 
which served as a training-school even for the sons of nobles. 
Bloet was active in assisting Henry I. during the rebellion of 
1 102, and became that monarch's justiciar. Latterly, however, 
he fell out of favour, and, although he had been very rich, was 
impoverished by the fines which the king extorted from him. 
Perhaps his wealth was his chief offence in the king's eyes; 
for he was in attendance on Henry when seized with his last 
illness. He was the patron of the chronicler Henry of Hunting- 
don, whom he advanced to an archdeaconry. 

Henry of Huntingdon and W. Malmesbury (De Gestis Pontificum) 
are original authorities. See E. A. Freeman's William. Rufus; Sir 
James Ramsay, The Foundations of England, vol. ii. (H. W. C. D.) 



BLOIS 



75' 



BLUIS, LOUIS DE (1506-1566), Flemish mystical writer, 
generally known under the name of Blosius, was born in 
October 1506 at the chateau of Donstienne, near Liege, of an 
illustrious family to which several crowned heads were allied. 
He was educated at the court of the Netherlands with the future 
emperor Charles V. of Germany, who remained to the last his 
staunch friend. At the age of fourteen he received the Bene- 
dictine habit in the monastery of Liessies in Hainaut, of which 
he became abbot in 1530. Charles V. pressed in vain upon 
him the archbishopric of Cambrai, but Blosius studiously 
exerted himself in the reform of his monastery and in the com- 
position of devotional works. He died at his monastery on 
the 7th of January 1566. 

Blosius's works, which were written in Latin, have been 
translated into almost every European language, and have 
appealed not only to Roman Catholics, but to many English 
laymen of note, such as W. E. Gladstone and Lord Coleridge. 
The best editions of his collected works are the first edition by 
J. Frojus (Louvain, 1568), and the Cologne reprints (1572, 
1587). His best-known works are: — the Institutio Spiritualis 
(Eng. trans., A Book of Spiritual Instruction, London, 1900); 
Consolatio Pusillanimium (Eng. trans., Comfort for the Faint- 
Hearted, London, 1903); Sacellum Animae Fidelis (Eng. trans., 
The Sanctuary of the Faithful Soul, London, 1905); all these 
three works were translated and edited by Father Bertrand 
Wilberforce, O.P., and have been reprinted several times; 
and especially Speculum Monachorum (French trans, by Felicite 
de Lamennais, Paris, 1809; Eng. trans., Paris, 1676; re-edited 
by Lord Coleridge, London, 1871, 1872, and inserted in " Pater- 
noster " series, 1901). 

See Georges de Blois, Louis de Blois, un Benedictin au XVI ^" e 
Steele (Paris, 1875), Eng. trans, by Lady Lovat (London, 1878, &c.). 

BLOIS, a town of central France, capital of the department 
of Loir-et-Cher, 35 m. S.W. of Orleans, on the Orleans railway 
between that city and Tours. Pop. (1906) 18,457. Situated 
in a thickly-wooded district on the right bank of the Loire, it 
covers the summits and slopes of two eminences between which 
runs the principal thoroughfare of the town named after the 
philosopher Denis Papin. A bridge of the 18th century from 
which it presents the appearance of an amphitheatre, unites 
Blois with the suburb of Vienne on the left bank of the river. 
The streets of the higher and older part of the town are narrow 
and tortuous, and in places so steep that means of ascent is 
provided by flights of steps. The famous chateau of the family 
of Orleans (see Architecture: Renaissance Architecture in 
France), a fine example of Renaissance architecture, stands on 
the more westerly of the two hills. It consists of three main 
wings, and a fourth and smaller wing, and is built round a court- 
yard. The most interesting portion is the north-west wing, 
which was erected by Francis I., and contains the room where 
Henry, duke of Guise, was assassinated by order of Henry III. 
The striking feature of the interior facade is the celebrated spiral 
staircase tower, the bays of which, with their beautifully sculp- 
tured balustrades, project into the courtyard (see Architecture, 
Plate VIII. fig. 84) . The north-east wing, in which is the entrance 
to the castle, was built by Louis XII. and is called after him; 
it contains picture-galleries and a museum. Opposite is the 
Gaston wing, erected by Gaston, duke of Orleans, brother of 
Louis XIII. , which contains a majestic domed staircase. In the 
north corner of the courtyard is the Salle des Etats, which, 
together with the donjon in the west corner, survives from the 
13th century. Of the churches of Blois, the cathedral of St Louis, 
a building of the end of the 17th century, but in Gothic style, 
is surpassed in interest by St Nicolas, once the church of the 
abbey of St Laumer, and dating from the 1 2th and 13th centuries. 
The picturesqueness of the town is enhanced by many old 
mansions, the chief of which is the Renaissance Hotel d'Alluye, 
and by numerous fountains, among which that named after 
Louis XII. is of very graceful design. The prefecture, the law 
court, the corn-market and the fine stud-buildings are among 
the chief modern buildings. 

Blois is the seat of a bishop, a prefect, and a court of assizes. 



It has a tribunal offirst instance, a tribunal of commerce, a board 
of trade arbitration, a branch of the Bank of France, a communal 
college and training-colleges. The town is a market for the 
agricultural and pastoral regions of Beauce and Sologne, and has 
a considerable trade in grain, the wines of the Loire valley, and 
in horses and other live-stock. It manufactures boots and 
shoes, biscuits, chocolate, upholstering materials, furniture, 
machinery and earthenware, and has vinegar-works, breweries, 
leather-works and foundries. 

Though of ancient origin, Blois is first distinctly mentioned by 
Gregory of Tours in the 6th century, and was not of any import- 
ance till the 9th century, when it became the seat of a powerful 
countship (see below). In 1196 Count Louis granted privileges 
to the townsmen; the commune, which survived throughout 
the middle ages, probably dated from this time. The counts of 
the Chatillon line resided at Blois more often than their pre- 
decessors, and the oldest parts of the chateau (13 th century) 
were built by them. In 1429 Joan of Arc made Blois her base 
of queries for the relief of Orleans. After his captivity in
England, Charles of Orleans in 1440 took up his residence in the 
chateau, where in 1462 his son, afterwards Louis XII., was born. 
In the 1 6th century Blois was often the resort of the French 
court. Its inhabitants included many Calvinists, and it was 
in 1562 and 1567 the scene of struggles between them and the 
supporters of the Roman church. In 1576 and 1588 Henry III., 
king of France, chose Blois as the meeting-place of the states- 
general, and in the latter year he brought about the murders of 
Henry, duke of Guise, and his brother, Louis, archbishop of 
Reims and cardinal, in the chateau, where their deaths were 
shortly followed by that of the queen-mother, Catherine de' 
Medici. From 1617 to 1619 Marie de' Medici, wife of King 
Henry IV., exiled from the court, lived at the chateau, which 
was soon afterwards given by Louis XIII. to his brother Gaston, 
duke of Orleans, who lived there till his death in 1660. The 
bishopric dates from the end of the 17th century. In 1814 
Blois was for a short time the seat of the regency of Marie Louise, 
wife of Napoleon I. 

See L. de la Saussaye, Blois et ses environs (1873) ; Histoire du 
chateau de Blois (1873); L. Bergevin et A. Dupre, Histoire de Blois 
(1847). 

BLOIS, Countship or. From 865 to about 940 the countship 
of Blois was one of those which were held in fee by the margrave 
of Neustria, Robert the Strong, and by his successors, the abbot 
Hugh, Odo (or Eudes), Robert II. and Hugh the Great. It then 
passed, about 940 and for nearly three centuries, to a new family 
of counts, whose chiefs, at first vassals of the dukes of France, 
Hugh the Great and Hugh Capet, became in 987, by the accession 
of the Capetian dynasty to the throne of France, the direct 
vassals of the crown. These new counts were originally very 
powerful. With the countship of Blois they united, from 940 to 
1044, that of Touraine, and from about 950 to 12 18, and after- 
wards from 1269 to 1286, the countship of Chartres remained in 
their possession. 

The counts of Blois of the house of the Theobalds (Thibauds) 
began with Theobald I., the Cheat, who became count about 940. 
He was succeeded by his son, Odo (Eudes) I., about 975. 
Theobald II., eldest son of Odo I., became count in 996, and 
was succeeded by Odo II., younger son of Odo I., about 1005. 
Odo II. was one of the most warlike barons of his time. With 
the already considerable domains which he held from his 
ancestors, he united the heritage of his kinsman, Stephen I., 
count of Troyes. In 1033 he disputed the crown of Burgundy 
with the emperor, Conrad the Salic, and perished in 1037 while 
fighting in Lorraine. He was succeeded in 103 7 by his eldest son, 
Theobald III., who was defeated by the Angevins in 1044, and 
was forced to give up the town of Tours and its dependencies 
to the count of Anjou. In 1089 Stephen Henry, eldest son of 
Theobald III., became count. He took part in the first crusade, 
fell into the hands of the Saracens, and died in captivity; he 
married Adela, daughter of William I., king of England. In 
1 102 Stephen Henry was succeeded by his son, Theobald IV. 
the Great, who united the countship of Troyes with his domains 



7 6 



BLOMEFIELD— BLONDEL 



in 1128. In 1135, on the death of his maternal uncle, Henry I., 
king of England, he was called to Normandy by the barons of 
the duchy, but soon renounced his claims on learning that his 
younger brother, Stephen, had just been proclaimed king of 
England. In 1 1 52 Theobald V. the Good, second son of Theobald 
IV., became count; he died in 1191 in Syria, at the siege of Acre. 
His son Louis succeeded in 1191, took part in the fourth crusade, 
and after the taking of Constantinople was rewarded with the 
duchy of Nicaea. He was killed at the battle of Adrianople in 
1205, in which year he was succeeded by his son, Theobald VI. 
the Young, who died childless. In 1218 the countship passed 
to Margaret, eldest daughter of Theobald V., and to Walter 
(Gautier) of Avesnes, her third husband. 

The Chatillon branch of the counts of Blois began in 1230 
with Mary of Avesnes, daughter of Margaret of Blois and her 
husband, Hugh of Chatillon, count of St Pol. In 1241 her 
brother, John of Chatillon, became count of Blois, and was 
succeeded in 1279 by his daughter, Joan of Chatillon, who 
married Peter, count of Alencon, fifth son of Louis IX., king of 
France. In 1286 Joan, sold the countship of Chartres to the king 
of France. Hugh of Chatillon, her first-cousin, became count 
of Blois in 1293, and was succeeded by his son, Guy I., in 1307. 
In 1342 Louis II., eldest son of Guy I., died at the battle of 
Crecy, and his brother, Charles of Blois, disputed the duchy of 
Brittany with John of Montfort. Louis III., eldest son of 
Louis II., became count in 1346, and was succeeded by John II., 
second son of Louis II., in 1372. In 1381 Guy II., brother of 
Louis III. and John II., succeeded in 1381, but died childless. 
Overwhelmed with debt, he had sold the countship of Blois to 
Louis I., duke of Orleans, brother *of King Charles VI., who took 
possession of it in 1397. 

In 1498 the countship of Blois was united with the crown by 
the accession of King Louis XII., grandson and second successor 
of Louis I., duke of Orleans. 

See Bernier, Histoire de Blois (1682) ; La Saussaye, Histoire de la 
ville de Blois (1846). (A. Lo.) 

BLOMEFIELD, FRANCIS (1705-1752), English topographer 
of the county of Norfolk, was born at Fersfield, Norfolk, on 
the 23rd of July 1705. On leaving Cambridge in 1727 he was 
ordained, becoming in 1729 rector of Hargham, Norfolk, and 
immediately afterwards rector of Fersfield, his father's family 
living. In 1733 he mooted the idea of a history of Norfolk, for 
which he had begun collecting material at the age of fifteen, and 
shortly afterwards, while, collecting further information for 
his book, discovered some of the famous Paston Letters. By 
1736 he was ready to put some of the results of his researches into 
type. At the end of 1739 the first volume of the History of 
Norfolk was completed. It was printed at the author's own press, 
bought specially for the purpose. The second volume was ready 
in 1745. There is little doubt that in compiling his book Blome- 
field had frequent recourse to the existing historical collections 
of Le Neve, Kirkpatrick and Tanner, his own work being to a 
large extent one of expansion and addition. To Le Neve in 
particular a large share of the credit is due. When half-way 
through his third volume, Blomefield, who had come up to London 
in connexion with a special piece of research, caught smallpox, 
of which he died on the 16th of January 1752. The remainder of 
his work was published posthumously, and the whole eleven 
volumes were republished in London between 1805 and 1810. 

BLOMFIELD, SIR ARTHUR WILLIAM (1829-1899), English 
architect, son of Bishop C. J. Blomfield, was born on the 6th of 
March 1829, and educated at Rugby and Trinity, Cambridge. 
He was then articled as an architect to P. C. Hardwick, and 
subsequently obtained a large practice on his own account. He 
became president of the Architectural Association in 1861, and a 
fellow (1867) and vice-president (1886) of the Royal Institute of 
British Architects. In 1887 he became architect to the Bank of 
England, and designed the law courts branch in Fleet Street, and 
he was associated with A. E. Street in the building of the law 
courts. In 1889 he was knighted. He died on the 30th of 
October 1899. He was twice married, and brought up two sons, 
Charles J. Blomfield and Arthur Conran Blomfield, to his own 



profession, of which they became distinguished representatives. 
Among the numerous churches which Sir Arthur Blomfield 
designed, his work at St Saviour's, Southwark, is a notable 
example of his use of revived Gothic, and he was highly regarded 
as a restorer. 

BLOMFIELD, CHARLES JAMES (1786-1857), English divine, 
was born on the 29th of May 1786 at Bury St Edmunds. He was 
educated at the local grammar school and at Trinity College, 
Cambridge, where he gained the Browne medals for Latin and 
Greek odes, and carried off the Craven scholarship. In 1808 he 
graduated as third wrangler and first medallist, and in the 
following year was elected to a fellowship at Trinity College. 
The first-fruits of his scholarship was an edition of the Prometheus 
of Aeschylus in 18 10; this was followed by editions of the Septem 
contra Thebas, Persae, Choephorae, and Agamemnon, of Calli- 
machus, and of the fragments of Sappho, Sophron and Alcaeus. 
Blomfield, however, soon ceased to devote himself entirely to 
scholarship. He had been ordained in 1810, and held in quick 
succession the livings of Chesterford, Quarrington, Dunton, Great 
and Little Chesterford, and Tuddenham. In 18 17 he was 
appointed private chaplain to Wm. Howley, bishop of London. 
In 1819 he was nominated to the rich living of St Botolph's, 
Bishopsgate, and in 1822 he became archdeacon of Colchester. 
Two years later he was raised to the bishopric of Chester where he 
carried through many much-needed reforms. In 1828 he was 
translated to the bishopric of London, which he held for twenty- 
eight years. During this period his energy and zeal did much to 
extend the influence of the church. He was one of the best 
debaters in the House of Lords, took a leading position in the 
action for church reform which culminated in the ecclesiastical 
commission, and did much for the extension of the colonial 
episcopate; and his genial and kindly nature made him an, 
invaluable mediator in the controversies arising out of the 
tractarian movement. His health at last gave way, and in 1856 
he was permitted to resign his bishopric, retaining Fulham 
Palace as his residence, with a pension of £6000 per annum. He 
died on the 5th of August 1857. His published works, exclusive 
of those above mentioned, consist of charges, sermons, lectures 
and pamphlets, and of a Manual of Private and Family Prayers. 
He was a frequent contributor to the quarterly reviews, chiefly 
on classical subjects. 

See Memoirs of Charles James Blomfield, D. D., Bishop of London, 
with Selections from his Correspondence, edited by his son, Alfred Blom- 
field (1863) ; G. E. Biber, Bishop Blomfield and his Times (1857). 

BLOMFIELD, EDWARD VALENTINE (1788-1816), English 
classical scholar, brother of Bishop C. J. Blomfield, was born at 
Bury St Edmunds on the 14th of February 1788. Going to 
Caius College, Cambridge, he was thirteenth wrangler in 181 1, 
obtained several of the classical prizes of the university, and 
became a fellow and lecturer at Emmanuel College. In 1813 he 
travelled in Germany and made the acquaintance of some of 
the great scholars of Germany. On his return, he published in 
the Museum Criticum (No. ii.) an interesting paper on " The 
Present State of Classical Literature in Germany." Blomfield is 
chiefly known by his translation of Matthiae's Greek Grammar 
( 1 8 1 9) , which was prepared for the press by his brother. He died 
on the 9th of October 1816, his early death depriving Cambridge 
of one who seemed destined to take a high place amongst her 
most brilliant classical scholars. 

See " Memoir of Edward Valentine Blomfield," by Bishop Monk, 
in Museum Criticum, No. vii. 

BLONDEL, DAVID (1591-1655), French Protestant clergyman, 
was born at Chalons-sur-Marne in 1591, and died on the 6th of 
April 1655. In 1650 he succeeded G. J. Vossius in the professor- 
ship of history at Amsterdam. His works were very numerous; 
in some of them he showed a remarkable critical faculty, as in his 
dissertation on Pope Joan (1647, !657), in which he came to the 
conclusion, now universally accepted, that the whole story is a 
mere myth. Considerable Protestant indignation was excited 
against him on account of this book. 

BLONDEL, JACQUES FRANQOIS (1705-1774), French archi- 
tect, began life as an architectural engraver, but developed 
into an architect of considerable distinction, if of no great 



BLONDIN— BLOOD 



77 



originality. As architect to Louis XV. from 1755 he necessarily 
did much in the rococo manner, although it would seem that he 
conformed to fashion rather than to artistic conviction. He 
was among the earliest founders of schools of architecture in 
France, and for this he was distinguished by the Academy; but 
he is now best remembered by his voluminous work L' Architecture 
francaise, in which he was the continuator of Marot. The book is 
a precious collection of views of famous buildings, many of which 
have disappeared or been remodelled. 

BLONDIN (1824-1897), French tight-rope walker and acrobat, 
was born at St Omer, France, on the 28th of February 1824. 
His real name was Jean Francois Gravelet. When five years 
old he was sent to the Ecole de Gymnase at Lyons and, after six 
months' training as an acrobat, made his first public appearance 
as " The Little Wonder." His superior skill and grace as well 
as the originality of the settings of his acts, made him a popular 
favourite. He especially owed his celebrity and fortune to his 
idea of crossing Niagara Falls on a tight-rope, n 00 ft. long, 
160 ft. above the water. This he accomplished, first in 1859, 
a number of times, always with different theatric variations: 
blindfold, in a sack, trundling a wheelbarrow, on stilts, carrying 
a man on his back, sitting down midway while he made and ate 
an omelette. In 1861 Blondin first appeared in London, at the 
Crystal Palace, turning somersaults on stilts on a rope stretched 
across the central transept, 170 ft. from the ground. In 1862 
he again gave a series of performances at the Crystal Palace, 
and elsewhere in England, and on the continent. After a period 
of retirement he reappeared in 1880, his final performance 
being given at Belfast in 1896. He died at Ealing, London, 
on the 19th of February 1897. 

BLOOD, the circulating fluid in the veins and arteries of 
animals. The word itself is common to Teutonic languages; 
the 0. Eng. is bldd, cf. Gothic Moth, Dutch bloed, Ger. Blut. It 
is probably ultimately connectefl with the root which appears 
in " blow," " bloom," meaning flourishing or vigorous. The 
Gr. word for blood, at/uct, appears as a prefix haemo- in many 
compound words. As that on which the life depends, as the 
supposed seat of the passions and emotions, and as that part 
which a child is believed chiefly to inherit from its parents, the 
word "blood" is used in many figurative and transferred 
senses; thus " to have his blood," " to fire the blood," " cold 
blood," " blood-royal," " half " or " whole blood," &c. The 
expression " blue blood " is from the Spanish sangre azul. The 
nobles of Castile claimed to be free from all admixture with the 
darker blood of Moors or Jews, a proof being supposed to lie in 
the blue veins that showed in their fairer skins. The common 
English expletive " bloody," used as an adjective or adverb, 
has been given many fanciful origins; it has been supposed to 
be a contraction of " by our Lady," or an adaptation of the oath 
common during the 17th century, " 'sblood," a contraction of 
" God's blood." The exact origin of the expression is not quite 
clear, but it is certainly merely an application of the adjective 
formed from " blood." The New English Dictionary suggests 
that it refers to the use of " blood " for a young rowdy of aristo- 
cratic birth, which was common at the end of the 17th century, 
and later became synonymous with "dandy," "buck," &c; 
" bloody drunk " meant therefore "drunk as a blood," "drunk 
as a lord." The expression came into common colloquial use 
as a mere intensive, and was so used till the middle of the 18th 
century. There can be little doubt that the use of the word 
has been considerably affected by the idea of blood as the vital 
principle, and therefore something strong, vigorous, and parallel 
as an intensive epithet with such expressions as " thundering," 
" awfully " and the like. 

Anatomy and Physiology 
In all living organisms, except the most minute, only a mini- 
mum number of cells can come into immediate contact with the 
general world, whence is to be drawn the food supply for the 
whole organism. Hence those cells — and they are by far the 
most numerous — which do not lie on the food-absorbing surface, 
must gain their nutriment by some indirect means. Further, 



each living cell produces waste products whose accumulation 
would speedily prove injurious to the cell, hence they must be 
constantly removed from its immediate neighbourhood and 
indeed from the organism as a whole. In this instance again, 
only a few cells can lie on a surface whence such materials can 
be directly discharged to the exterior. Hence the main number 
of the cells of the organism must depend upon some mechanism 
by which the waste products can be carried away from them 
to that group of cells whose duty it is to modify them, or dis- 
charge them from the body. These two ends are attained by the 
aid of a circulating fluid, a fluid which is constantly flowing 
past every cell of the body. From it the cells extract the food 
materials they require for their sustenance, and into it they dis- 
charge the waste materials resulting from their activity. This 
circulating medium is the blood. 

Whilst undoubtedly the two functions of this circulating 
fluid above given are the more prominent, there are yet others 
of great importance. For instance, it is known that many tissues 
as a result of their activity produce certain chemical substances 
which are of essential importance to the life of other tissue 
cells. These substances — internal secretions as they are termed 
— are carried to the second tissue by the blood stream. Again, 
many instances are known in which two distant tissues com- 
municate with one another by means of chemical messengers, 
bodies termed hormones {bpixauv, to stir up), which are produced 
by one group of cells, and sent to the other group to excite 
them to activity. Here, also, the path by which such messengers 
travel is the blood stream. A further and most important 
manner in which the circulating fluid is utilized in the life of an 
animal is seen in the way in which it is employed in protecting 
the body should it be invaded by micro-organisms. 

Hence it is clear that the blood is of the most vital importance 
to the healthy life of the body. But the fact that it is present as 
a circulating medium exposes the animal to a great dangef, viz. 
that it may be lost should any vessel carrying it become ruptured. 
This is constantly liable to happen, but to minimize as far as 
possible any such loss, the blood is endowed with the peculiar 
property of clotting, i.e. of setting to a solid or stiff jelly by 
means of which the orifices of the torn vessels become plugged 
and the bleeding stayed. 

The performance of these essential functions depends upon 
the maintenance of a continuous flow past all tissue cells, and 
this is attained by the circulatory mechanism, consisting of a 
central pump, the heart, and a system of ramifying tubes, the 
arteries, through which the blood is forced from the heart to 
every tissue (see Vascular System). A second set of tubes, 
the veins, collects the blood and returns it to the heart. In 
many invertebrates the circulating fluid is actually poured into 
the tissue spaces from the open terminals of the arteries. From 
these spaces it is in turn drained away by the veins. Such a 
system is termed a haemolymph system and the circulating 
fluid the haemolymph. Here the essential point gained is that 
the fluid is brought into direct contact with the tissue cells. 
In all vertebrates, the ends of the arteries are united to the 
commencements of the veins by a plexus of extremely minute 
tubes, the capillaries, consequently the blood is always retained 
within closed tubes and never comes into contact with the tissue 
cells. It is while passing through the capillaries that the blood 
performs its work; here the blood stream is at its slowest and 
is brought nearest to the tissue cell, only being separated from 
it by the extremely thin wall of the capillary and by an equally 
thin layer of fluid. Through this narrow barrier the interchanges 
between cell and blood take place. 

The advantage gained in the vertebrate animal by retaining 
the blood in a closed system of tubes lies in the great diminution 
of resistance to the flow of blood, and the consequent great 
increase in rate of flow past the tissue cells. Hence any food 
stuffs which can travel quickly through the capillary wall to 
the tissue cell outside can be supplied in proportionately greater 
quantity within a given time, without requiring any very great 
increase in the concentration of that substance in the blood. 
Conversely, any highly diffusible substance may be withdrawn 



7 8 



BLOOD 



from the tissues by the blood at a similarly increased pace. 
These conditions are more peculiarly of importance for the 
supply of oxygen and the removal of carbonic acid — especially 
for the former, because the amount of it which can be carried 
by the blood is small. But as the rate at which a tissue lives, 
i.e. its activity, depends upon the rate of its chemical reactions, 
and as these are fundamentally oxidative, the more rapidly 
oxygen is carried to a tissue the more rapidly it can live, and the 
greater the amount of work it can perform within a given time. 
The rate of supply is of much less importance in the case of 
the other food substances because they are far more soluble in 
water, so that the supply in sufficient quantity can easily be 
met by a relatively slow blood flow. Hence we find that the 
gradual evolution of the animal kingdom goes hand in hand 
with the gradual development of a greater oxygen-carrying 
capacity of the blood and an increase in the rate of its flow. 

In the groundwork of a tissue are a number of spaces — the 
tissue spaces. They are filled with fluid and intercommunicate 
freely, finally connecting with a number of fine tubes, the 
lymphatics, through which excess of fluid or any solid particles 
present are drained away. The contained fluid acts as an inter- 
mediary between the blood and the cell; from it, the cell takes 
its various food stuffs, these having in the first instance been 
derived from the blood, and into it the cell discharges its waste 
products. On the course of the lymphatics a number of typical 
structures, the lymphatic glands, are placed, and the lymph 
has to pass through these structures where any deleterious 
products are retained, and the fluid thus purified is drained 
away by further lymphatics and finally returned to the blood. 
Thus there is a second stream of fluid from the tissues, but one 
vastly slower than that of the blood. The flow is too slow for it 
to act as the vehicle for the removal of those waste products 
(carbonic acid, &c.) which must of necessity be removed quickly. 
These' must be removed by the blood. The same is true for the 
main number of other waste products, which, however, being 
of small molecular size are readily absorbed into the blood 
stream. 

But in addition to fluid, the tissue spaces may at times be 
found to contain solid matter in the form of particles, which 
may represent the debris of destroyed cells, or which are, as is 
quite commonly the case, micro-organisms. Apparently such 
material cannot be removed from a tissue by absorption into 
the blood stream — indeed in the case of living organisms such 
an absorption would in many instances rapidly prove fatal, and 
special provision is made to prevent such an accident. These, 
therefore, are made to travel along the lymphatic channels, 
and so, before gaining access to the blood stream and thus to the 
body generally, have to run the gauntlet of the protective 
mechanism provided by the lymphatic glands, where in the major 
number of cases they are readily destroyed. 

Hence we see that first and foremost we have to regard the 
blood as a food-carrier to all the cells of the body; in the second 
place as the vehicle carrying away most if not all the waste 
products; in a third direction, it is acting as a means for trans- 
mitting chemical substances manufactured in one tissue to 
distant cells of the body for whose nutrition or excitation they 
may be essential; and in addition to these important functions 
there is yet another whose value it is almost impossible to over- 
estimate, for it plays the essential role in rendering the animal 
immune to the attacks of invading organisms. The question of 
immunity is discussed elsewhere, and it is sufficient merely 
to indicate the chief means by which the blood subserves this 
essential protective mechanism. Should living organisms find 
their way into the surface cells or within the tissue spaces, the 
body fights them in a number of ways, (i) It may produce one 
or more chemical substances capable of neutralizing the toxic 
material produced by the organism. (2) It may produce chemical 
substances which act as poisons to the micro-organism, either 
paralysing it or actually killing it. Or (3) the organism may be 
attacked and taken up into the body of wandering cells, e.g. 
certain of the leucocytes, and then digested by them. Such cells 
are therefore called phagocytes {4>ayeiv, to eat). Thus, by its 



power of reacting in these ways the body has become capable 
of withstanding the attacks of many different varieties of micro- 
organisms, of both animal and vegetable origin. 

General Properties.— Blood is an opaque, viscid liquid of 
bright red colour possessing a distinct and characteristic odour,' 
especially when warm. Its opacity is due to the presence of a 
very large number of solid particles, the blood corpuscles, having 
a higher refractive index than that of the liquid in which they 
float. The specific gravity in man averages about 1-055. The 
specific gravity of the liquid portion, the plasma (Gr. irKaaixa, 
something formed or moulded, irXaaaav, to mould), is about 
1-027, whilst that of the corpuscles amounts to 1-088. To litmus 
it reacts as a weak alkali. 

Blood Plasma. —The plasma is a solution in water of a varied 
number of substances, and as a solvent it confers on the blood 
its power of acting as a carrier of food stuffs and waste products. 
One important food substance, oxygen, is, however, only partly 
carried in solution, being mainly combined with haemoglobin 
in the red corpuscles. The food stuffs carried by the plasma 
are proteins, carbohydrates, salts and water. The main waste 
products dissolved in it are ammonium carbonate, urea, urates, 
xanthin bases, creatin and small amounts of other nitrogenous 
bodies, carbonic acid as carbonates, other carbon compounds 
such as cholesterin, lecithin and a number of other substances. 
Thus, if we take mammalian blood as a type, the plasma would 
have the following approximate composition: — 

In 1000 grms. plasma — 

Water 901-51 

Substances not vaporizing at 120° C. — 

Fibrin 8-o6 

Other proteins and organic substances 81-92 
Inorganic substances — 



Chlorine 
Sulphuric acid 
Phosphoric acid 
Potassium 
Sodium 
Calcium 
Magnesium 
Oxygen _ . 



3-536 
0-129 
0-145 
0-314 
3-410 
0-298 

0-218 

0-455 



8-505 



98-49 



Proteins. — The proteins of the blood plasma belong to the two 
classes of the albumins and the globulins. The globulins present 
are named fibrinogen and serum-globulin; as its name implies, 
the chief physiological property of fibrinogen is that it can give 
rise to fibrin, the solid substance formed when blood clots. It 
possesses the typical properties of a globulin, i.e. it coagulates 
on heating (in this instance at a temperature of 56° C), and is 
precipitated by half saturating its solution with ammonium 
sulphate. It differs from other globulins in that it is less soluble. 
It is only present in very small quantities, 0-4%. The other 
globulin, serum-globulin, is not coagulated until 75 C. is reached, 
and we now know that it is in reality a mixture of several 
proteins, but so far these have not been completely separated 
from one another and obtained in a pure form. On dialysing a 
solution of serum-globulin a part is precipitated, and this portion 
has been termed the eu-globulin fraction, the remainder being 
known, in contradistinction, as the pseudo-globulin. Again, on 
diluting a solution and adding a small amount of acetic acid a 
precipitate is formed which in some respects differs from the 
remainder of the globulin present. Whether in these two 
instances we are dealing with approximately pure substances 
is extremely doubtful. A further important point in connexion 
with the chemistry of the globulins is that dextrose may be 
found among their decomposition products, i.e. that a part of 
it, or possibly the whole, possesses a glucoside character. 

Serum-albumin gives all the typical colour and precipitation 
reactions of the albumins. If plasma be weakly acidified with 
sulphuric acid, then treated with crystals of ammonium sulphate 
until a slight precipitate forms, filtered and the filtrate allowed 
to evaporate very slowly, typical crystals of serum-albumin 
may form. According to many it is a uniform and specific 



BLOOD 



79 



substance, but others hold the view that it consists of at least 
three distinct substances, as shown by the fact that if a solution 
be gradually heated coagulation will occur at three different 
temperatures, viz. at 73 , 77 and 84 C. On the other hand the 
close agreement between different analyses of even the amorphous 
preparations points to there being but one serum-albumin. 

When blood clots two new proteins make their appearance in 
the fluid part of the blood, or serum, as it is now called. The first 
of these is fibrin ferment (for its origin see section on Clotting 
below). The other, fibrinoglobulin, possesses all the typical 
characteristics of the globulins and coagulates at 64° C. 

Carbohydrates. — Three several carbohydrates are described 
as occurring in plasma, viz. glycogen, animal gum and dextrose. 
If glycogen is present in solution in the plasma it is there in very 
small quantities only, and has probably arisen from the destruc- 
tion of the white blood corpuscles, since some leucocytes un- 
doubtedly contain glycogen. A small amount of carbohydrate 
having the formula for starch and yielding a reducing sugar on 
hydrolysis with acid has also been described. The constant 
carbohydrate constituent of plasma, however, is dextrose. This 
is present to the approximate amount of 0-15 % in arterial blood. 
The amount may be much greater in' the blood of the portal vein 
during carbohydrate absorption, and according to some observers 
there is less in venous than in arterial blood, but the difference is 
small and falls within the error of observation. The statement 
that when no absorption is taking place the blood of the hepatic 
vein is richer in dextrose than that of the portal vein (Bernard) 
is denied by Pavy. 

Fats. — Plasma or serum is as a rule quite clear, but after a meal 
rich in fats it may become quite milky owing to the presence of 
neutral fats in a very fine state of subdivision. This suspended 
fat rapidly disappears from the blood after fat absorption has 
ceased. To some extent it varies in composition with that of the 
fat absorbed, but usually consists of the glycerides of the common 
fatty acids — palmitic, stearic and oleic. In addition, there is a 
small amount of fatty acid in solution in the plasma. As to the 
form in which this occurs there is some uncertainty. It is 
possibly present as a soap or even as a neutral fat, since a little can 
be dissolved in plasma, the solvent substance being probably 
protein or cholesterin. Fatty acids also appear to be present to 
some extent combined with cholesterin forming cholesterin esters 
(about 0-06%). 

Other Organic Compounds. — In addition to the substances 
above described, belonging to the three main classes of food stuffs, 
there are still other organic bodies present in plasma in small 
amounts, which for convenience we may classify as non-nitro- 
genous and nitrogenous. Among the former may be mentioned 
lactic acid, glycerin, a lipochrome, and probably many other 
substances of a similar type whose separation has not yet been 
effected. 

The non-protein nitrogenous constituents consist of the 
following: ammonia as carbonate or carbamate (0-2 to o-6%), 
urea (0-02 to 0-05%), creatine, cr;ainine, uric acid, xanthine, 
hypoxanthine and occasionally hippuric acid. Three ferments 
are also described as being present: (1) a glycolytic ferment 
exerting an action upon dextrose; (2) a lipase or fat-splitting 
ferment; and (3) a diastase capable of converting starch into 
sugar. 

Salts. — The saline constituents of plasma comprise chlorides, 
phosphates, carbonates and possibly sulphates, of sodium, 
potassium, calcium and magnesium. The most abundant metal 
is sodium and the most abundant acid is hydrochloric. These 
two are present in sufficient amount to form about 0-65% of 
sodium chloride. The phosphate is present to about 0-02 %. 
Sulphuric acid is always present if the blood has been calcined 
for the purposes of the analysis, and may then be present to about 
0-013 %. This is, however, probably produced during the 
destruction of the protein, since it has been shown that no 
sulphate can be removed from normal plasma by dialysis. The 
amount of potassium present (0-03 %) is less than one-tenth of 
that of the sodium, and the quantities of calcium and magnesium 
are even less. 



Formed Elements. — When viewed under the microscope the 
main number of these are seen to be small yellow bodies of very 
uniform size, size and shape varying, however, in different 
animals. When observed in bulk they have a red colour, their 
presence in fact giving the typical colour to blood. These are the 
red blood corpuscles or erythrocytes (Gr. kpvdpos, red). Mingled with 
them in the blood are a smaller number of corpuscles which possess 
no colour and have therefore been called white blood corpuscles 
or leucocytes ( Gr. XevKos, white) . Lastly, there are present a large 
number of small lens-shaped structures, less in number than the 
red corpuscles, and much more difficult to distinguish. These are 
known as blood platelets. 

Red Corpuscles. — These are present in very large numbers and, 
under normal conditions, all possess exactly the same appearance. 
With rare exceptionstheir shape is that of a biconcave disk with 
bevelled edges, the size varying somewhat in different animals, 
as is seen in the following table which gives their diameters: — 

Man 0-0075 mm. 

Dog _ 0-0073 mm. 

Rabbit 0-0069 mm. 

Cat 0-0065 mm. 

Goat 0-0041 mm. 

The coloured corpuscles of amphibia as well as of nearly all 
vertebrates below mammals are biconvex and elliptical. The 
following are the dimensions of some of the more common: — 

Pigeon . . . 0-0147 mm. long by 0-0065 mm. wide. 

Frog . . 

Newt 

Proteus . 

Amphiuma 

Their number also varies as follows 
Man .... 4,000,000 to 



0-0223 >» 


0-0157 


0-0293 ... 


0-0195 


0-0580 „ 


0-0350 


0-0770 ,, 


,, 0-0460 



Goat 
Sheep 
Birds . 
Fish 
Frog . 
Proteus 



5,000,000 per cub. mm. 

9,000,000 to 10,000,000 ,, ,, 

13,000,000 to 14,000,000 ,, „ 

1,000,000 to 4,000,000 „ ,, 

250,000 to 2,000,000 ,, „ 
500,000 per cub. mm. 
36,000 



In mammals they are apparently homogeneous in structure, 
have no nucleus, but possess a thin envelope. Their specific 
gravity is distinctly higher than that of the plasma (1-088), so 
that if clotting has been prevented, blood on standing yields a 
large deposit which may form as much as half the total volume 
of the blood. 

Chemical Composition. — On destruction the red corpuscles 
yield two chief proteins, haemoglobin and a nucleo-protein, and 
a number of other substances similar to those usually obtained 
on the break-down of any cellular tissue, such for instance as 
lecithin, cholesterin and inorganic salts. The most important 
protein is the haemoglobin. To it the corpuscle owes its dis- 
tinctive property of acting as an oxygen carrier, for it possesses 
the power of combining chemically with oxygen and of yielding 
up that same oxygen whenever there is a decrease in the con- 
centration of the oxygen in the solvent. Thus in a given solution 
of haemoglobin the amount of it which is combined with oxygen 
depends absolutely on the oxygen concentration. The greatest 
dissociation of oxyhaemoglobin occurs as the oxygen tension falls 
from about 40 to 20 mm. of mercury. That the oxygen forms a 
definite compound with the haemoglobin is proved by the fact 
that haemoglobin thoroughly saturated with oxygen (oxy- 
haemoglobin) has a definite absorption spectrum showing two 
bands between the D and E lines, whilst haemoglobin from which 
the oxygen has been completely removed only gives one band 
between those lines. In association with this, oxyhaemoglobin 
has a typical bright red colour, whereas haemoglobin is dark 
purple. A further striking characteristic of haemoglobin is that 
it contains iron in its molecule. The amount present, though 
small bears a perfectly definite quantitative relation to the 
amount of oxygen with which the haemoglobin is capable of 
combining (two atoms of oxygen to one of iron). One gram of 
haemoglobin crystals can combine with 1-34 cc. of oxygen. On 
destruction with an acid or alkali, haemoglobin yields a pigment 
portion, haematin, and a protein portion, globin, the latter 
belonging to the group of the histones (Gr. lards, web, tissue). 



8o 



BLOOD 



In this cleavage the iron is found in the pigment. By the use of 
a strong acid, it may be made to yield iron-free pigment, the 
remainder of the molecule being much further decomposed. 

Destruction and Formation. — In the performance of their work 
the corpuscles gradually deteriorate. They are then destroyed, 
chiefly in the liver, but whether the whole of this process is 
effected by the liver alone is not decided. It is proved, however, 
that the destruction of the haemoglobin is entirely effected there. 
It was for a long time considered to be one of the functions of the 
spleen to examine the red corpuscles and to destroy or in some 
way to mark those no longer fitted for the performance of their 
work. It is proved that the destruction of the haemoglobin is 
entirely effected in the liver, since both the main cleavage products 
may be traced to this organ, which discharges the pigmentary 
portion as the bile pigment, but retains the iron-protein moiety 
at any rate for a time. The amount of bile pigment eliminated 
during the day indicates that the destruction must be consider- 
able, and since the number of corpuscles does not vary there must 
be an equivalent formation of new ones. This takes place in the 
red bone-marrow, where special cells are provided for their 
continuous production. In embryonic life their formation is 
effected in another way. Certain mesodermic cells, resembling 
those of the connective tissue, collect masses of haemoglobin, and 
from these elaborate red blood corpuscles which thus come to 
lie in the fluid part of the cell. By a canalization of the branches 
of these cells which unite with branches of other cells the pre- 
cursors of the blood capillaries are formed. 

White Blood Corpuscles. — These constitute the second import- 
ant group of formed elements in the blood, and number about 
1 2,000 to 20,000 per cubic mm. They are typical wandering cells 
carried to all parts of the body by the blood stream, but often 
leave that stream and gain the tissue spaces by passing through 
the capillary wall. They exist in many varieties and were first 
classified according as, under the microscope, they presented a 
granular appearance or appeared clear. The cells were also 
distinguished from one another according as they possessed fine 
or coarse granules. The granules are confined to the protoplasm 
of the cell, and it has been shown that they differ chemically, 
because their staining properties vary. Thus, some granules 
select an acid stain, and the cells containing them are then 
designated acidophile or eosinophile; 1 other granules select a basic 
stain and are called basophile, while yet others prefer a neutral 
stain (neuirophile). 

In human blood the following varieties of leucocytes may be 
distinguished: — 

1. The Polymorphonuclear Cell. — This possesses a nucleus of 
very complicated outline and a fair amount of protoplasm filled 
with numbers of fine granules which stain with eosin. They vary 
in size but are usually about o-oi mm. in diameter. They are 
highly amoeboid and phagocytic, and form about 70% of the 
total number of leucocytes. 

2. The Coarsely Granular Eosinophile Cell. — These large cells 
contain a number of well-defined granules which stain deeply 
with acid dyes. The nucleus is crescentic. The cells amount to 
about 2 % of the total number of leucocytes, though the propor- 
tion varies considerably. They are actively amoeboid. 

3. The Lymphocyte. — This is the smallest leucocyte, being 
only about 0-0065 mm. in diameter. It has a large spherical 
nucleus with a small rim of clear protoplasm surrounding it. 
It forms from 1 5 to 40 % of the number of leucocytes, and is less 
markedly amoeboid than the other varieties. 

4. The Hyaline (Gr. va'ki.vos, glassy, crystalline, vaXos, glass) 
cell or macrocyte (Gr. /xa/cpos, long or large). — This is a cell 
similar to the last with a spherical, oval or indented nucleus, but 
it has much more protoplasm. It constitutes about 4 % of all 
the leucocytes and is highly amoeboid and phagocytic. 

5. The Basophile Cell. — This possesses a spherical nucleus and 
the protoplasm contains a small number of granules staining 

1 The suffix -phile, Greek 4>i\dv, to love, prefer, is in scientific 
terminology frequently applied to substances that exhibit such 
preference for particular stains or reagents, the names of which form 
the first part of the word. 



deeply with basic dyes. It is rarely found in the blood of adults 
except in certain diseases. 

Functions. — These cells act as scavengers or as destroyers of 
living organisms that may have gained access to the tissue 
spaces. They play an important part in the chemical processes 
underlying the phenomena of immunity, and some at least are 
of importance in starting the process of clotting. 

They are constantly suffering destruction in the performance 
of their work. Many, too, are lost to the body by their passage 
through the different mucous surfaces. Their origin is still 
obscure in many points. The lymphocytes are derived from 
lymphoid tissue, wherever it exists in the different parts of the 
body. The polymorphonuclear and eosinophile cells are derived 
from the bone-marrow, each by division of specific mother cells 
located in that tissue. The macrocyte is believed by many to 
represent a further stage in the development of the lymphocyte. 
Their rate of formation may be influenced by a variety of 
conditions — for instance, they are found to vary in number 
according to the diet and also, to a considerable extent, in 
disease. 

Platelets. — The platelets or thrombocytes (Gr. 0p6,uj3os, clot) 
are the third class of formed elements occurring in mammalian 
blood. There are still, however, many observers who consider 
that platelets are not present in the normal circulating blood, 
but only make their appearance after it has been shed or other- 
wise injured. They are minute lens-shaped structures, and may 
amount to as many as 800,000 per cubic mm. Under certain 
conditions, examination has shown that they are protoplasmic 
and amoeboid, and that each one contains a central body of 
different staining properties from the remainder of the structure. 
This has been regarded by some as a nucleus. On being brought 
into contact with a foreign surface they adhere to it firmly, very 
rapidly passing through a number of phases resulting ultimately 
in the formation of granular debris. In shed blood they tend to 
collect into groups, and during clotting, fibrin filaments may be 
observed to shoot out from these clumps. 

Variations in the Blood of different Animals. — If we contrast 
the blood of different animals of the vertebrate class we find 
striking differences both in microscopic appearances and in 
chemical properties. In the first place, the corpuscles vary in 
amount and in kind. Thus, whilst in a mammal the corpuscles 
form 40 to 50 % of the total volume of the blood, in the lower 
vertebrates the volume is much less, e.g. in frogs as low as 25 % 
and in fishes even lower. The deficiency is chiefly in the red 
corpuscles, the ratio of white to red increasing as we examine the 
blood from animals lower in the scale. The corpuscles themselves 
are also found to vary, especially the red ones. In the mammal 
they are biconcave disks with bevelled edges, they do not contain 
a nucleus so that they are not cells. In the bird they are larger, 
ellipsoidal in shape and have a large nucleus in the centre of 
the cell. In reptiles and amphibia the red corpuscles are also 
nucleated, but the stroma portion containing the haemoglobin 
is arranged in a thickened annular part encircling the nucleus. 
When seen from the flat they are oval in section. In fishes the 
corpuscles show very much the same structure. A further very 
significant difference to be observed between the bloods of 
different vertebrates is in the amount of haemoglobin they 
contain; thus in the lower classes, fishes and amphibia, not only 
is the number of red corpuscles small but the amount of haemo- 
globin each corpuscle contains is relatively low. The concentra- 
tion of the haemoglobin in the corpuscles attains its maximum 
in the mammal and the bird. Since the haemoglobin is practically 
the same from whatever animal it is obtained and can only com- 
bine with the same amount of oxygen, the oxygen-capacity of the 
blood of any vertebrate is in direct proportion to the amount of 
haemoglobin it contains. Therefore we see that as we ascend 
the scale in the vertebrate series the oxygen-carrying capacity 
of the blood rises. This increase was a natural preliminary 
condition for the progress of evolution. In order that a more 
active animal might be developed the main essential was that 
the chemical processes of the cell should be carried out more 
rapidly, . and as these processes are fundamentally oxidative, 



BLOOD 



81 



increased activity entails an increased rate of supply of oxygen. 
This latter has been brought about in the animal kingdom in 
two ways, first by an increase in the concentration of the haemo- 
globin of the blood effected by an increase both in the number of 
corpuscles and in the amount of haemoglobin contained in each, 
and secondly by an increase in the rate at which the blood has 
been made to pass through the tissues. In the lower vertebrates 
the blood pressure is low and the haemoglobin content of the 
blood is low, consequently both rate of blood-flow and oxygen- 
content are low. In contrast with this, in higher vertebrates the 
blood pressure is high and the haemoglobin content of the blood 
is high, consequently both rate of blood-flow and oxygen-content 
are high. We must associate with this important step in evolu- 
tion the means employed for the more rapid absorption of 
oxygen and for its increased rate of discharge to the tissues, the 
most important features of which are a diminution in the size of 
the corpuscle and the attainment of its peculiar shape, both 
resulting in the production of a relatively enormous corpuscular 
surface in a unit volume of blood. 

Variations are also found in the white corpuscles as well as in 
the red, but these differences are not so striking and lie chiefly 
in unimportant details of structure of individual cells. Enormous 
variations are to be found in different species of mammals, but 
the cells generally conform to the types of secreting cells or 
phagocytes. 

The platelets also differ in the different species. In the frog, 
for instance, many are spindle-shaped and contain a nucleus-like 
structure. Birds' blood is stated to contain no platelets. The 
variations in number of these bodies have not. been satisfactorily 
ascertained on account of the difficulties involved in any attempt 
to preserve them and to render them visible under the microscope. 
Differences are also found in the chemical composition of the 
plasma. The chief variation is in the amount of protein present, 
which attains its maximum concentration in birds and mammals, 
while in reptiles, amphibia and fishes it is much less. The 
bloods of the latter two classes are much more watery than that 
of the mammal. Moreover, it has been proved that there are 
specific differences in the chemical nature of the various proteins 
present even between different varieties of mammals. Thus the 
ratio of the globulin fraction to the albumin fraction may vary 
considerably, and again, one or other of the proteins may be 
quite specific for the animal from which it is derived . 

Clotting. — If a sample of blood be withdrawn from an animal, 
within a short time it undergoes a series of changes and becomes 
converted into a stiff jelly. It is said to clot. If the process is 
watched it is seen to start first from the surfaces where it is in 
contact with any foreign body; thence it extends through the 
blood until the whole mass sets solid. A short time elapses 
before this process commences — a time dependent upon two 
chief conditions, viz. the temperature at which the blood is kept 
and the extent of foreign surface with which it is brought into 
contact. Thus in a mammal the blood clots most quickly at a 
temperature a little above body temperature, while if the blood 
be cooled quickly the clotting is considerably delayed and in the 
case of some animals altogether prevented. For example, human 
blood kept at body temperature clots in three minutes, while if 
allowed to cool to room temperature the first sign of clotting may 
not make its appearance until eight minutes after its removal 
from the body. The process of clotting is also considerably 
accelerated by making the blood flow in a thin stream over a 
wide surface. The full completion of the process occupies some 
time if the blood be kept quiet, but ultimately the whole mass 
of the blood becomes converted into a solid. At this stage the 
containing vessel may be inverted without any drop of fluid 
escaping. A short time after this stage has been reached drops 
of a yellow fluid appear upon the surface and, increasing in size 
and number, run together to form a layer of fluid separated from 
the clot. This fluid is termed serum; its appearance is due to the 
contraction of the clot, which thus squeezes out the fluid from 
between its solid constituents. Contraction continues for about 
twenty-four hours, at the end of which time a large quantity 
(one-third or more of the total volume) of serum may have 



been separated. The clot contracts uniformly, thus preserving 
throughout the same general shape as that of the vessel in which 
the blood has been collected. Finally the clot swims freely in 
the serum which it has expressed. 

The cause of the clot formation has been found to be the 
precipitation of a solid from the liquid plasma of the blood. 
This solid is in the form of very minute threads and hence is 
termed fibrin. The threads traverse the mass of blood in every 
possible direction, interlacing and thus confining in their meshes 
all the solid elements of the blood. Soon after their deposition 
they begin to contract, and as the meshwork they form is very 
minute they carry with them all the corpuscles of the blood. 
These with the fibrin form the shrunken clot. 

If the rate at which blood clots be retarded either by cooling 
or by some other process the corpuscles may have time to settle, 
partially or completely, in which case distinct layers may form. 
The lowermost of these contains chiefly the red corpuscles, the 
second layer may be grey owing to the high percentage of leuco- 
cytes present, while a third, marked by opalescence only, may 
be very rich in platelets. Above these a clear layer of fluid 
may be found. This is plasma. The formation of these layers 
depends solely upon the rate of sedimentation of these elements, 
the rate depending partly upon differences in specific gravity, 
and partly upon the tendency the corpuscles have to run into 
clumps. Horse's blood offers one of the best instances of the 
clumping of red corpuscles, and in this animal sedimentation 
of the red corpuscles is most rapid. 

If now such a sedimented blood is allowed to clot the process 
is found to start in the middle two layers, i.e. in those 
containing the white corpuscles and platelets. From these 
layers it spreads through the rest of the liquid, being most 
retarded, however, in the red corpuscle layer, and particularly 
so if the sedimentation has been very complete. Not only does 
the clotting process start from the layers containing the leuco- 
cytes and platelets, but in them it also proceeds more quickly. 
These observations clearly indicate that the clotting process is 
initiated by some change starting from these elements. 

The object of the clotting of the blood is quite clear. It is 
to prevent, as far as possible, any loss of blood when there is 
an injury to an animal's vessels. The shed blood becomes con- 
verted into a solid, and this, extending into the interior of the 
ruptured vessel, forms a plug and thus arrests the bleeding. 
It is found that clotting is especially accelerated whenever 
the blood touches a foreign tissue, for instance, the outer layers 
of a torn blood-vessel wall, muscle tissue, &c, i.e. in exactly 
those conditions in which rapid clotting becomes of the greatest 
importance. Yet another very pregnant fact in connexion 
with clotting is that if an animal be bled rapidly and the blood 
collected in successive samples it is found that those collected 
last clot most quickly. Hence the more excessive the haemor- 
rhage in any case, the greater becomes the onset of the natural 
cure for the bleeding, viz. clotting. 

When we begin to inquire into the nature of clotting we have 
to determine in the first place whence the fibrin is derived. 
It has long been known that two chemical substances at least 
are requisite for its production. Thus certain fluids are known, 
e.g. some samples of hydrocele or pericardial fluid, which will 
not clot spontaneously, but will clot rapidly when a small 
quantity of serum or of an old blood-clot is added to it. The 
constituent substance which is present in the first-named fluids 
is known as fibrinogen, and that present in the serum or the 
clot is known as fibrin-ferment or thrombin. 

Fibrinogen is present in living blood dissolved in the plasma; 
it is also present in such fluids as hydrocele or pericardial effusions, 
which, though capable of clotting, do not clot spontaneously. 
Thrombin, on the other hand, does not exist in living blood, but 
only makes its appearance there after blood is shed. It is not 
yet certain what is the nature of the final reaction between 
fibrinogen and thrombin. The possibilities are, that thrombin 
may act — (i) by acting upon fibrinogen, which it in some way 
converts into fibrin, (2) by uniting with fibrinogen to form fibrin, 
or (3) by yielding part of itself to the fibrinogen which thus 



82 



BLOOD 



becomes converted into fibrin. The experimental study of the 
rate of fibrin formation, when different strengths of thrombin 
solutions are allowed to act upon a fibrinogen solution, leads 
us to the probable conclusion that the first of these three possi- 
bilities is the correct one, and that thrombin therefore exerts 
a true ferment action upon fibrinogen. It is known that in the 
reaction, in addition to the formation of fibrin, yet another 
protein makes its appearance. This is known as fibrinoglobulin, 
and apparently it arises from the fibrinogen, so that the change 
would be one of cleavage into fibrin and fibrinoglobulin. It 
is very noteworthy that although the amount of fibrin formed 
during the clotting appears very bulky, yet the actual weight 
is extremely small, not more than 0-4 grms. from 100 cc. of 
blood. 

Having ascertained that the clotting is due to the action of 
thrombin upon fibrinogen, we now see that the next step to be 
explained is the origin of thrombin. It has been shown that the 
final step in its formation consists in the combination of another 
substance, termed prothrombin, with calcium. Any soluble 
calcium salt is found to be effective in this respect, and con- 
versely the removal of soluble calcium (e.g. by sodium oxalate) 
will prevent the formation of thrombin and therefore of clotting. 

In the next place it can be proved that prothrombin does not 
exist as such in circulating blood, so that the problem becomes 
an inquiry as to the origin of prothrombin. Experiment has 
shown that in its turn prothrombin arises from yet another 
precursor, which is named thrombogen, and that thrombogen 
also is not to be found in circulating blood but only makes its 
appearance after the blood is shed. The conversion of throm- 
bogen into prothrombin has been proved to be due to the action 
of a second ferment which has been named thrombokinase, and 
this latter is again absent from living blood. Hence the question 
arises, whence are derived thrombogen and thrombokinase? 
In the study of this question it has been found that if the blood 
of birds be collected direct from an artery through a perfectly 
clean cannula into a clean and dust-free glass vessel, it does not 
clot spontaneously. The plasma collected from such blood is 
found to contain thrombogen but no thrombokinase. A some- 
what similar plasma may be prepared from a mammal's blood 
by collecting samples of blood from an artery into vessels which 
have been thoroughly coated with paraffin, though in this instance 
thrombogen may be absent as well as thrombokinase. If 
plasma containing thrombogen but no thrombokinase be treated 
with a saline extract of any tissues it will soon clot. The saline 
extract contains thrombokinase. This ferment can therefore 
be derived from most tissues, including also the white blood 
corpuscles and the platelets. Thrombogen is produced from the 
leucocytes, but it is not yet certain whether it is also formed 
from the platelets. The discovery of the origin of the throm- 
bokinase from tissue cells explains a fact that has long been 
known, namely, that if in collecting blood, it is allowed to flow 
over cut tissues, clotting is most markedly accelerated. The 
fact that birds' blood if very carefully collected will not clot 
spontaneously tends to prove that thrombokinase is not derived 
from the leucocytes, and makes probable its origin from the 
platelets, for it is known that birds' blood apparently does not 
contain platelets, at any rate in the form in which they are 
found in mammalian blood. When examining the general 
properties of platelets, attention was drawn to the remarkably 
rapid manner in which they undergo change on coming into 
contact with a foreign surface. It is apparently the actual 
contact which initiates these changes, changes which are funda- 
mentally chemical in character, resulting in the production of 
thrombokinase and possibly also of thrombogen. 

Thus as our knowledge at present stands the following 
statement gives a recapitulated account of the changes which 
constitute the many phases of clotting. When blood escapes 
from a blood-vessel it comes into contact with a foreign surface, 
either a tissue or the damaged walls of the cut vessel. Very 
speedily this contact results in the discharge of thrombogen and 
thrombokinase, the former from the white blood corpuscles and 
also possibly from the platelets, the latter from the platelets 



or from the tissue with which the blood comes in contact. The 
interaction of these two bodies next results in the formation of 
prothrombin, which, combining with the calcium of any soluble 
lime salt present, forms thrombin or fibrin-ferment. The last 
step in the change is the action of thrombin upon fibrinogen 
to form fibrin, and the clot is complete. 

The intrinsic value to the animal of these changes is quite 
plain. The power of clotting and thus stopping haemorrhage 
is of essential importance, and yet this clotting must not occur 
within the living blood-vessels, or it would speedily result in 
death. That the tissues should be able to accelerate the process 
is of very obvious value. That the inner lining of the blood- 
vessels does not act as a foreign tissue is possibly due to the 
extreme smoothness of their surface. 

Further, an animal must always be exposed to a possible 
danger in the absorption of some thrombin from a mass of clotted 
blood still retained within the body, and we know that if a 
quantity of active ferment be injected into the blood-stream 
intravascular clotting does result. Under all usual conditions 
this is obviated, the protective mechanism being of a twofold 
character. First, it is found that thrombin becomes converted 
very quickly into an inactive modification. Serum, for instance, 
very quickly loses its power of inducing clotting in fibrinogen 
solutions. Secondly, the body has been found to possess the 
power of making a substance, antithrombin, which can combine 
with thrombin forming a substance which is quite inactive as 
far as clotting is concerned. Finally, there is evidence that 
normal blood contains a small quantity of this substance, 
antithrombin, and that under certain conditions the amount 
present may be enormously increased. (T. G. Br.) 

Pathology of the Blood. 

The changes in the blood in disease are probably as numerous 
and varied as the diseases which attack the body, for the blood 
is not only the medium of respiration, but also of nutrition, of 
defence against organisms and of many other functions, none 
of which can be affected without corresponding alterations 
occurring in the circulating fluid. The immense majority of 
these changes are, however, so subtle that they escape detection 
by our present methods. But in certain directions, notably 
in regard to the relations with micro-organisms, changes in the 
blood-plasma can be made out, though they are not associated 
in all cases with changes in the formed elements which float in 
it, nor with any obvious microscopical or chemical alterations. 

The phenomena of immunity to the attacks of bacteria or 
their toxins, of agglutinative action, of opsonic action, of the 
precipitin tests, and of haemolysis, are all largely f mmunity 
dependent on the inherent or acquired characters 
of the blood serum. It is a commonplace that different 
people vary in their susceptibility to the attacks of different 
organisms, and different species of animals also vary greatly. 
This " natural immunity " is due partly to the power possessed 
by the leucocytes or white blood corpuscles of taking into their 
bodies and digesting or holding in an inert state organisms which 
reach the blood — phagocytosis, — partly to certain bodies in 
the blood serum which have a bactericidal action, or whose 
presence enables the phagocytes to deal more easily with the 
organisms. This natural immunity can be heightened when 
it exists, or an artificial immunity can be produced in various 
ways. Doses of organisms or their toxins can be injected on 
one or several occasions, and provided that the lethal dose 
be not reached, in most cases an increased power of resistance is 
produced. The organisms may be injected alive in a virulent 
condition, or with their virulence lessened by heat or cold, 
by antiseptics, by cultivation in the presence of oxygen, or by 
passage through other animals, or they may first be killed, or 
their toxins alone injected. The method chosen in each case 
depends on the organism dealt with. The result of this treat- 
ment is that in the animal treated protective substances appear 
in the serum, and these substances can be transferred to the 
serum of another animal or of man; in other words the active 
immunity of the experimental animal can be translated into 



BLOOD 



83 



the passive immunity of man. According to the nature of the 
substances injected into the former, its serum may be antitoxic, 
if it has been immunized against any particular toxin, or anti- 
bacterial, if against an organism. Familiar examples of these 
are, of the former diphtheria antitoxin, of the latter anti-plague 
and anti-typhoid sera. An antitoxin exerts its effects by actual 
combination with the respective toxin, the combination being 
inert. It is probable that the ultimate source of the antitoxin is 
to be found in the living cells of the tissues and that it passes 
from them into the blood. The action of an antibacterial serum 
depends on the presence in it of a substance known as " immune- 
body," which has a special affinity and power of combining 
with the bacterium used. In order that it may exert this power 
it requires the presence of a substance normally present in the 
serum known as " complement." The development of these 
" anti-bodies," though jt has been studied mainly in connexion 
with bacteria and their toxins, is not confined to their action, 
but can be demonstrated in regard to many other substances, 
such as ferments, tissue cells, red corpuscles, &c. In some 
animals, for example, the blood serum has the power of dissolv- 
ing the red corpuscles of an animal of different species; e.g. the 
guinea-pig's serum is " haemolytic " to the red corpuscles of 
the ox. This haemolytic power (haemolysis) can be increased 
by repeated injections of red corpuscles from the other animal, 
in this case also, as in the bacterial case, by the production and 
action of immune-body and complement. The antiserum pro- 
duced in the case of the red corpuscles may sometimes, if injected 
into the first animal, whose red corpuscles were used, cause 
extensive destruction of its red corpuscles, with haemo- 
globinuria, and sometimes a fatal result. 

Opsonic action depends on the presence of a substance, the 
" opsonin," in the serum of an immunized animal, which makes 
the organism in question more easily taken up by the phagocytes 
(leucocytes) of the blood. The opsonin becomes fixed to the 
organisms. It is present to a certain extent in normal serum, 
but can be greatly increased by the process of immunization; 
and the " opsonic index," or relation between the number of 
organisms taken up by leucocytes when treated with the serum 
of a healthy person or " control," and with the serum of a 
person affected with any bacterial disease and under treatment 
by immunization, is regarded by some as representing the degree 
of immunity produced. 

Agglutinative action is evidence of the presence in a serum 
of a somewhat similar set of substances, known as " agglutinins." 
When a portion of an antiserum is added to an emulsion of the 
corresponding organism, the organisms, if they are motile, cease 
to move, and in any case become gathered together into clumps. 
In all probability several different bodies are concerned in this 
process. This reaction, in its practical applications at least, 
may be regarded as a reaction of infection rather than of im- 
munization as oidinarily understood, for it is found that the 
blood serum of patients suffering from typhoid, Malta fever, 
cholera, and many other bacterial diseases, agglutinates the 
corresponding organisms. This fact has come to be of great 
importance in diagnosis. 

The precipitin test depends on a somewhat analogous reaction. 
If the serum of an animal be injected repeatedly into another 
animal of different species, a " precipitin " appears in the serum 
of the animal treated, which causes a precipitate when added 
to the serum of the first animal. The special importance of this 
fact is that it can be utilized as a method of distinguishing 
between human blood and that of animals, which is often of 
importance in medical jurisprudence. 

In this summary the facts adduced are practically all biological, 
and are due to the extraordinary activity with which the study 
of bacteriology (<?.».) has been pursued in recent years. The 
chemistry of the blood has not hitherto been found to give 
information of clinical or diagnostic importance, and nothing 
need here be added to what is said above on the physiology of 
the blood. Enough has been said, however, to show the extra- 
ordinary complexity of the apparently simple blood serum. 

The methods at present employed in examining the blood 



Anaemia. 



clinically are: the enumeration of the red and white corpuscles 
per cubic millimetre; the estimation of the percentage of 
haemoglobin and of the specific gravity of the blood; the micro- 
scopic examination of freshly-drawn blood and of blood films 
made upon cover-glasses, fixed and stained. In special cases the 
alkalinity and the rapidity of coagulation may be ascertained, 
or the blood may be examined bacteriologically. We have no 
universally accepted means of estimating, during life, the total 
amount of blood in the body, though the method of J. S. Haldane 
and J. Lorrain Smith, in which the total oxygen capacity of the 
blood is estimated, and its total volume worked out from that 
datum, has seemed to promise important results {Journ. of 
Physiol, vol. xxv. p. 331, 1900). After death the amount df 
blood sometimes seems to be increased, and sometimes, as in 
" pernicious anaemia," it is certainly diminished. But the high 
counts of red corpuscles which are occasionally reported as 
evidence of plethora or increase of the total blood are really only 
indications of concentration of the fluid except in certain rare 
cases. It is necessary, therefore, in examining blood diseases, 
to confine ourselves to the study of the blood-unit, which is 
always taken as the cubic millimetre, without reference to the 
number of units in the body. • 

Anaemia is often used as a generic term for all blood diseases, 
for in almost all of them the haemoglobin is diminished, either 
as a result of diminution in the number of the red 
corpuscles in which it is contained, or because the 
individual red corpuscles contain a smaller amount of haemo- 
globin than the normal. As haemoglobin is the medium of 
respiratory interchange, its diminution causes obvious symptoms, 
which are much more easily appreciated by the patient than 
those caused by alterations in the plasma or the leucocytes. It 
is customary to divide anaemias into " primary " and " second- 
ary ": the primary are those for which no adequate cause has 
as yet been discovered; the secondary, those whose cause is 
known. Among the former are usually included chlorosis, 
pernicious anaemia, and sometimes the leucocythaemias; 
among the latter, the anaemias due to such agencies as malignant 
disease, malaria, chronic metallic poisoning, chronic haemor- 
rhage, tubercle, Bright's disease, infective processes, intestinal 
parasites, &c. As our knowledge advances, however, this dis- 
tinction will probably be given up, for the causes of several 
of the primary anaemias have been discovered. For example, 
the anaemia due to bothriocephalus, an intestinal parasite, is 
clinically indistinguishable from the other forms of pernicious 
anaemia with which it used to be included, and leucocythaemia 
has been declared by Lowit, though probably erroneously, to 
be due to a blood parasite closely related to that of malaria. 
In all these conditions there is a considerable similarity in the 
symptoms produced and in the pathological anatomy. The 
general symptoms are pallor of the skin and mucous membranes, 
weakness and lassitude, shortness of breath, palpitation, a 
tendency to fainting, and usually also gastro-intestinal disturb- 
ance, headache and neuralgia. The heart is often dilated, and 
on auscultation the systolic murmurs associated with that 
condition are heard. In fatal cases the internal organs are 
found to be pale, and very often their cells contain an excessive 
amount of fat. In many anaemias there is a special tendency 
to haemorrhage. Most of the above symptoms and organic 
changes are directly due to diminished respiratory interchange 
from the loss of haemoglobin, and to its effect on the various 
organs involved. The diagnosis depends ultimately in all cases 
upon the examination of the blood. 

Though the relative proportions of the leucocytes are probably 
continually undergoing change even in health, especially as the 
result of taking food, the number of red corpuscles remains much 
more constant. Through the agency of some unknown mechan- 
ism, the supply of fresh red corpuscles from the bone-marrow 
keeps pace with the destruction of effete corpuscles, and in 
health each corpuscle contains a definite and constant amount 
of haemoglobin. The disturbance of this arrangement in 
anaemia may be due to loss or to increased destruction of cor- 
puscles, to the supply of a smaller number of new ones, to a 



8 4 



BLOOD 



diminution of the amount of haemoglobin in the individual 
new corpuscles, or to a combination of these causes. It is most 
easy to illustrate this by describing what happens after a haemor- 
rhage. If this is small, the loss is replaced by the fully-formed 
corpuscles held in reserve in the marrow, and there is no dis- 
turbance. If it is larger, the amount of fluid lost is first made up 
by fluid drawn from the tissues, so that the number of corpuscles 
is apparently diminished by dilution of the blood; the erythro- 
blasts, or formative red corpuscles, of the bone-marrow are 
stimulated to proliferation, and new corpuscles are quickly 
thrown into the circulation. These are apt, however, to be small 
and to contain a subnormal amount of haemoglobin, and it is 
only after some time that they are destroyed and their place 
taken by normal corpuscles. If the loss has been very great, 
nucleated red corpuscles may even be carried into the blood- 
stream. The blood possesses a great power of recovery, if time 
be given it, because the organ (bone-marrow) which forms so 
many of its elements never, in health, works at high pressure. 
Only a part of the marrow, the so-called red marrow, is normally 
occupied by erythroblastic tissue, the rest of the medullary 
cavity of the bones being taken up by fat. If any long-continued 
demand for red corpuscles is made, the fat is absorbed, and its 
place gradually taken by red marrow. This compensatory change 
is found in all chronic anaemias, no matter what their cause may 
be, except in some rare cases in which the marrow does not react. 

It is often very difficult, especially in " secondary " anaemias, 
to say which of the above processes is mainly at work. In acute 
anaemias, such as those associated with septicaemia, there is no 
doubt that blood destruction plays the principal part. But if 
the cause of anaemia is a chronic one, a gastric cancer, for 
instance, though there may possibly be an increased amount of 
destruction of corpuscles in some cases, and though there is often 
loss by haemorrhage, the cancer interferes with nutrition, the 
blood is impoverished and does not nourish the erythroblasts 
in the marrow sufficiently, and the new corpuscles which are 
turned out are few and poor in haemoglobin. In chronic 
anaemias, regeneration always goes on side by side with destruc- 
tion, and it is important to remember that the state of the blood 
in these conditions gives the measure, not of the amount of 
destruction which is taking place so much as of the amount of 
regeneration of which the organism is capable. The evidence of 
destruction has often to be sought for in other organs, or in 
secretions or excretions. 

Of the so-called primary anaemias the most common is 
chlorosis, an anaemia which occurs only in the female sex, 
between the ages of fifteen and twenty-five as a rule. Its 
symptoms are those caused by a diminution of haemoglobin, 
and though it is never directly fatal, and is extremely amenable 
to treatment with iron preparations, its subjects very frequently 
suffer from relapses at varying intervals after the first attack. 
Its causation is probably complex. Bad hygienic conditions, 
over-fatigue, want of proper food, especially of the iron-contain- 
ing proteids of meat, the strain put upon the blood and blood- 
forming organs by the accession of puberty and the occurrence 
of menstruation, all probably play a part in it. It has also been 
suggested that internal secretions may be concerned in stimulat- 
ing the bone-marrow, and that in the female sex in particular 
the genital organs may act in this way. Imperfect assumption 
of function by these organs at puberty, caused perhaps by some 
of the above-mentioned conditions, might lead to sluggishness 
in the bone-marrow, and to the supply to the blood of the 
poorly-formed corpuscles deficient in haemoglobin which are 
characteristic of the disease. Chlorosis is the type of anaemias 
from imperfect blood-formation. Lorrain Smith has produced 
evidence to show that the total amount of haemoglobin in the 
body is not diminished in this disease, but that the blood-plasma 
is greatly increased in amount, so that the haemoglobin is diluted 
and the amount in each blood-unit greatly lessened. 

Pernicious anaemia is a rarer disease than chlorosis, occurs 
usually later in life, and is distributed nearly equally between 
the two sexes. But it is of great importance because of its 
almost uniformly fatal termination, though its downward course 



is generally broken by temporary improvement on one or more 
occasions. The symptoms are those of a progressive anaemia, 
in which gastro-intestinal disturbance usually plays a large part, 
and nervous symptoms are common, and they become at last 
much more severe than those of any secondary anaemia. The 
patient may die in the first attack, but more usually, when things 
seem to be at their worst, improvement sets in, either spon- 
taneously or as the result of treatment, and the patient slowly 
regains apparent health. This remission may be followed by a 
relapse, that again by a remission, and so on, but as a rule the 
disease is fatal within, at the outside, two or three years. 

The prime cause of the disease is not known. It seems probable 
indeed that the causal factors are numerous. Severe malarial 
infection, syphilis, pregnancy, chronic gastro-intestinal disease, 
chronic gas-poisoning, are all, in different cases, known to have 
been causally associated with it, and it is probable that a con- 
genital weakness of the bone-marrow has often to do with its 
production, as in many cases a family or hereditary history of 
the disease can be obtained. The condition is now regarded as 
a chronic toxaemia, partly because of the clinical symptoms 
and pathological appearances, partly because analogous con- 
ditions can be produced experimentally by such poisons as 
saponin and toluylendiamin, and partly because of the facts of 
bothriocephalus anaemia. The site of production of the toxin, 
or toxins, for it is possible that several may have the same effect 
on the blood, is possibly not always the same, but must often 
be the alimentary canal, as bothriocephalus anaemia proves. 
Not all persons affected with this intestinal tapeworm contract 
the disease, but only those in whose intestines the worm is dead 
and decomposing or sometimes only " sick." The expulsion 
of the worm puts an end to the absorption of the toxin and the 
patients recover. No adequate explanation of the formation 
of the toxin in the immense majority of the cases, in which there 
is no tapeworm, has yet been given. It is certain that no 
organism as yet known is concerned. 

This toxaemia affects the marrow and through it the blood, 
the gastro-intestinal apparatus and the nervous system, especi- 
ally the spinal cord, in different proportions in different cases. 
The effect upon the marrow is to alter the type of red corpuscle 
formation, causing a reversion to the embryonic condition, in 
which the nucleated red corpuscles are large (megaloblasts), and 
the corpuscles in the blood formed from them are also large, are 
apparently ill suited to the needs of the adult, and easily break 
down, as the deposits of iron in the liver, spleen, kidneys and 
marrow prove. Whether this reversion is due to an exhaustion 
of the normal process or to an inhibition of it is not definitely 
known. The result is that the circulating red corpuscles are 
enormously diminished; it is usual to find 1,000,000 or less in 
the cubic millimetre instead of the normal 5,000,000. Though 
the haemoglobin is of course absolutely diminished, it is always, 
in severe cases, present in relatively higher percentage than the 
red corpuscles, because the average red corpuscle is larger and 
contains more haemoglobin than the normal. The large 
nucleated red corpuscles (megaloblasts) with which the marrow 
is crowded, often appear in the blood. 

Other anaemias, such 'as those known as lymphadenoma, or 
Hodgkin's disease, splenic anaemia, chloroma, leucanaemia and 
the anaemia pseudo-leucaemica of children, need not be described 
here, as they are either rare or their occurrence or nature is still 
too much under discussion. 

The number and nature of the leucocytes in the blood bears 
no constant or necessary relation to the number or condition 
of the red corpuscles, and their variations depend 
on entirely different conditions. The number in the cytosl's. 
cubic millimetre is usually about 7000, but may vary 
in health from 5000 to 10,000. A diminution in their number 
is known as leucopenia, and is found in starvation, in some 
infective diseases, as for example in typhoid fever, in malaria 
and Malta fever, and in pernicious anaemia. An increase is 
very much more frequent, and is known as leucocytosis, though 
in this term is usually connoted a relative increase in the 
proportion of the polymorphonuclear neutrophile leucocytes. 



BLOOD-LETTING— BLOOMER 



85 



Leucocytosis occurs under a great variety of conditions, normally 
to a slight extent during digestion, during pregnancy, and after 
violent exercise, and abnormally after haemorrhage, in the course 
of inflammations and many infective diseases, in malignant 
disease, in such toxic states as uraemia, and after the ingestion 
of nuclein and other substances. It does not occur in some 
infective diseases, the most important of which are typhoid fever, 
malaria, influenza, measles and uncomplicated tuberculosis. 
In all cases where it is sufficiently severe and long continued, 
the reserve space in the bone-marrow is filled up by the active 
proliferation of the leucocytes normally found there, and is used 
as a nursery for the leucocytes required in the blood. In many 
cases leucocytosis is known to be associated with the defence of 
the organism from injurious influences, and its amount depends 
on the relation between the severity of the attack and the power 
of resistance. There may be an increase in the proportions 
present in the blood of lymphocytes (lymphocytosis), and of 
eosinophile cells (eosinophilic,). This latter change is associated 
specially with some forms of asthma, with certain skin diseases, 
and with the presence of animal parasites in the body, such as 
ankylostoma and filaria. 

The disease in which the number of leucocytes in the blood 
is greatest is leucocythaemia or leucaemia. There are two main 
Leucaemia. f° rms °f tms disease, in both of which there are 
anaemia, enlargement of the spleen and lymphatic 
glands, or of either of them, leucocytic hypertrophy of the 
bone-marrow, and deposits of leucocytes in the liver, kidney 
and other organs. The difference lies in the kind of leucocytes 
present in excess in the blood, blood-forming organs and 
deposits in, v the tissues. In the one form these are lymphocytes, 
which areAmnd in health mainly in the marrow, the blood itself, 
the lymph glands and in the lymphatic tissue round the ali- 
mentary canal; in the other they are the kinds of leucocytes 
normally found in the bone-marrow — myelocytes, neutrophile, 
basophile and eosinophile, and polymorphonuclear cells, also 
neutrophile, basophile and eosinophile. The clinical course of 
the two forms may differ. The first, known as lymphatic 
leucaemia or lymphaemia, may be acute, and prove fatal in a 
few weeks or even days with rapidly advancing anaemia, or 
may be chronic and last for one or two years or longer. The 
second, known as spleno-myelogenous leucaemia or myelaemia, 
is almost always chronic, and may last for several years. Re- 
covery does not take place, though remissions may occur. The 
use of the X-rays has been found to influence the course of this 
disease very favourably. The most recent view of the pathology 
of the disease is that it is due to an overgrowth of the bone- 
marrow leucocytes, analogous in some respects to tumour 
growth and caused by the removal of some controlling mechanism 
rather than by stimulation. The anaemia accompanying the 
disease is due partly to the leucocyte overgrowth, which takes 
up the space in the marrow belonging of right to red corpuscle 
formation and interferes with it. (G.L.G.) 

BLOOD-LETTING. There are certain morbid conditions when 
a patient may obtain marked relief from the abstraction of a 
certain amount of blood, from three or four ounces up to twenty 
or even thirty in extreme cases. This may be effected by vene- 
section, or the application of leeches, or more rarely by cupping 
(q.v.). Unfortunately, in years gone by, blood-letting was used to 
such excess, as a cure for almost every known disease, that public 
opinion is now extremely opposed to it. In certain pathological 
conditions, however, it brings relief and saves life when no other 
means would act with sufficient promptness to take its place. 

Venesection, in which the blood is usually withdrawn from 
the median-basilic vein of the arm, has the disadvantage that it 
can only be performed by the medical man, and that the patient's 
friends are generally very much opposed to the idea. But the 
public are not nearly so prejudiced against the use of leeches; 
and as the nurse in charge can be instructed to use these if 
occasion arises, this is the form of blood-letting usually practised 
to-day. From one to twelve leeches are applied at the time, 
the average leech withdrawing some two drachms of blood. 
Should this prove insufficient, as much again can be abstracted 



by the immediate application of hot fomentations to the wounds. 
They should always be applied over some bony prominence, 
that pressure may be effectively used to stop the haemorrhage 
afterwards. They should never be placed over superficial veins, 
or where there is much loose subcutaneous tissue. If, as is often 
the case, there is any difficulty in making them bite, the skin 
should be pricked at the desired spot with the point of a sterilized 
needle, and the leech will then attach itself without further 
trouble. Also they must be left to fall off of their own accord, 
the nurse never dragging them forcibly off. If cold and pressure 
fail to stop the subsequent haemorrhage, a little powdered alum 
or other styptic may be inserted in the wound. The following are 
the main indications for their use, though in some cases they are 
better replaced by venesection. (1) For stagnation of blood on 
the right side of the heart with constant dyspnoea, cyanosis, &c. 
In acute lung disease, the sudden obstruction to the passage of 
blood through the lungs throws such an increased strain on the 
right ventricle that it may dilate to the verge of paralysis; but 
by lessening the total volume of blood, the heart's work is 
lightened for a time, and the danger at the moment tided over. 
This is a condition frequently met with in the early stages of 
acute pneumonia, pleurisy and bronchitis, when the obstruction 
is in the lungs, the heart being normal. But the same result is 
also met with as a result of failure of compensation with back 
pressure in certain forms of heart disease (q.v.). (2) To lower 
arterial tension. In the early stages of cerebral haemorrhage 
(before coma has supervened), when the heart is working 
vigorously and the tension of the pulse is high, a timely vene- 
section may lead to arrest of the haemorrhage by lowering the 
blood pressure and so giving the blood in the ruptured vessel 
an opportunity to coagulate. (3) In various convulsive attacks, 
as in acute uraemia. 

BLOOD-MONEY, colloquially, the reward for betraying a 
criminal to justice. * More strictly it is used of the money-penalty 
paid in old days by a murderer to the kinsfolk of his victim. 
These fines completely protected the offender from the vengeance 
of the injured family. The system was common among the 
Scandinavian and Teutonic races previous to the introduction of 
Christianity, and a scale of payments, graduated according to 
the heinousness of the crime, was fixed by laws, which further 
settled who could exact the blood-mone}', and who were entitled 
to share it. Homicide was not the only crime thus expiable: 
blood-money could be exacted for all crimes of violence. Some 
acts, such as killing any one in a church or while asleep, or within 
the precincts of the royal palace, were " bot-less "; and the 
death penalty was inflicted. Such a criminal was outlawed, and 
his enemies could kill him wherever they found him. 

BLOODSTONE, the popular name of the mineral heliotrope, 
which is a variety of dark green chalcedony or plasma, with 
bright red spots, splashes and streaks. The green colour is due 
to a chloritic mineral; the red to haematite. Some coarse kinds 
are opaque, resembling in this respect jasper, and some writers 
have sought to restrict the name "bloodstone" to green jasper, 
with red markings, thus making heliotrope a translucent and 
bloodstone an opaque stone, but, though convenient, such a 
distinction is not generally recognized. A good deal of bloodstone 
comes from India, where it occurs in the Deccan traps, and is cut 
and polished at Cambay. The stone is used for seals, knife- 
handles and various trivial ornaments. Bloodstone is not very 
widely distributed, but is found in the basaltic rocks of the Isle 
of Rum in the west of Scotland, and in a few other localities. 
Haematite (Gr. al/xa, blood), or native peroxide of iron, is also 
sometimes called " bloodstone." 

BLOOM (from A.S. bloma, a flower), the blossom of flowering 
plants, or the powdery film on the skin of fresh-picked fruit; 
hence applied to the surface of newly-minted coins or to a cloudy 
appearance on the varnish of painting due to moisture; also, 
in metallurgy, a term used of the rough billets of iron and steel, 
which have undergone a preliminary hammering or rolling, and 
are ready for further working. 

BLOOMER, AMELIA JENKS (1818-1894), American dress- 
reformer and women's rights advocate, was born at Homer, New 



86 



BLOOMFIELD— BLOOMINGTON 



York, on the 27th of May 1818. After her marriage in 1840 she 
established a periodical called The Lily, which had some success. 
In 1849 sne t0 °k up the idea — previously originated by Mrs 
Elizabeth Smith Miller — of a reform in woman's dress, and the 
wearing of a short skirt, with loose trousers, gathered round the 
ankles. The name of " bloomers " gradually became popularly 
attached to any divided-skirt or knickerbocker dress for women. 
Until her death on the 30th of December 1894 Mrs Bloomer took 
a prominent part in the temperance campaign and in that for 
woman's suffrage. 

BLOOMFIELD, MAURICE (1855- ), American Sanskrit 
scholar, was born on the 23rd of February 1855, in Bielitz, 
Austrian Silesia. He went to the United States in 1867, and ten 
years later graduated from Furman University, Greenville, South 
Carolina. He then studied Sanskrit at Yale, under W. D. 
Whitney, and at Johns Hopkins, to which university he returned 
as associate professor in 1881 after a stay of two years in Berlin 
and Leipzig, and soon afterwards was promoted professor of 
Sanskrit and comparative philology. His papers in the American 
Journal of Philology number a few in comparative linguistics, 
such as those on assimilation and adaptation in congeneric 
classes of words, and many valuable " Contributions to the 
Interpretation of the Vedas," and he is best known as a student 
of the Vedas. He translated, for Max-Miiller's Sacred Books of 
the East,the Hymns of the Atharva-Veda (1897) ; contributed to 
the Buhler-Kielhorn Grundriss der indo-arischen Philologie und 
Altertumskunde the section " The Atharva-Veda and the Gopatha 
Brahmana " (1899); was first to edit the Kaucika-Sutra (1890), 
and in 1907 published, in the Harvard Oriental series, A Vedic 
Concordance. In 1905 he published Cerberus, the Dog of Hades, a 
study in comparative mythology. 

BLOOMFIELD, ROBERT (1766-1823), English poet, was born 
of humble parents at the village of Honington, Suffolk, on the 3rd 
of December 1766. He was apprenticed at the age of eleven to a 
farmer, but he was too small and frail for field labour, and four 
years later he came to London to work for a shoemaker. The 
poem that made his reputation, The Farmer's Boy, was written 
in a garret in Bell Alley. The manuscript, declined by several 
publishers, fell into the hands of Capell Lofft, who arranged for 
its publication with woodcuts by Bewick in 1800. The success of 
the poem was remarkable, over 25,000 copies being sold in the 
next two years. His reputation was increased by the appearance 
of his Rural Tales (1802), News from the Farm (1804), Wild 
Flowers (1806) and The Banks of the Wye (1811). Influential 
friends attempted to provide for Bloomfield, but ill-health and 
possibly faults of temperament prevented the success of these 
efforts, and the poet died in poverty at Shefford, Bedfordshire, 
on the 19th of August 1823. His Remains in Poetry and Verse 
appeared in 1824. 

BLOOMFIELD, a town of Essex county, New Jersey, U.S.A., 
about 12 m. W. of New York, and directly adjoining the city of 
Newark on the N. Pop. (1900) 9668, of whom 2267 were foreign- 
born; (1905, statecensus) 11,668; (1910), 15,070. Area, 5 -42 sq.m. 
Bloomfield is served by the Erie, and the Delaware, Lacka- 
wanna & Western railways, and by several electric lines connect- 
ing with Newark, Montclair, Orange, East Orange and other 
neighbouring places. It is a residential suburb of Newark and 
New York, is the seat of a German theological school (Presby- 
terian, 1869) and has the Jarvie Memorial library (1902). There 
is a Central Green, and in 1908 land was acquired for another 
park. Among the town's manufactures are silk and woollen 
goods, paper, electric elevators, electric lamps, rubber goods, 
safety pins, hats, cream separators, brushes and novelties. The 
value of the town's factory products increased from $3,370,924 
in 1900 to $4,645,483 in 1905, or 37-8%. First settled about 
1670-1675 by the Dutch and by New Englanders from the 
Newark colony, Bloomfield was long a part of Newark, the 
principal settlement at first being known as Wardsesson. In 
1796 it was named Bloomfield in honour of General Joseph 
Bloomfield (1753-1823), who served (1775-1778) in the War of 
American Independence, reaching the rank of major, was 
governor of New Jersey in 1801-1802 and 1803-1812, brigadier- 



general in the United States army during the War of 181 2, and 
a Democratic representative in Congress from 181 7 to 1821. 
The township of Bloomfield was incorporated in 181 2. From it 
were subsequently set off Belleville (1839), Montclair (1868) and 
Glen Ridge (1895). 

BLOOMINGTON, a city and the county-seat of McLean 
county, Illinois, U.S.A., in the central part of the state, about 
125 m. S.W. of Chicago. Pop. (1890) 20,484; (1900) 23,286, 
of whom 361 1 were foreign-born, there being a large German 
element; (1910 census) 25,768. The city is served by the 
Chicago & Alton, the Illinois Central, the Cleveland, Chicago, 
Cincinnati & St Louis, and the Lake Erie & Western railways, 
and by electric inter-urban lines. Bloomington is the seat of 
the Illinois Wesleyan University (Methodist Episcopal, co- 
educational, founded in 1850), which comprises a college of 
liberal arts, an academy, a college of law, a college of music and 
a school of oratory, and in 1907 had 1350 students. In the town 
of Normal (pop. in 1900, 3795), 2 m. north of Bloomington, are 
the Illinois State Normal University (opened at Bloomington 
in 1857 and removed to its present site in i860), one of the first 
normal schools in the Middle West, and the state soldiers' 
orphans' home (1869). Bloomington has a public library, and 
Franklin and Miller parks; among its principal buildings are 
the court house, built of marble, and the Y.M.C.A. building. 
Among the manufacturing establishments are foundries arid 
machine shops, including the large shops of the Chicago & Alton 
railway, slaughtering and meat-packing establishments, flour 
and grist mills, printing and publishing establishments, a caramel 
factory and lumber factories. The value of the city's factory 
products increased from $3,011,899 in 1900 to $5,777,000 in 
1905, or 91-8%. There are valuable coal mines Jfc and near 
the city, and the city is situated in a fine farming region. 
Bloomington derives its name from Blooming Grove, a small 
forest which was crossed by the trails leading from the Galena 
lead mines to Southern Illinois, from Lake Michigan to St Louis, 
and from the Eastern to the far Western states. The first settle- 
ment was made in 1822, but the town was not formally founded 
until 1 83 1, when it became the county-seat of McLean county. 
The first city charter was obtained in 1850, and in 1857 the 
public school system was established. In 1856 Bloomington 
was the meeting place of a state convention called by the Illinois 
editors who were opposed to the Kansas-Nebraska Bill (see 
Decatur). This was the first convention of the Republican 
party in Illinois; among the delegates were Abraham Lincoln, 
Richard Yates, John M. Palmer and Owen Lovejoy. The city 
has been the residence of a number of prominent men, including 
David Davis (1815-1886), an associate justice of the United 
States Supreme Court in 1862-1877, a member of the United 
States Senate in 1877-1883, and president pro tempore of the 
Senate in 1881-1883; Governor John M. Hamilton (184 7-1905), 
Governor Joseph W. Fifer (b. 1840); and Adlai Ewing 
Stevenson (b. 1835), a Democratic representative in Congress in 
1875-1877 and 1879-1881, and vice-president of the United 
States in 1893-1897. Bloomington's prosperity increased after 
1867, when coal was first successfully mined in the vicinity. 

In the Transactions of the Illinois State Historical Society for 
1905 may be found a paper, " The Bloomington Convention of 1856 
and Those Who Participated in it." 

BLOOMINGTON, a city and the county-seat of Monroe county, 
Indiana, U.S.A., about 45 m. S. by W. of Indianapolis. Pop. 
(1890) 4018; (1900) 6460, including 396 negroes; (1910) 8838. 
It is served by the Chicago, Indianapolis & Louisville and the 
Indianapolis Southern (Illinois Central) railways. Bloomington 
is the seat of the Indiana University (co-educational since 1868), 
established as a state seminary in 1820, and as Indiana College 
in 1828, and chartered as the State university in 1838; in 1907- 
1908 it had 80 instructors, 2051 students, and a library of 65,000 
volumes; its school of law was established in 1842, suspended 
in 1877 and re-established in 1889; its school of medicine was 
established in 1903; but most of the medical course is given 
in Indianapolis; a graduate school was organized in 1904; and 
a summer school (or summer term of eleven weeks) was first 



BLOOMSBURG— BLOUNT, SIR T. P. 



87 



held in 1905. Dr David Starr Jordan was the first president of 
the university in 1885-1891, when it was thoroughly reorganized 
and its curriculum put on the basis of major subjects and depart- 
ments. The university's biological station is on Winona Lake, 
Kosciusko county. Among the manufactures of Bloomington 
are furniture and wooden ware. There are valuable limestone 
quarries in the vicinity. The city was first settled about 1818. 

BLOOMSBURG, a town and the county-seat of Columbia 
county, Pennsylvania, U.S.A., on Fishing Creek, 2 m. from its 
confluence with the Susquehanna, and about 40 m. S.W. of 
Wilkes-Barre. Pop. (1890) 4635; (1900) 6170 (213 foreign- 
born); (1910) 7413. It is served by the Delaware, Lackawanna 
& Western, the Philadelphia & Reading, and the Bloomsburg 
& Sullivan and the Susquehanna, Bloomsburg & Berwick 
railways (the last two only 30 m. and 39 m. long respectively); 
and is connected with Berwick, Catawissa and Danville by 
electric lines. The town is built on a bluff commanding ex- 
tensive views. Among the manufactures of Bloomsburg are 
railway cars, carriages, silk and woollen goods, furniture, carpets, 
wire-drawing machines and gun carriages. Iron ore was for- 
merly obtained from the neighbouring hills. The town is the 
seat of a state normal school, established as such in 1869. 
Bloomsburg was laid out as a town in 1802, became the county- 
seat in 1846, and was incorporated in 1870. 

BLOUNT, CHARLES (1654-1693), English author, was born 
at Upper Holloway on the 27th of April 1654. His father, 
Sir Henry Blount (1602-1682), was the author of a Voyage to 
the Levant, describing his own travels. He gave his son a careful 
education, and is said to have helped him in his Anima Mundi; 
or An Historical Narration of the Opinions of the Antients concern- 
ing Man's Soul after his Life, according to unenlightened Nature 
(1679), which gave great offence by the sceptical views expressed 
in it. It was suppressed by order of the bishop of London, and 
even burnt by some over-zealous official, but a re-issue was 
permitted. Blount was an admirer of Hobbes, and published 
his "Last Sayings" (1679), a pamphlet consisting of extracts 
from The Leviathan. Great is Diana of the Ephesians, or the 
Original of Idolatry, together with the Political Institution of the 
Gentiles' Sacrifices (1680) attracted severe criticism on the ground 
that in deprecating the evils of priestcraft Blount was attacking 
Christianity itself. His best-known book, The Two First Books 
of Philostratus concerning the Life of Apollonius Tyaneus , , . 
(1680), is said to have been prohibited in 1693, chiefly on account 
of the notes, which are stated by Bayle (note, s.v. Apollonius) to 
have been taken mainly from a MS. of Lord Herbert of Cherbury. 
Blount contributed materially to the removal of the restrictions 
on the freedom of the press, with two pamphlets (1693) by 
" Philopatris," mainly derived from Milton's Areopagitica. 
He also laid a successful trap for the censor, Edmund Bohun. 
Under the name of " Junius Brutus " he wrote a pamphlet 
entitled " King William and Queen Mary Conquerors." The 
title-page set forth the theory of the justice of title by conquest, 
which Blount knew to be agreeable to Bohun. It was duly 
licensed, but was ordered by the House of Commons to be 
burnt by the common hangman, as being diametrically opposed 
to the attitude of William's government on the subject. These 
proceedings showed the futility of the censorship, and hastened 
its overthrow. 

Blount had fallen in love with his deceased wife's sister, and, 
in despair of overcoming her scruples as to the legality of such 
a marriage, shot himself in the head. He survived for some 
time, refusing help except from his sister-in-law. Alexander 
Pope asserted (Epilogue to the Satires, Note, i. 124) that he 
wounded himself in the arm, pretending to kill himself, and that 
the result was fatal contrary to his expectations. He died in 
August 1693. 

Shortly before his death a collection of his pamphlets and private 
papers was printed with a preface by Charles Gildon, under the title 
of the Oracles of Reason. His Miscellaneous Works (1695) is a fuller 
edition by the same editor. 

BLOUNT (or Blunt), EDWARD (b. 1565?), the printer, in 
conjunction with Isaac Jaggard, of Mr William Shakespeares 



Comedies, Histories and Tragedies. Published according to the 
true Originall Copies (1623), usually known as the first folio of 
Shakespeare. It was produced under the direction of John 
Heming (d. 1630) and Henry Condell (d. 1627), both of whom 
had been Shakespeare's colleagues at the Globe theatre, but as 
Blount combined the functions of printer and editor on other 
occasions, it is fair to conjecture that he to some extent edited 
the first folio. The Stationers' Register states that he was the 
son of Ralph Blount or Blunt, merchant tailor of London, and 
apprenticed himself in 1578 for ten years to William Ponsonby, a 
stationer. He became a freeman of the Stationers' Company in 
1588. Among the most important of his publications are 
Giovanni Florio's Italian-English dictionary and his translation 
of Montaigne, Marlowe's Hero and Leander, and the Sixe Court 
Comedies of John Lyly. He himself translated Ars Aulica, or the 
Courtier's Arte (1607) from the Italian of Lorenzo Ducci, and 
Christian Policie (1632) from the Spanish of Juan de Santa 
Maria. 

BLOUNT, THOMAS (1618-1679), English antiquarian, was the 
son of one Myles Blount, of Orleton in Herefordshire. He was 
born at Bordesley, Worcestershire. Few details of his life are 
known. It appears that he was called to the bar at the Inner 
Temple, but, beingazealous Roman Catholic, his religioninterfered 
considerably with the practice of his profession. Retiring to his 
estate at Orleton, he devoted himself to the study of the law as 
an amateur, and also read widely in other branches of knowledge. 
He died at Orleton on the 26th of December 1679. His principal 
works are Glossographia; or, a dictionary interpreting the hard 
•words of whatsoever language, now used in our refined English 
tongue (1656, reprinted in 1707), which went through several 
editions and remains most amusing and instructive reading; 
Nomolexicon: a law dictionary interpreting such difficult and 
obscure words and terms as are found either in our common or 
statute, ancient or modern lawes (1670; third edition, with 
additions by W. Nelson, 1717); and Fragmenta Antiquitatis: 
Ancient Tenures of land, and jocular customs of some mannors 
(1679; enlarged by J. Beckwith and republished, with additions 
by H. M. Beckwith, in 1815; again revised and enlarged by 
W. C. Hazlitt, 1874). Blount's Boscobel (1651), giving an account 
of Charles II.'s preservation after Worcester, with the addition of 
the king's own account dictated to Pepys, has been edited with 
a bibliography by C. G. Thomas (1894). 

BLOUNT, SIR THOMAS POPE (1649-1697), English author, 
eldest son of Sir Henry Blount and brother of Charles Blount 
iff. v.), was born at Upper Holloway on the 12th of September 
1649. He succeeded to the estate of Tittenhanger on his mother's 
death in 1678, and in the following year was created a baronet. 
He represented the borough of St Albans in the two last parlia- 
ments of Charles II. and was knight of the shire from the revolu- 
tion till his death. He married Jane, daughter of Sir Henry 
Caesar, by whom he had five sons and nine daughters. He died 
at Tittenhanger on the 30th of June 1697. His Censura cele- 
brorum authorum sive iractalus in quo varia virorum doctorum de 
clarissimis cujusque seculi scriptoribus judicia traduntur (1690) 
was originally compiled for Blount's own use, and is a dictionary 
in chronological order of what various eminent writers have said 
about one another. This necessarily involved enormous labour 
in Blount's time. It was published at Geneva in 1694 with all 
the quotations from modern languages translated into Latin, 
and again in 17 10. His other works are A Natural History, 
containing many not common observations extracted out of the best 
modern writers (1693), De re poetica, or remarks upon Poetry, with 
Characters and Censures of the most considerable Poets . . .(1694), 
and Essays on Several Occasions (1692). It is on this last work 
that his claims to be regarded as an original writer rest. The 
essays deal with the perversion of learning, a comparison between 
the ancients and the moderns (to the advantage of the latter), 
the education of children, and kindred topics. In the third 
edition (1697) he added an eighth essay, on religion, in which 
he deprecated the multiplication of ceremonies. He displays 
throughout a hatred of pedantry and convention, which makes 
his book still interesting. 



88 



BLOUNT, W.— BLOW-GUN 



See A. Kippis, Biographia Britannica (1780), vol. ii. For an 
account of Blount's family see Robert Clutterbuck. History and 
Antiquities of the County of Hertford (1815), vol. i. pp. 207-212. 

BLOUNT, WILLIAM (1 749-1800), American politician, was 
born in Bertie county, North Carolina, on the 26th of March 1 749. 
He was a member of the Continental Congress in 1 783-1 784 and 
again in 1786-1787, of the constitutional convention at Phil- 
adelphia in 1787, and of the state convention which ratified the 
Federal constitution for North Carolina in 1789. From 1790 
until 1796 he was, by President Washington's appointment, 
governor of the " Territory South of the Ohio River," created 
out of land ceded to the national government by North Carolina 
in 1789. He was also during this period the superintendent of 
Indian affairs for this part of the country. In 1791 he laid out 
Knoxville (Tennessee) as the seat of government. He presided 
over the constitutional convention of Tennessee in 1796, and, on 
the state being admitted to the Union, became one of its first 
representatives in the United States Senate. In 1797 his 
connexion became known with a scheme, since called " Blount's 
Conspiracy," which provided for the co-operation of the American 
frontiersmen, assisted by Indians, and an English force, in the 
seizure on behalf of Great Britain of the Floridas and Louisiana, 
then owned by Spain, with which power England was then at 
war. As this scheme, if carried out, involved the corrupting of 
two officials of the United States, an Indian agent and an 
interpreter, a breach of the neutrality of the United States, and 
the breach of Article V. of the treaty of San Lorenzo el Real 
(signed on the 27th of October 1795) between the United States 
and Spain, by which each power agreed not to incite the Indians 
to attack the other, Blount was impeached by the House of 
Representatives on the 7th of July 1797, and on the following 
day was formally expelled from the Senate for " having been 
guilty of high misdemeanor, entirely inconsistent with his public 
trust and duty as a senator." On the 29th of January 1798 
articles of impeachment were adopted by the House of Repre- 
sentatives. On the 14th of January 1799, however, the Senate, 
sitting as a court of impeachment, decided that it had no jurisdic- 
tion, Blount not then being a member of the Senate, and, in the 
Senate's opinion, not having been, even as a member, a civil 
officer of the United States, within the meaning of the con- 
stitution. The case is significant as being the first case of 
impeachment brought before the United States Senate. " In a 
legal point of view, all that the case decides is that a senator of 
the United States who has been expelled from his seat is not after 
such expulsion subject to impeachment " (Francis Wharton, State 
Trials). In effect, however, it also decided that a member of 
Congress was not in the meaning of the constitution a civil officer 
of the United States and therefore could not be impeached. 
The " conspiracy " was disavowed by the British government, 
which, however, seems to have secretly favoured it. Blount 
was enthusiastically supported by his constituents, and upon his 
return to Tennessee was made a member and the presiding officer 
of the state senate. He died at Knoxville on the 21st of March 
1800. 

For a defence of Blount, see General Marcus J. Wright's Account 
of the Life and Services of William Blount (Washington, D. C, 1884). 

BLOUSE, a word (taken from the French) used for any loosely 
fitting bodice belted at the waist. In France it meant originally 
the loose upper garment of linen or cotton, generally blue, worn 
by French workmen to preserve their clothing, and, by trans- 
ference, the workman himself. 

BLOW, JOHN (1648-1708), English musical composer, was 
born in 1648, probably at North Collingham in Nottinghamshire. 
He became a chorister of the chapel royal, and distinguished 
himself by his proficiency in music; he composed several 
anthems at an unusually early age, including Lord, Thou hast 
been our refuge; Lord, rebuke me not; and the so-called " club 
anthem," / will always give thanks, the last in collaboration with 
Pelham Humphrey and William Turner, either in honour of a 
victory over the Dutch in 1665, or — more probably — simply to 
commemorate the friendly intercourse of the three choristers. 
To this time also belongs the composition of a two-part setting 



of Herrick's Goe, perjtir'd man, written at the request of Charles 
II. to imitate Carissimi's Bite, cieli. In ^669 Blow became 
organist of Westminster Abbey. In 1673 he was made a gentle- 
man of the chapel royal, and in the September of this year he 
was married to Elizabeth Braddock, who died in childbirth ten 
years later. Blow, who by the year 1678 was a doctor of music, 
was named in 1685 one of the private musicians of James II. 
Between 1680 and 1687 he wrote the only stage composition by 
him of which any record survives, the Masque for the Entertain- 
ment of the King: Venus and Adonis. In this Mary Davies 
played the part of Venus, and her daughter by Charles II., Lady 
Mary Tudor, appeared as Cupid. In 1687 he became master of 
the choir of St Paul's church; in 1695 he was elected organist of 
St Margaret's, Westminster, and is said to have resumed his post 
as organist of Westminster Abbey, from which in 1680 he had 
retired or been dismissed to make way for Purccll. In 1699 he 
was appointed to the newly created post of composer to the 
chapel royal. Fourteen services and more than a hundred 
anthems by Blow are extant. In addition to his purely ecclesi- 
astical music Blow wrote Great sir, the joy of all our hearts, an ode 
for New Year's day 1681-1682; similar compositions for 1683, 
1686, 1687, 1688, 1689, 1693 (?), 1694 and 1700; odes, &c, for 
the celebration of St Cecilia's day for 1684, 1691, 1695 and 1700; 
for the coronation of James II. two anthems, Behold, God, our 
Defender, and God spake sometimes in visions; some harpsichord 
pieces for the second part of Playford's Musick's Handmaid 
(1689); Epicedium for Queen Mary (1695); Ode on the Death of 
Purcell (1696). In 1700 he published his Amphion Anglicus, a 
collection of pieces of music for one, two, three and four voices, 
with a figured-bass accompaniment. A famous page in Burney's 
History of Music is devoted to illustrations of " Dr Blow's 
Crudities," most of which only show the meritorious if immature 
efforts in expression characteristic of English music at the time, 
while some of them (where Burney says " Here we are lost ") 
are really excellent. Blow died on the 1st of October 1708 at his 
house in Broad Sanctuary, and was buried in the north aisle of 
Westminster Abbey. 

BLOW-GUN, a weapon consisting of a long tube, through 
which, by blowing with the mouth, arrows or other missiles can 
be shot accurately to a considerable distance. Blow-guns are 
used both in warefare and the chase by the South American 
Indian tribes inhabiting the region between the Amazon and 
Orinoco rivers, and by the Dyaks of Borneo. In the 18th century 
they were also known to certain North American Indians, 
especially the Choctaws and Cherokees of the lower Mississippi. 
Captain Bossu, in his Travels through Louisiana (1756), says of 
the Choctaws: " They are very expert in shooting with an instru- 
ment made of reeds about 7 ft. long, into which they put a little 
arrow feathered with the wool of the thistle (wild cotton?)." 
The blow-guns of the South American Indians differ in style and 
workmanship. That of the Macusis of Guiana, called pucuna, is 
the most perfect. It is made of two tubes, the inner of which, 
called oorah, is a light reed | in. in diameter which often grows 
to a length of 1 5 ft. without a joint. This is enclosed, for protec- 
tion and solidity, in an outer tube of a variety of palm (Iriartella 
setigera). The mouth-piece is made of a circlet of silk-grass, and 
the farther end is feruled with a kind of nut, forming a sight. A 
rear open sight is formed of two teeth of a small rodent. The 
length of the pucuna is about 11 ft. and its weight i| ft>. The 
arrows, which are from 12 to 18 in. long and very slender, are 
made of ribs of the cocorite palm-leaf. They are usually feathered 
with a tuft of wild cotton, but some have in place of the cotton a 
thin strip of bark curled into a cone, which, when the shooter 
blows into the pucuna, expands and completely fills the tube, 
thus avoiding windage. Another kind of arrow is furnished 
with fibres of bark fixed along the shaft, imparting a rotary 
motion to the missile, a primitive example of the theory of the 
rifle. The arrows used in Peru are only a few inches long and as 
thin as fine knitting-needles. All South American blow-gun 
arrows are steeped in poison. The natives shoot very accurately 
with the pucuna at distances up to 50 or 60 yds. 

The blow-gun of the Borneo Dyaks, called sumpitan, is from 



BLOWITZ — BLOWPIPE 



89 



6 to 7 ft. long and made of ironwood. The bore, of \ in., is made 
with, a long pointed piece of iron. At the muzzle a small iron 
hook is affixed, to serve as a sight, as well as a spear-head like a 
bayonet and for the same purpose. The arrows used with the 
sumpitan are about 10 in. long, pointed with fish-teeth, and 
feathered with pith. They are also envenomed with poison. 

Poisoned arrows are also used by the natives of the Philippine 
island of Mindanao, whose blow-pipes, from 3 to 4 ft. long and 
made of bamboo, are often richly ornamented and even jewelled. 

The principle of the blow-gun is, of course, the same as that 
of the common " pea-shooter." 

See Sport with Rod and Gun in American Woods and Waters, by 
A. M. Mayer, vol. ii. (Edinburgh, 1884) ; Wanderings in South 
America, &c, by Charles Waterton (London, 1828); The Head 
Hunters of Borneo, by Carl Bock (London, 1881). 

BLOWITZ, HENRI GEORGES STEPHAN ADOLPHE DE 
(1825-1903), Anglo-French journalist, was born, according to the 
account given in his memoirs, at his father's chateau in Bohemia 
on the 28th of December 1825. At the age of fifteen he left home, 
and travelled over Europe for some years in company with a 
young professor of philology, acquiring a thorough knowledge 
of French, German and Italian and a mixed general education. 
The finances of his family becoming straitened, young Blowitz 
was on the point of starting to seek his fortune in America, when 
he became acquainted in Paris with M. de Falloux, minister of 
public instruction, who appointed him professor of foreign 
languages at the Tours Lycee, whence, after some years, he was 
transferred to the Marseilles Lycee. After marrying in 1859 he 
resigned his professorship, but remained at Marseilles, devoting 
himself to literature and politics. In 1869 information which he 
supplied to a legitimist newspaper at Marseilles with regard to 
the candidature of M. de Lesseps as deputy for that city led to 
a demand for his expulsion from France. He was, however, 
allowed to remain, but had to retire to the country. In 1870 his 
predictions of the approaching fall of the Empire caused the 
demand for his expulsion to be renewed. While his case was 
under discussion the battle of Sedan was fought, and Blowitz 
effectually ingratiated himself with the authorities by applying 
for naturalization as a French subject. Once naturalized, he 
returned to Marseilles, where he was fortunately able to render 
considerable service to Thiers, who subsequently employed him 
in collecting information at Versailles, and when this work was 
finished offered him the French consulship at Riga. Blowitz was 
on the point of accepting this post when Laurence Oliphant, 
then Paris correspondent of The Times, for which Blowitz had 
already done some occasional work, asked him to act as his 
regular assistant for a time, Frederick Hardman, the other Paris 
correspondent of The Times, being absent. Blowitz accepted 
the offer, and when, later on, Oliphant was succeeded by Hardman 
he remained as assistant correspondent. In 1873 Hardman died, 
and Blowitz became chief Paris correspondent to The Times. 
In this capacity he soon became famous in the world of journalism 
and diplomacy. In 1875 the due de Decazes, then French 
foreign minister, showed Blowitz a confidential despatch from 
the French ambassador in Berlin (in which the latter warned his 
government that Germany was contemplating an attack on 
France), and requested the correspondent to expose the German 
designs in The Times. The publication of the facts effectually 
aroused European public opinion, and any such intention was 
immediately thwarted. Blowitz's most sensational journalistic 
feat was achieved in 1878, when his enterprise enabled The 
Times to publish the whole text of the treaty of Berlin at the 
actual moment that the treaty was being signed in Germany. 
In 1877 and again in 1888 Blowitz rendered considerable service 
to the French government by his exposure of internal designs 
upon the Republic. He died on the 18th of January 1903. 
My Memoirs, by H. S. de Blowitz, was published in 1903. 
BLOWPIPE, in the arts and chemistry, a tube for directing 
a jet of air into a fire or into the flame of a lamp or gas jet, for 
the purpose of producing a high temperature by accelerating 
the combustion. The blowpipe has been in common use from 
the earliest times for soldering metals and working glass, but 
its introduction into systematic chemical analysis is to be 



ascribed to A. F. Cronstedt, and not to Anton Swab, as has been 
maintained (see J. Landauer, Ber. 26, p. 898). The first work 
on this application of the blowpipe was by G. v. Engestrom, 
and was published in 1770 as an appendix to a treatise on 
mineralogy. Its application has been variously improved at 
the hands of T. O. Bergman, J. G. Gahn, J. J. Berzelius, 
C. F. Plattner and others, but more especially by the two last- 
named chemists. 

The simplest and oldest form of blowpipe is a conical brass 
tube, about 7 in. in length, curved at the small end into a right 
angle, and terminating in a small round orifice, which is applied 
to the flame, while the larger end is applied to the mouth. 
Where the blast has to be kept up for only a few seconds, this 
instrument is quite serviceable, but in longer chemical queries
inconvenience arises from the condensation of moisture exhaled 
by the lungs in the tube. Hence most blowpipes are now made 
with a cavity for retaining the moisture. Cronstedt placed a 
bulb in the centre of his blowpipe. Dr Joseph Black's instru- 
ment consists of a conical tube of tin plate, with a small brass 
tube, supporting the nozzle, inserted near the wider end, and 
a mouth-piece at the narrow end. 

The sizes of orifice recommended by Plattner are 0-4 and 
0-5 mm. A trumpet mouth-piece is recommended from the 
support it gives to the cheeks when inflated. The mode of 
blowing is peculiar, and requires some practice; an uninterrupted 
blast is kept up by the muscular action of the cheeks, while the 
ordinary respiration goes on through the nostrils. 

If the flame of a candle or lamp be closely examined, it will 
be seen to consist of four parts — (a) a deep blue ring at the base, 
(b) a dark cone in the centre, (c) a luminous portion round this, 
and (d) an exterior pale blue envelope (see Flame). In blow- 
pipe work only two of these four parts are made use of, viz. 
the pale envelope, for oxidation, and the luminous portion, for 
reduction. To obtain a good oxidizing flame, the blowpipe is held 
with its nozzle inserted in the edge of the flame close over the 
level of the wick, and blown into gently and evenly. A conical 
jet is thus produced, consisting of an inner cone, with an outer 
one commencing near its apex — the former, corresponding to 
(a) in the free flame, blue and well defined; the latter corre- 
sponding to id), pale blue and vague. The heat is greatest just 
beyond the point of the inner cone, combustion being there 
most complete. Oxidation is better effected (if a very high 
temperature be not required) the farther the substance is from 
the apex of the inner cone, for the air has thus freer access. To 
obtain a good reducing flame (in which the combustible matter, 
very hot, but not yet burned, is disposed to take oxygen from 
any compound containing it), the nozzle, with smaller orifice, 
should just touch the flame at a point higher above the wick, 
and a somewhat weaker current of air should be blown. The 
flame then appears as a long, narrow, luminous cone, the end 
being enveloped by a dimly visible portion of flame correspond- 
ing to that which surrounds the free flame, while there is also a 
dark nucleus about the wick. The substance to be reduced is 
brought into the luminous portion, where the reducing power 
is strongest. 

Various materials are used as supports for substances in the 
blowpipe flame; the principal are charcoal, platinum and glass 
or porcelain. Charcoal is valuable for its infusibility and low 
conductivity for heat (allowing substances to be strongly heated 
upon it), and for its powerful reducing properties; so that it is 
chiefly employed in testing the fusibility of minerals and in 
reduction. The best kind of charcoal is that of close-grained 
pine or alder; it is cut in short prisms, having a flat smooth 
surface at right angles to the rings of growth. In this a shallow 
hole is made for receiving the substance to be held in the flame. 
Gas-carbon is sometimes used, since it is more permanent in 
the flame than wood charcoal. Platinum is employed in oxi- 
dizing processes, and in the fusion of substances with fluxes; 
also in observing the colouring effect of substances on the blow- 
pipe flame (which effect is apt to be somewhat masked by char- 
coal). Most commonly it is used in the form of wire, with a 
small bend or loop at the end. 



9° 



BLUCHER— BLUE 



The mouth blowpipe is unsuitable for the production of a 
large flame, and cannot be used for any lengthy queries;
hence recourse must be made to types in which the air-blast 
is occasioned by mechanical means. The laboratory form in 
common use consists of a bellows worked by either hand or 
foot, and a special type of gas burner formed of two concentric 
tubes, one conveying the blast, the other the gas; the supply 
of air and gas being regulated by stopcocks. The hot blast blow- 
pipe of T. Fletcher, in which the blast is heated by passing 
through a copper coil heated by a separate burner, is only of 
service when a pointed flame of a fairly high temperature is 
required. Blowpipes in which oxygen is used as the blast 
have been manufactured by Fletcher, Russell & Co., and have 
proved of great service in conducting fusions which require a 
temperature above that yielded by the air-blowpipe. 

For the applications of the blowpipe in chemical analysis see 
Chemistry : Analytical. 

BLUCHER, GEEHARD LEBERECHT VON (1742-1819), 
Prussian general field marshal, prince of Wahlstadt in Silesia, 
was born at Rostock on the 16th of December 1742. In his 
fourteenth year he entered the service of Sweden, and in the 
Pomeranian campaign of 1760 he was taken prisoner by the 
Prussians. He was persuaded by his captors to enter the 
Prussian service. He took part in the later battles of the Seven 
Years' War, and as a hussar officer gained much experience of 
light cavalry work. In peace, however, his ardent spirit led him 
into excesses of all kinds, and being passed over for promotion 
he sent in his resignation, to which Frederick replied, " Captain 
Bliicher can take himself to the devil " (1773). He now settled 
down to farming, and in fifteen years he had acquired an honour- 
able independence. But he was unable to return to the army until 
after the death of Frederick the Great. He was then reinstated 
as major in his old regiment, the Red Hussars. He took part 
in the expedition to Holland in 1787, and in the following year 
became lieutenant-colonel. In 1789 he received the order pour 
le merile, and in 1794 he became colonel of the Red Hussars. In 
1793 and 1794 he distinguished himself in cavalry actions against 
the French, and for his success at Kirrweiler he was made a 
major-general. In 1801 he was promoted lieutenant-general. 

He was one of the leaders of the war party in Prussia in 
1805-1806, and served as a cavalry general in the disastrous 
campaign of the latter year. At Auerstadt Bliicher repeatedly 
charged at the head of the Prussian cavalry, but without success. 
In the retreat of the broken armies he commanded the rearguard 
of Prince Hohenlohe's corps, and upon the capitulation of the 
main body of Prenzlau he carried off a remnant of the Prussian 
army to the northward, and in the neighbourhood of Liibeck 
he fought a series of combats, which, however, ended in his 
being forced to surrender at Ratkau (November 7, 1806). His 
adversaries testified in his capitulation that it was caused by 
" want of provisions and ammunition." He was soon exchanged 
for General Victor, and was actively employed in Pomerania, 
at Berlin, and at Konigsberg until the conclusion of the war. 
After the war, Bliicher was looked upon as the natural leader 
of the patriot party, with which he was in close touch during 
the period of Napoleonic domination. His hopes of an alliance 
with Austria in the war of 1809 were disappointed. In this 
year he was made general of cavalry. In 181 2 he expressed 
himself so openly on the alliance of Russia with France that he 
was recalled from his military governorship of Pomerania and 
virtually banished from the court. 

When at last the Napoleonic domination was ended by the 
outbreak of the War of Liberation in 1813, Bliicher of course 
was at once placed in high command, and he was present at 
Liitzen and Bautzen. During the armistice he worked at the 
organization of the Prussian forces, and when the war was 
resumed Bliicher became commander-in-chief of the Army of 
Silesia, with Gneisenau and Muffling as his principal staff officers, 
and 40,000 Prussians and 50,000 Russians under his control. 
The autumn campaign of 1813 will be found described in the 
article Napoleonic Campaigns, and it will here be sufficient 
to say that the most conspicuous military quality displayed by 



Bliicher was his unrelenting energy. The irresolution and 
divergence of interests usual in allied armies found in him a 
restless opponent, and the knowledge that if he could not induce 
others to co-operate he was prepared to attempt the task in hand 
by himself often caused other generals to follow his lead. He 
defeated Marshal Macdonald at the Katzbach, and by his victory 
over Marmont at Mockern led the way to the decisive overthrow 
of Napoleon at Leipzig, which place was stormed by Bliicher's 
own army on the evening of the last day of the battle. On the 
day of Mockern (October 16, 1813) Bliicher was made a general 
field marshal, and after the victory he pursued the routed French 
with his accustomed energy. In the winter of 1813-1814 
Bliicher, with his chief staff officers, was mainly instrumental 
in inducing the allied sovereigns to carry the war into France 
itself. The combat of Brienne and the battle of La Rothiere 
were the chief incidents of the first stage of the celebrated 
campaign of 1814, and they were quickly followed by the victories 
of Napoleon over Bliicher at Champaubert, Vauxchamps and 
Montmirail. But the courage of the Prussian leader was un- 
diminished, and his great victory of Laon (March 9 to 10) 
practically decided the fate of the campaign. After this Bliicher 
infused some of his own energy into the queries of Prince
Schwarzenberg's Army of Bohemia, and at last this army and 
the Army of Silesia marched in one body direct upon Paris. 
The victory of Montmartre, the entry of the allies into the French 
capital, and the overthrow of the First Empire were the direct 
consequences. Bliicher was disposed to make a severe retaliation 
upon Paris for the calamities that Prussia had suffered from 
the armies of France had not the allied commanders intervened 
to prevent it. Blowing up the bridge of Jena was said to be one 
of his contemplated acts. On the 3rd of June 1814 he was made 
prince of Wahlstadt (in Silesia on the Katzbach battlefield), 
and soon afterwards he paid a visit to England, being received 
everywhere with the greatest enthusiasm. 

After the peace he retired to Silesia, but the return of Napoleon 
soon called him to further service. He was put in command of 
the Army of the Lower Rhine with General Gneisenau as his 
chief of staff (see Waterloo Campaign). In the campaign of 
181 5 the Prussians sustained a very severe defeat at the outset 
at Ligny (June 16), in the course of which the old field marshal 
was ridden over by cavalry charges, his life being saved only 
by the devotion of his aide-de-camp, Count Nostitz. He was 
unable to resume command for some hours, and Gneisenau drew 
off the defeated army. The relations of the Prussian and the 
English headquarters were at this time very complicated, and it 
is uncertain whether Bliicher himself was responsible for the 
daring resolution to march to Wellington's assistance. This 
was in fact done, and after an incredibly severe march Bliicher's 
army intervened with decisive and crushing effect in the battle 
of Waterloo. The great victory was converted into a success 
absolutely decisive of the war by the relentless pursuit of the 
Prussians, and the allies re-entered Paris on the 7th of July. 
Prince Bliicher remained in the French capital for some months, 
but his age and infirmities compelled him to retire to his Silesian 
residence at Krieblowitz, where he died on the 12th of September 
1819, aged seventy-seven. He retained to the end of his life 
that wildness of character and proneness to excesses which had 
caused his dismissal from the army in his youth, but however 
they may be regarded, these faults sprang always from the ardent 
and vivid temperament which made Bliicher a dashing leader of 
horse. The qualities which made him a great general were his 
patriotism and the hatred of French domination which inspired 
every success of the War of Liberation. He was twice married, 
and had, by his first marriage, two sons and a daughter. Statues 
were erected to his memory at Berlin, Breslau and Rostock. 

Of the various lives of Prince Bliicher, that by Varnhagen von 
Ense (1827) is the most important. His war diaries of 1793-1794, 
together with a memoir (written in 1805) on the subject of a national 
army, were edited by Golz and Ribbentrop (Campagne Journal 
1793-4 von Gl. Lt. v. Bliicher). 

BLUE (common in different forms to most European 
languages), the name of a colour, used in many colloquial 



BLUEBEARD— BLUFF 



phrases. From the fact of various parties, political and other, 
having adopted the colour blue as their badge, various classes of 
people have come to be known as " blue " or " blues"; thus 
" true blue " meant originally a staunch Presbyterian, the 
Covenanters having adopted blue as their colour as opposed to 
red, the royal colour; similarly, in the navy, there was in the 
18th century a " Blue Squadron," Nelson being at one time 
" Rear-Admiral of the Blue "; again, in 1690, the Royal Horse 
Guards were called the "Blues" from their blue uniforms, or, 
from their leader, the earl of Oxford, the "Oxford Blues"; 
also, from the blue ribbon worn by the knights of the Garter 
comes the use of the phrase as the highest mark of distinction 
that can be worn, especially applied on the turf to the winning 
of the Derby. The " blue Peter " is a rectangular blue flag, with 
a white square in the centre, hoisted at the top of the foremast 
as a signal that a vessel is about to leave port. At Oxford and 
Cambridge a man who represents his university in certain 
athletic sports is called a " blue " from the " colours " he is 
then entitled to wear, dark blue for Oxford and light blue for 
Cambridge. 

BLUEBEARD, the monster of Charles Perrault's tale of Barbe 
Bleue, who murdered his wives and hid their bodies in a locked 
room. Perrault's tale was first printed in his Histoires et contes 
du terns passe (1697). The essentials of the story — Bluebeard's 
prohibition to his wife to open a certain door during his absence, 
her disobedience, her discovery of a gruesome secret, and her 
timely rescue from death — are to be found in other folklore 
stories, none of which, however, has attained the fame of 
Bluebeard. A close parallel exists in an Esthonian legend of a 
husband who had already killed eleven wives, and was prevented 
from killing the twelfth, who had opened a secret room, by a 
gooseherd, the friend of her childhood. In " The Feather Bird " 
of Grimm's Hausmarchen, three sisters are the victims, the third 
being rescued by her brothers. Bluebeard, though Perrault 
does not state the number of his crimes, is generally credited 
with the murder of seven wives. His history belongs to the 
common stock of folklore, and has even been ingeniously fitted 
with a mythical interpretation. In France the Bluebeard legend 
has its local habitation in Brittany, but whether the existing 
traditions connecting him with Gilles de Rais (q.v.) or Comorre 
the Cursed, a Breton chief of the 6th century, were anterior 
to Perrault's time, we have no means of determining. The 
identification of Bluebeard with Gilles de Rais, the bite ^exter- 
mination of Michelet's forcible language, persists locally in the 
neighbourhood of the various castles of the baron, especially at 
Machecoul and Tiffauges, the chief scenes of his infamous crimes. 
Gilles de Rais, however, had only one wife, who survived him, 
and his victims were in the majority of cases young boys. The 
traditional connexion may arise simply from the not improbable 
association of two monstrous tales. The less widespread identi- 
fication of Bluebeard with Comorre is supported by a series of 
frescoes dating only a few years later than the publication of 
Perrault's story, in a chapel at St Nicolas de Bieuzy dedicated 
to St Tryphine, in which the tale of Bluebeard is depicted as 
the story of the saint, who in history was the wife of Comorre. 
Comorre or Conomor had his original headquarters at Carhaix, 
in Finistere. He extended his authority by marriage with the 
widow of Iona, chief of Domnonia, and attempted the life of 
his stepson Judwal, who fled to the Frankish court. About 547 
or 548 he obtained in marriage, through the intercession of 
St Gildas, Tryphine, daughter of Weroc, count of Vannes. The 
pair lived in peace at Castel Finans for some time, but Comorre, 
disappointed in his ambitions in the Vannetais, presently 
threatened Tryphine. She took flight, but her husband found 
her hiding in a wood, when he gave her a wound on the skull and 
left her for dead. She was tended and restored to health by 
St Gildas, and after the birth of her son retired to a convent of 
her own foundation. Eventually Comorre was defeated and 
slain by Judwal. In legend St Tryphine was decapitated and 
miraculously restored to life by Gildas. Alain Bouchard (Grandes 
croniques, Nantes, 1531) asserts that Comorre had already put 
several wives to death before he married Tryphine. In the 



Legendes bretonnes of the count d'Amezeuil the church legend 
becomes a charming fairy tale. 

See also E. A. Vizetclly, Bluebeard (1902) ; E. Sidney Hartland, 
"The Forbidden Chamber," in Folklore, vol. iii. (1885); and the 
editions of the Contes of Charles Perrault (q.v.). Cf. A. France, 
Les Sept Femmes de Barbe Bleue (1909). 

BLUE-BOOK, the general name given to the reports and 
other documents printed by order of the parliament of the 
United Kingdom, so called from their being usually covered 
with blue paper, though some are bound in drab and others have 
white covers. The printing of its proceedings was first adopted 
by the House of Commons in 1681, and in 1836 was commenced 
the practice of selling parliamentary papers to the public. All 
notices of questions, resolutions, votes and proceedings in both 
Houses of Parliament are issued each day during the session; 
other publications include the various papers issued by the 
different government departments, the reports of committees 
and commissions of inquiry, public bills, as well as returns, 
correspondence, &c, specially ordered to be printed by either 
house. The papers of each session are so arranged as to admit 
of being bound up in regular order, and are well indexed. The 
terms upon which blue-books, single papers, &c, are issued 
to the general public are one halfpenny per sheet of four pages, 
but for an annual subscription of £20 all the parliamentary 
publications of the year may be obtained ; but subscriptions can 
be arranged so that almost any particular class of publication 
can be obtained — for example, the daily votes and proceedings 
can be obtained for an annual subscription of £3, the House 
of Lords papers for £10, or the House of Commons papers for 
£15. Any publication can also be purchased separately. 

Most foreign countries have a distinctive colour for the binding 
of their official publications. That of the United States varies, 
but foreign diplomatic correspondence is bound in red. The 
United States government publications are not only on sale (as a 
rule) but are widely supplied gratis, with the result that important 
publications soon get out of print, and it is difficult to obtain ac- 
cess to many valuable reports or other information, except at a 
public library. German official publications are bound in white ; 
French, in yellow; Austrian, in red; Portuguese, in white; Italian, 
in green; Spanish, in red; Mexican, in green; Japanese, in grey; 
Chinese, in yellow. 

BLUESTOCKING, a derisive name for a literary woman. 
The term originated in or about 175°, when Mrs Elizabeth 
Montagu (q.v.) made a determined effort to introduce into 
society a healthier and more intellectual tone, by holding 
assemblies at which literary conversation and discussions were 
to take the place of cards and gossip. Most of those attending 
were conspicuous by the plainness of their dress, and a Mr 
Benjamin Stillingfleet specially caused comment by always 
wearing blue or worsted stockings instead of the usual black 
silk. It was in special reference to him that Mrs Montagu's 
friends were called the Bluestocking Society or Club, and the 
women frequenting her house in Hill Street came to be known 
as the " Bluestocking Ladies " or simply " bluestockings." As 
an alternative explanation, the origin of the name is attributed 
to Mrs Montagu's deliberate adoption of blue stockings (in 
which fashion she was followed by all her women friends) as 
the badge of the society she wished to form. She is said to have 
obtained the idea from Paris, where in the 17th century there 
was a revival of a social reunion in 1590 on the lines of that 
formed in 1400 at Venice, the ladies and men of which wore 
blue stockings. The term had been applied in England as early 
as 1653 to the Little Parliament, in allusion to the puritanically 
plain and coarse dress of the members. 

BLUFF (a word of uncertain origin; possibly connected with 
an obsolete Dutch word, blaf, broad), an adjective used of a 
ship, meaning broad and nearly vertical in the bows; similarly, 
of a cliff or shore, presenting a bold and nearly perpendicular 
front; of a person, good-natured and frank, with a rough or 
abrupt manner. Another word "bluff," perhaps connected 
with German verbliifen, to baffle, meant originally a horse's 
blinker, the corresponding verb meaning to blindfold: it survives 



9 2 

as a term in such games as poker, where " to bluff " means 
to bet heavily on a hand so as to make an opponent believe it 
to be stronger than it is; hence such phrases as " the game of 
bluff,"" a policy of bluff." 

BLUM, ROBERT FREDERICK (1857-1903), American artist, 
was born in Cincinnati, Ohio, on the 9th of July 1857. He was 
employed for a time in a lithographic shop, and studied at the 
McMicken Art School of Design in Cincinnati, and at the Penn- 
sylvania Academy of Fine Arts in Philadelphia, but he was 
practically self-taught, and early showed great and original 
talent. He settled in New York in 1879, and his first published 
sketches — of Japanese jugglers — appeared in St Nicholas. His 
most important work is a large frieze in the Mendelssohn Music 
Hall, New York, " Music and the Dance " (1895). His pen-and- 
ink work for the Century magazine attracted wide attention, as 
did his illustrations for Sir Edwin Arnold's Japonica. In the 
country and art of Japan he had been interested for many years. 
" A Daughter of Japan," drawn by Blum and W. J. Baer, was 
the cover of Scribner's Magazine for May 1893, and was one of 
the earliest pieces of colour-printing for an American magazine. 
In Scribner's for 1893 appeared also his " Artist's Letters from 
Japan." He was an admirer of Fortuny, whose methods some- 
what influenced his work. Blum's Venetian pictures, such as 
"A Bright Day at Venice" (1882), had lively charm and 
beauty. He died on the 8th of June 1903 in New York City. 
He was a member of the National Academy of Design, being 
elected after his exhibition in 1892 of " The Amcya "; and 
was president of the Painters in Pastel. Although an excellent 
draughtsman and etcher, it was as a colourist that he chiefly 
excelled. 

BLUMENBACH, JOHANN FRIEDRICH (1752-1840), German 
physiologist and anthropologist, was born at Gotha on the nth 
of May 1752. After studying medicine at Jena, he graduated 
doctor at Gottingen in 1775, and was appointed extraordinary 
professor of medicine in 1776 and ordinary professor in 1778. 
He died at Gottingen on the 22nd of January 1840. He was 
the author of Institutiones Physiologicae (1787), and of a Hand- 
buch der vergleichcnden Anatomie (1804), both of which were 
very popular and went through many editions, but he is best 
known for his work in connexion with anthropology, of which 
science he has been justly called the founder. He was the first 
to show the value of comparative anatomy in the study of man's 
history, and his craniometrical researches justified his division 
of the human race into several great varieties or families, of 
which he enumerated five — the Caucasian or white race, the 
Mongolian or yellow, the Malayan or brown race, the Negro or 
black race, and the American or red race. This classification has 
been very generally received, and most later schemes have been 
modifications of it. His most important anthropological work 
was his description of sixty human crania published originally 
in fasciculi under the title Collcclionis suae craniorum diver sarum 
gentium illustratae decades (Gottingen, 1790-1828). 

BLUMENTHAL, LEONHARD, Count von (1810-1900), 
Prussian field marshal, son of Captain Ludwig von Blumenthal 
(killed in 18 13 at the battle of Dennewitz), was born at Schwedt- 
on-Oder on the 30th of July 1810. Educated at the military 
schools of Culm and Berlin, he entered the Guards as 2nd lieu- 
tenant in 1827. After serving in the Rhine provinces, he joined 
the topographical division of the general staff in 1846. As 
lieutenant of the 31st foot he took part in 1848 in the suppression 
of the Berlin riots, and in 1849 was promoted captain on the 
general staff. The same year he served on the staff of General 
von Bonin in the Schleswig-Holstein campaign, and so distin- 
guished himself, particularly at Fredericia, that he was appointed 
chief of the staff of the Schleswig-Holstein army. In 1850 he 
was general staff officer of the mobile division under von Tietzen 
in Hesse-Cassel. He was sent on a mission to England in that 
year (4th class of Red Eagle), and on several subsequent occa- 
sions. Having attained the rank of lieutenant-colonel, he was 
appointed personal adjutant to Prince Frederick Charles in 1859. 
In i860 he became colonel of the 31st, and later of the 71st, 
regiment. He was chief of the staff of the III. army corps when, 



BLUM— BLUNT, J. J. 



on the outbreak of the Danish War of 1864, he was nominated 
chief of the general staff of the army against Denmark, and 
displayed so much ability, particularly at Diippel and the 
passage to Alsen island, that he was promoted major-general 
and given the order pour le merite. In the war of 1866 Blumen- 
thal occupied the post of chief of the general staff to the crown 
prince of Prussia, commanding the 2nd army. It was upon 
this army that the brunt of the fighting fell, and at Koniggratz 
it decided the fortunes of the day. Blumcnthal's own part in 
these battles and in the campaign generally was most con- 
spicuous. On the field of Koniggratz the crown prince said to 
his chief of staff, " I know to whom I owe the conduct of my 
army," and Blumenthal soon received promotion to lieutenant- 
general and the oak-leaf of the order pour le merite. He was also 
made a knight of the Hohenzollern Order. From 1866 to 1870 
he commanded the 14th division at Diisseldorf. In the Franco- 
German War of 1870-71 he was chief of staff of the 3rd army 
under the crown prince. Blumenthal's soldierly qualities and 
talent were never more conspicuous than in the critical days 
preceding the battle of Sedan, and his services in the war have 
been considered as scarcely less valuable and important than 
those of Moltke himself. In 187 1 Blumenthal represented 
Germany at the British manoeuvres at Chobham, and was given 
the command of the IV. army corps at Magdeburg. In 1873 he 
became a general of infantry, and ten years later he was made a 
count. In 1888 he was made a general field marshal, after which 
he was in command of the 4th and 3rd army inspections. He 
retired in 1896, and died at Quellendorf near Kothen on the 21st 
of December 1900. 

Blumenthal's diary of 1866 and 1870-1871 has been edited by 
his son, Count Albrecht von Blumenthal [Tagebuch des G.F.M. von 
Blumenthal), 1902; an English translation (Journals of Count von 
Blumenthal) was published in 1903. 

BLUNDERBUSS (a corruption of the Dutch donder, thunder, 
and the Dutch bus; cf. Ger. Biichse, a box or tube, hence a 
thunder-box or gun), an obsolete muzzle-loading firearm with 
a bell-shaped muzzle. Its calibre was large so that it could 
contain many balls or slugs, and it was intended to be fired at 
a short range, so that some of the charge was sure to take effect. 
The word is also used by analogy to describe a blundering and 
random person or talker. 

BLUNT, JOHN HENRY (1823-1884), English divine, was born 
at Chelsea in 1823, and before going to the university of Durham 
in 1 8 50 was for some years engaged in business as a manufacturing 
chemist. He was ordained in 1852 and took his M.A. degree 
in 1855, publishing in the same year a work on The Atonement. 
He held in Succession several preferments, among them the 
vicarage of Kennington near Oxford (1868), which he vacated 
in 1873 for the crown living of Beverston in Gloucestershire. 
He had already gained some reputation as an industrious 
theologian, and had published among other works an annotated 
edition of the Prayer Book (1867), a History of the English 
Reformation (1868), and a Book of Church Law (1872), as well as 
a useful Dictionary of Doctrinal and Historical Theology (1870). 
The continuation of these labours was seen in a Dictionary of 
Sects and Heresies (1874), an Annotated Bible (3 vols., 1878-1879), 
and a Cyclopaedia of Religion (1884), and received recognition 
in the shape of the D.D. degree bestowed on him in 1882. He 
died in London on the nth of April 1884. 

BLUNT, JOHN JAMES (1794-1855), English divine, was born 
at Newcastle-under-Lyme in Staffordshire, and educated at 
St John's College, Cambridge, where he took his degree as 
fifteenth wrangler and obtained a fellowship (1816). He was 
appointed a Wort's travelling bachelor 1818, and spent some 
time in Italy and Sicily, afterwards publishing an account of his 
journey. He proceeded M.A. in 1819, B.D. 1826, and was 
Hulsean Lecturer in 1 831-183 2 while holding a curacy in Shrop- 
shire. In 1834 he became rector of Great Oakley in Essex, and 
in 1839 was appointed Lady Margaret professor of divinity at 
Cambridge. In 1854 he declined the see of Salisbury, and he 
died on the 18th of June 1855. His chief book was Undesigned 
Coincidences in the Writings both of the Old and New Testaments 



BLUNT, W. S.— B'NAI B'RITH 



93 



(1833; fuller edition, 1847). Some of his writings, among them 
the History of the Christian Church during the First Three Centuries 
and the lectures On the Right Use of the Early Fathers, were 
published posthumously. 

A short memoir of him appeared in 1856 from the hand of William 
Selwyn, his successor in the divinity professorship. 

BLUNT, WILFRID SCAWEN (1840- ), English poet and 
publicist, was born on the 17th of August 1840 at Petworth 
House, Sussex, the son of Francis Scawen Blunt, who served in 
the Peninsular War and was wounded at Corunna. He was 
educated at Stonyhurst and Oscott, and entered the diplomatic 
service in 1858, serving successively at Athens, Madrid, Paris and 
Lisbon. In 1867 he was sent to South America, and on his 
return to England retired from the service on his marriage with 
Lady Anne Noel, daughter of the earl of Lovelace and a grand- 
daughter of the poet Byron. In 1872 he succeeded, by the death 
of his elder brother, to the estate of Crabbet Park, Sussex, where 
he established a famous stud for the breeding of Arab horses, 
Mr and Lady Anne Blunt travelled repeatedly in northern Africa, 
Asia Minor and Arabia, two of their expeditions being described 
in Lady Anne's Bedouins of the Euphrates (2 vols., 1879) and A 
Pilgrimage to Nejd (2 vols., 1881). Mr Blunt became known as 
an ardent sympathizer with Mahommedan aspirations, and in 
his Future of Islam (1888) he directed attention to the forces 
which afterwards produced the movements of Pan-Islamism and 
Mahdism. Hs was a violent opponent of the English policy in 
the Sudan, and in The Wind and the Whirlwind (in verse, 1883) 
prophesied its downfall. He supported the national party in 
Egypt, and took a prominent part in the defence of Arabi Pasha. 
Ideas about India (1885) was the result of two visits to that 
country, the second in 1883-1884. In 1885 and 1886 he- stood 
unsuccessfully for parliament as a Home Ruler; and in 1887 he 
was arrested in Ireland while presiding over a political meeting in 
connexion with the agitation on Lord Clanricarde's estate, and 
was imprisoned for two months in Kilmainham . His best-known 
volume of verse, Love Sonnets of Proteus (1880), is a revelation of 
his real merits as an emotional poet. The Poetry of Wilfrid Blunt 
(1888), selected and edited by W. E. Henley and Mr George 
Wyndham, includes these sonnets, together with " Worth 
Forest, a Pastoral," " Griselda " (described as a " society novel 
in rhymed verse"), translations from the Arabic, and poems 
which had appeared in other volumes. 

BLUNTSCHLI, JOHANN KASPAR (1808-1881), Swiss jurist 
and politician, was born at Zurich on the 7th of March 1808, the 
son of a soap and candle manufacturer. From school he passed 
into the Politische Institut (a seminary of law and political 
science) in his native town, and proceeding thence to the uni- 
versities of Berlin and Bonn, took the degree of doctor juris in the 
latter in 1829. Returning to Zurich in 1830, he threw himself 
with ardour into the political strife which was at the time 
unsettling all the cantons of the Confederation, and in this year 
published Uber die Verfassung der Stadt Ziirich (On the Con- 
stitution of the City of Zurich) . This was followed by Das Volk 
und der Souveran (1830), a work in which, while pleading for 
constitutional government, he showed his bitter repugnance of 
the growing Swiss radicalism. Elected in 1837 a member of the 
Grosser Rath (Great Council), he became the champion of the 
moderate conservative party. Fascinated by the metaphysical 
views of the philosopher Fricdrich Rohmer (1814-1856), a man 
who attracted little other attention, he endeavoured in Psycho- 
logische Studien uber Staat und Kirche (1844) to apply them to 
political science generally, and in particular as a panacea for the 
constitutional troubles of Switzerland. Bluntschli, shortly before 
his death, remarked, " I have gained renown as a jurist, but 
my greatest desert is to have comprehended Rohmer." This 
philosophical essay, however, coupled with his uncompromising 
attitude towards both radicalism and ultramontanism, brought 
him many enemies, and rendered his continuance in the council, 
of which he had been elected president, impossible. He resigned 
his seat, and on the overthrow of the Sonderbund in 1847, 
perceiving that all hope of power for his party was lost, took 
leave of Switzerland with the pamphlet Stimme eines Schweizers 



uber die Bundesreform (1847), and settled at Munich, where he 
became professor of constitutional law in 1848. 

At Munich he devoted himself with energy to the special work 
of his chair, and, resisting the temptation to identify himself 
with politics, published Allgemeines Staalsrecht (1851-1852); 
Lehre vom modernen Staat (1875-1876); and, in conjunction with 
Karl Ludwig Theodor Brater (1819-1869), Deuisches Staats- 
worterbuch (n vols., 1857-1870; abridged by Edgar Loening in 
3 vols., 1860-1875). Meanwhile he had assiduously worked at his 
code for the canton of Zurich, Privatrechlliches Gesetzbuch fur den 
Kanton Ziirich (4 vols., 1854-1856), a work which was much 
praised at the time, and which, particularly the section devoted 
to contracts, served as a model for codes both in Switzerland and 
other countries. In 1861 Bluntschli received a call to Heidelberg 
as professor of constitutional law (Staatsrecht), where he again 
entered the political arena, endeavouring in his Geschichte des 
allgcmeinen Staatsrcchts und der Politik (1864) " to stimulate," 
as he said, " the political consciousness of the German people, to 
cleanse it of prejudices and to further it intellectually." In his 
new home, Baden, he devoted his energies and political influence, 
during the Austro-Prussian War of 1866, towards keeping the 
country neutral. From this time Bluntschli became active in 
the field of international law, and his fame as a jurist belongs 
rather to this province than to that of constitutional law. His 
Das moderne Kriegsrecht (1866); Das moderne Volkerrecht 
(1868), and Das Beutcrecht im Krieg (1878) are likely to remain 
invaluable text-books in this branch of the science of juris- 
prudence. He also wrote a pamphlet on the "Alabama " case. 

Bluntschli was one of the founders, at Ghent in 1873, of the 
Institute of International Law, and was the representative of the 
German emperor at the conference on the international laws of 
war at Brussels. During the latter years of his life he took a 
lively interest in the Protestantenvcrein, a society formed to 
combat reactionary and ultramontane views of theology. He 
died suddenly at Karlsruhe on the 21st of October 1881. His 
library was acquired by Johns Hopkins University at Baltimore, 
U.S.A. 

Among his works, other than those before mentioned, may be 
cited Deutsches Privatrecht (1853-1854); Deutsche Staatslehre 
filr Gebildete (1874); and Deutsche Staatslehre und die heutige 
Slaatenwelt (1880). 

For notices of Bluntschli's life and works see his interesting 
autobiography, Denkwurdiges aus meinem Leben (1884); von 
Holtzendorff, Bluntschli und seine Verdienste urn die Staatswissen- 
schaften (1882); Brockhaus, Konversations-Lexicon (1901); and a 
biography by Meyer von. Kronau, in All gemeine deutsche Biographic 

BLYTH, a market town and seaport of Northumberland, 
England, in the parliamentary borough of Morpeth, 9 m. E.S.E. 
of that town, at the mouth of the river Blyth, on a branch of the 
North Eastern railway. Pop. of urban district (1901) 5472. 
This is the port for a considerable coal-mining district, and its 
harbour, on the south side of the river, is provided with 
mechanical appliances for shipping coal. There are five dry 
docks, and upwards of i| m. of quayage. Timber is largely 
imported. Some shipbuilding and the manufacture of rope, 
sails and ship-fittings are carried on, and the fisheries are 
valuable. Blyth is also in considerable favour as a watering- 
place; there are a pleasant park, a pier, protecting the harbour, 
about 1 m. in length, and a sandy beach affording sea-bathing. 
The river Blyth rises near the village of Kirkheaton, and has an 
easterly course of about 25 m. through a deep, well- wooded and 
picturesque valley. 

B'NAI B'RITH (or Sons of the Covenant), INDEPENDENT 
ORDER OF, a Jewish fraternal society. It was founded at New 
York in 1843 by a number of German Jews, headed by Henry 
Jones, and is the oldest as well as the largest of the Jewish 
fraternal organizations. Its membership in 1908 was 35,870, 
its 481 lodges and 10 grand lodges being distributed over the 
United States, Germany, Austria-Hungary, Rumania, Egypt 
and Palestine. Its objects are to promote a high morality among 
Jews, regardless of differences as to dogma and ceremonial 
customs, and especially to inculcate the supreme virtues of 



94 



BOA— BOAR 



charity and brotherly love. Political and religious discussions 
were from the first excluded from the debates of the order. In 
1851 the first grand lodge was established at New York; in 1856, 
the number of district lodges having increased, the supreme 
authority was vested in a central body consisting of one member 
from each lodge; and by the present constitution, adopted in 
1868, this authority is vested in a president elected for five years, 
an executive committee and court of appeals (elected as before). 
The first lodge in Germany was instituted at Berlin in 1883. A 
large number of charitable and other public institutions have 
been established in the United States and elsewhere by the order, 
of which may be mentioned the large orphan asylum in Cleveland, 
the home for the aged and infirm at Yonkers, N.Y., the National 
Jewish hospital for consumptives at Denver, and the Maimonides 
library in New York City. The B'nai B'rith society has also 
co-operated largely with other Jewish philanthropic organizations 
in succouring distressed Israelites throughout the world. 

See the Jewish Encyclopaedia (1902), s.v. 

BOA, a name formerly applied to all large serpents which, 
devoid of poison fangs, kill their prey by constriction; but now 
confined to that subfamily of the Boidae which are devoid of 
teeth in the praemaxilla and are without supraorbital bones. 
The others are known as pythons (q.v.). The true boas comprise 
some forty species; most of them are American, but the genus 
Eryx inhabits North Africa, Greece and south-western Asia; 
the. genus Enygrus ranges from New Guinea to the Fiji; Casarea 
dussumieri is restricted to Round Island, near Mauritius; and 
two species of Boa and one of Corallus represent this subfamily 
in Madagascar, while all the other boas live in America, chiefly 
in tropical parts. All Boidae possess vestiges of pelvis and hind 
limbs, appearing externally as claw-like spurs on each side of the 
vent, but they are so small that they are practically without 
function in climbing. The usually short tail is prehensile. 

One of the commonest species of the genus Boa is the Boa 
constrictor, which has a wide range from tropical Mexico to 
Brazil. The head is covered with small scales, only one of the 
preoculars being enlarged. The general colour is a delicate pale 
brown, with about a dozen and a half darker cross-bars, which are 
often connected by a still darker dorso-lateral streak, enclosing 
large oval spots. On each side is a series of large dark brown 
spots with light centres. On the tail the markings become 
bolder, brick red with black and yellow. The under parts are 
yellowish with black dots. This species rarely reaches a length 
of more than 10 ft. It climbs well, prefers open forest in the 
neighbourhood of water, is often found in plantations where it 
retires into a hole in the ground, and lives chiefly on birds and 
small mammals. Like most true boas, it is of a very gentle 
disposition and easily domesticates itself in the palm or reed 
thatched huts of the natives, where it hunts the rats during the 
night. 

The term* " boa " is applied by analogy to a long article of 
women's dress wound round the neck. 

80ABDIL (a corruption of the name Abu Abdullah), the last 
Moorish king of Granada, called el chico, the little, and also el 
zogoybi, the unfortunate. A son of Muley Abu'l Hassan, king of 
Granada, he was proclaimed king in 1482 in place of his father, 
who was driven from the land. Boabdil soon after sought to 
gain prestige by invading Castile. He was taken prisoner at 
Lucena in 1483, and only obtained his freedom by consenting to 
hold Granada as a tributary kingdom under Ferdinand and 
Isabella, king and queen of Castile and Aragon. The next few 
years were consumed in struggles with his father and his 
uncle Abdullah ez Zagal. In 1491 Boabdil was summoned by 
Ferdinand and Isabella to surrender the city of Granada, and 
on his refusal it was besieged by the Castilians. Eventually, in 
January 1492, Granada was surrendered, and the king spent 
some time on the lands which he was allowed to hold in Andalusia. 
Subsequently he crossed to Africa, and is said to have been 
killed in battle fighting for his kinsman, the ruler of Fez. The 
spot from which Boabdil looked for the last time on Granada is 
still shown, and is known as " the last sigh of the Moor " (el 
ultimo suspire del Moro). 



See J. A. Conde, Domin&eion de los Arabes en Espana (Paris, 
1840), translated into English by Mrs J. Foster (London, 1854- 
i855) ; Washington Irving, The Alhambra (New York, ed. 1880). 

BOADICEA, strictly Boudicca, a British queen in the time 
of the emperor Nero. Her husband Prasutagus ruled the Iceni 
(in what is now Norfolk) as an autonomous prince under Roman 
suzerainty. On his death (a.d. 6,1) without male heir, his 
dominions were annexed, and the annexation was carried out 
brutally. He had by his will divided his private wealth between 
his two daughters and Nero, trusting thereby to win imperial 
favour for his family. Instead, his wife was scourged (doubtless 
for resisting the annexation), his daughters outraged, his chief 
tribesmen plundered. The proud, fierce queen and her people 
rose, and not alone. With them rose half Britain, enraged, for 
other causes, at Roman rule. Roman taxation and conscription 
lay heavy on the province; in addition, the Roman government 
had just revoked financial concessions made a few years earlier, 
and L. Annaeus Seneca, who combined the parts of a moralist 
and a money-lender, had abruptly recalled large loans made 
from his private wealth to British chiefs. A favourable chance 
for revolt was provided by the absence of the governor-general, 
Suetonius Paulinus, and most of his troops in North Wales and 
Anglesey. All south-east Britain joined the movement. Paulinus 
rushed back without waiting for his troops, but he could do nothing 
alone. The Britons burnt the Roman municipalities of Verulam 
and Colchester, the mart of London, and several military posts, 
massacred " over 70,000 " Romans and Britons friendly to Rome, 
and almost annihilated the Ninth Legion marching from Lincoln 
to the rescue. At last Paulinus, who seems to have rejoined his 
army, met the Britons in the field. The site of the battle is 
unknown. One writer has put it at Chester; others at London, 
where King's Cross had once a narrow escape of being christened 
Boadicea's Cross, and actually for many years bore the name of 
Battle Bridge, in supposed reference to this battle. Probably, 
however, it was on Watling Street, between London and Chester. 
In a desperate soldiers' battle Rome regained the province. 
Boadicea took poison; thousands of Britons fell in the fight or 
were hunted down in the ensuing guerrilla. Finally, Rome 
adopted a kindlier policy, and Britain became quiet. But the 
scantiness of Romano-British remains in Norfolk may be due to 
the severity with which the Iceni were crushed. 

See Tacitus, Annals, xiv. ; Agric. xv. ; Dio lxii. The name 
Boudicca seems to mean in Celtic much the same as Victoria. 

(F. J. H.) 

BOAR (O. Eng. bar; the word is found only in W. Ger. 
languages, cf. Dutch beer, Ger. Eber), the name given to the un- 
castrated male of the domestic pig (q.v.), and to some wild species 
of the family Suidae (see Swine). The European wild boar (Sus 
scrofa) is distributed over Europe, northern Africa, and central 
and northern Asia. It has long been extinct in the British 
Isles, where it once abounded, but traces have been found of its 
survival in Chartley Forest, Staffordshire, in an entry of 1683 
in an account-book of the steward of the manor, and it possibly 
remained till much later in the more remote parts of Scotland 
and Ireland (J. E. Harting, Extinct British Animals, 1880). 
The wild boar is still found in Europe, in marshy woodland 
districts where there is plenty of cover, and it is fairly plentiful 
in Spain, Austria, Russia and Germany, particularly in the 
Black Forest. 

From the earliest times, owing to its great strength, speed, 
and ferocity when at bay, the boar has been one of the favourite 
beasts of the chase. Under the old forest laws of England it wat 
one of the " beasts of the forest," and, as such, under the Norman 
kings the unprivileged killing of it was punishable by death or 
the loss of a member. It was hunted in England and in Europe 
on foot and on horseback with dogs, while the weapon of attack 
was always the spear. In Europe the wild boar is still hunted 
with dogs, but the spear, except when used in emergencies and 
for giving the coup de grdce, has been given up for the gun. It 
is also shot in great forest drives in Austria, Germany and 
Russia. The Indian wild boar (Sus cristatus) is slightly taller 
than Sus scrofa, standing some 30 to 40 in. at the shoulder. It 



BOARD— BOASE 



95 



is found throughout India, Ceylon and Burma. Here the horse 
and spear are still used, and the sport is one of the most popular 
in India. (See Pig-sticking.) 

The boar is one of the four heraldic beasts of venery, and was 
the cognizance of Richard III., king of England. As an article 
of food the boar's head was long considered a special delicacy, 
and its serving was attended with much ceremonial. At Queen's 
College, Oxford, the dish is still brought on Christmas day in 
procession to the high-table, accompanied by the singing of a 
carol. 

BOARD (O. Eng. lord), a plank or long narrow piece of 
timber. The word comes into various compounds to describe 
boards used for special purposes, or objects like boards (drawing- 
board, ironing-board, sounding-board, chess-board, cardboard, 
back-board, notice-board, scoring-board). The phrase "to 
keep one's name on the boards," at Cambridge University, 
signifies to remain a member of a college; at Oxford it is " on 
the books." In bookbinding, pasteboard covers are called 
boards. Board was early used of a table, hence such phrases 
as "bed and board," "board and lodging"; or of a gaming- 
table, as in the phrase " to sweep the board," meaning to pocket 
all the stakes, hence, figuratively, to carry all before one. The 
same meaning leads to " Board of Trade," " Local Government 
Board," &c. 

From the meaning of border or side, and especially ship's 
side, comes " sea-board," meaning sea-coast, and the phrases 
"aboard" (Fr. abord), "over-board," "by the board"; 
similarly " weather-board," the side of a ship which is to wind- 
ward; " larboard and starboard " (the former of uncertain 
origin, Mid. Eng. laddeboard or latheboard; the latter meaning 
" steering side," O. Eng. steorbord, the rudder of early ships 
working over the steering side), signifying (to one standing at 
the stern and looking forward) the left and right sides of the 
ship respectively. 

BOARDING-HOUSE, a private house in which the proprietor 
provides board and lodging for paying guests. The position 
of a guest in a boarding-house differs in English law, to some 
extent, on the one hand from that of a lodger in the ordinary 
sense of the term, and on the other from that of a guest in an 
inn. Unlike the lodger, he frequently has not the exclusive 
occupation of particular rooms. Unlike the guest in an inn, 
his landlord has no lien upon his property for rent or any other 
debt due in respect of his board (Thompson v. Lacy, 1820,3 B. 
and Aid. 283). The landlord is under an obligation to take 
reasonable care for the safety of property brought by a guest 
into his house, and is liable for damages in case of breach of this 
obligation (Scarborough v. Cosgrove, 1903, 2 K.B. 803). Again, 
unlike the innkeeper, a boarding-house keeper does not hold 
himself out as ready to receive all travellers for whom he has 
accommodation, for which they are ready to pay, and of course 
he is entitled to get rid of any guest on giving reasonable notice 
(see Lamond v. Richard, 1897, 1 Q.B. 541, 548). What is 
reasonable notice depends on the terms of the contract; and, 
subject thereto, the course of payment of rent is a material 
circumstance (see Landlord and Tenant). Apparently the 
same implied warranty of fitness for habitation at the commence- 
ment of the tenancy which exists in the case of furnished lodg- 
ings (see Lodger and Lodgings) exists also in the case of 
boarding-houses; and the guest in a boarding-house, like a lodger, 
is entitled to all the usual and necessary conveniences of a 
dwelling-house. 

The law of the United States is similar to English law. 

Under the French Code Civil, claims for subsistence furnished 
to a debtor and his family during the last year of his life by 
boarding-house keepers (maitres de pension) are privileged over 
the generality of moveables, the privilege being exerciseable 
after legal expenses, funeral expenses, the expenses of the last 
illness, and the wages of servants for the year elapsed and what 
is due for the current year (art. 2101 (5)). Keepers of taverns 
(aubergistes) and hotels (hdteliers) are responsible for the goods 
of their guests — the committal of which to their custody is 
regarded as a deposit of necessity (dipdt necessaire). They are 



liable for the loss of such goods by theft, whether by servants 
or strangers, but not where the loss is due to force majeure (arts. 
1952-1954). Their liability for money and bearer securities not 
actually deposited is limited to 1000 francs (law of 18 th of April 
1889). These provisions are reproduced in substance in the 
Civil Codes of Quebec (arts. 1814, 1815, 1994, 2006) and of 
St Lucia (art. 1889). In Quebec, boarding-house keepers have 
a lien on the goods of their guests for the value or price of any 
food or accommodation furnished to them, and have also a right 
to sell their baggage and other property, if the amount remains 
unpaid for three months, under conditions similar to those 
imposed on innkeepers in England (art. 18 16 A; and see Inns 
and Innkeepers); also in the Civil Code of St Lucia (arts. 
iS78, 1714, 1715)- ' (A. W. R.) 

BOARDING-OUT SYSTEM, in the English poor law, the 
boarding-out of orphan or deserted children with suitable foster- 
parents. The practice was first authorized in 1868, though 
for many years previously it had been carried out by some 
boards of guardians on their own initiative. Boarding-out is 
governed by two orders of the Local Government Board, issued 
in 1 889. The first permits guardians to board-out children within 
their own union, except in the metropolis. The second governs 
the boarding-out of children in localities outside the union. 
The sum payable to the foster-parents is not to exceed 4s. per 
week for each child. 'The system has been much discussed by 
authorities on the administration of the poor law. It has been 
objected that few working-men with an average-sized family 
can afford to devote such an amount for the maintenance of 
each child, and that, therefore, boarded-out children are better 
off than the children of the independent (Fawcett, Pauperism). 
Working-class guardians, also, do not favour the system, being 
suspicious as to the disinterestedness of the foster-parents. 
On the other hand, it is argued that from the economic and 
educational point of view much better results are obtained by 
boarding-out children; they are given a natural life, and when 
they grow up they are without effort merged in the general 
population (Mackay, Hist. Eng. Poor Law). See also Poor 
Law. 

The " boarding-out " of lunatics is, in Scotland, a regular part 
of the lunacy administration. It has also been successfully 
adopted in Belgium. (See Insanity.) 

BOARDMAN, GEORGE DANA (1801-1831), American 
Baptist missionary, was born at Livermore, Me., and educated 
at Waterville College and Andover Theological Seminary. In 
1825 he went to India as a missionary, and in 1827 to Burma, 
where his promising work among the Karens was cut short 
by his early death. His widow married another well-known 
Burmese missionary, Adoniram Judson. 

His son, George Dana Boardman, the younger (1828-1903), 
made the voyage from Burma to America alone when six years 
of age. He graduated in 1852 at Brown University, and from 
the Newton Theological Institution in 1855. He held Baptist 
pastorates at Rochester (1856-1864), and at Philadelphia, and 
was president of the American Baptist Missionary Union, 1880- 
1884. At Philadelphia he is said to have taken his congregation 
through every verse of the New Testament in 643 Wednesday 
evening lectures, which occupied nearly eighteen years, and 
afterwards to have begun on the Old Testament in similar 
fashion. Among his published works are Studies in the Model 
Prayer (1879), and Epiphanies of the Risen Lord (1879). 

BOASE, HENRY SAMUEL (1799-1883), English geologist, 
the eldest son of Henry Boase (1763-1827), banker, of Madron, 
Cornwall, was born in London on the 2nd of September 1799. 
Educated partly at Tiverton grammar-school, and partly at 
Dublin, where he studied chemistry, he afterwards proceeded 
to Edinburgh and took the degree of M.D. in 1821. He then 
settled for some years as a medical practitioner at Penzance; 
there geology engaged his particular attention, and he became 
secretary of the Royal Geological Society of Cornwall. The 
results of his observations were embodied in his Treatise on 
Primary Geology (1834), a work of considerable merit in regard 
to the older crystalline and igneous rocks and the subject of 



9 6 



BOAT 



mineral veins. In 1837 he removed to London, where he 
remained for about a year, being elected F.R.S. In 1838 he 
became partner in a firm of bleachers at Dundee. He retired 
in 187 1, and died on the 5th of May 1883. 

BOAT (O. Eng. bdt; the true etymological connexion with 
Dutch and Ger. boot, Fr. bateau, Ital. battello presents great 
difficulties; Celtic forms are from O. Eng.), a comparatively 
small open craft for conveyance on water, usually propelled 
by some form of oar or sail. 

The origin of the word " boat " is probably to be looked 
for in the A.S. bat = 3. stem, a stick, a piece of wood. If 
this be so, the term in its inception referred to the material of 
which the primitive vessel was constructed, and in this respect 
may well be contrasted with the word " ship," of which the 
primary idea was the process by which the material was fashioned 
and adapted for the use of man. 

We may assume that primitive man, in his earliest efforts to 
achieve the feat of conveying himself and his belongings by 
water, succeeded in doing so — (1) by fastening together a 
quantity of material of sufficient buoyancy to float and carry 
him above the level of the water; (2) by scooping out a fallen 
tree so as to obtain buoyancy enough for the same purpose. 
In these two processes is to be found the genesis of both boat and 
ship, of which, though often used as convertible terms, the 
former is generally restricted to the smaller type of vessel such 
as is dealt with in this article. For the larger type the reader 
is referred to Ship. 

Great must have been the triumph of the man who first 
discovered that the rushes or the trunks he had managed to tie 
together would, propelled by a stick or a branch (cf. ramus and 
remus) used as pole or paddle, convey him safely across the river 
or lake, which had hitherto been his barrier. But use multiplies 
wants, discovers deficiencies, suggests improvements. Man soon 
found out that he wanted to go faster than the raft would move, 
that the water washed over and up through it, and this need of 
speed, and of dry carrying power, which we find operative 
throughout the history of the boat down to the present day, 
drove him to devise other modes of flotation as well as to try 
to improve his first invention. 

The invention of the hollowed trunk, of the " dug-out " 
(monoxylon), however it came about, whenever and wherever 
it came into comparison with the raft, must have superseded the 
latter for some purposes, though not by any means for all. It 
was superior to the raft in speed, and was, to a certain extent, 
water-tight. On the other hand it was inferior in carrying 
power and stability. But the two types once conceived had 
come to stay, and to them severally, or to attempts to combine 
the useful properties of both, may be traced all the varieties of 
vessel to which the name of boat may be applied. 

The development of the raft is admirably illustrated in the 
description, given us by Homer in the Odyssey, of the construc- 
tion by the hero Ulysses of a vessel of the kind. Floating timber 
is cut down and carefully shaped and planed with axe and adze, 
and the timbers are then exactly fitted face to face and com- 
pacted with trenails and dowels, just as the flat floor of a lump 
or lighter might be fashioned and fitted nowadays. A platform 
is raised upon the floor and a bulwark of osiers contrived to 
keep out the wash of the waves (cf. infra, Malay boats). It 
seems as if the poet, who was intimately acquainted with the 
sea ways of his time, intended to convey the idea of progress in 
construction, as illustrated by the technical skill of his hero, 
and the use of the various tools with which he supplies him. 

On the other hand the dug-out had its limitations. The 
largest tree that could be thrown and scooped out afforded but 
a narrow space for carrying goods, and presented problems as 
to stability which must have been very difficult to solve. The 
shaping of bow and stern, the bulging out of the sides, the 
flattening of the bottom, the invention of a keel piece, the 
attempt to raise the sides by building up with planks, all led 
on towards the idea of constructing a boat properly so called, or 
perhaps to the invention of the canoe, which in some ways may 
be regarded as the intermediate stage between dug-out and boat. 



Meanwhile the raft had undergone improvements such as 
those which Homer indicates. It had arrived at a floor composed 
of timbers squared and shaped. It had risen to a platform, the 
prototype of a deck. It was but a step to build up the sides and 
turn up the ends, and at this point we reach the genesis of ark 
and punt, of sanpan and junk, or, in other words, of all the many 
varieties of flat-bottomed craft. 

When once we have reached the point at which the improve- 
ments in the construction of the raft and dug-out bring them, 
as it were, within sight of each other, we can enter upon the 
history of the development of boats properly so called, which, 
in accordance with the uses and the circumstances that dictated 
their build, may be said to be descended from the raft or the 
dug-out, or from the attempt to combine the respective advan- 
tages of the two original types. 

Uses and circumstances are infinite in variety and have 
produced an infinite variety of boats. But we may safely say 
that in all cases the need to be satisfied, the nature of the material 
available, and the character of the difficulties to be overcome 
have governed the reason and tested the reasonableness of the 
architecture of the craft in use. 

It is not proposed in this article to enter at any length into 
the details of the construction of boats, but it is desirable, for 
the sake of clearness, to indicate certain broad distinctions 
in the method of building, which, though they run back into the 
far past, in some form or other survive and are in use at the 
present day. 

The tying of trunks together to form a raft is still not unknown 
in the lumber trade of the Danube or of North America, nor was 
it in early days confined to the raft. It extended to many 
boats properly so called, even to many of those built by the 
Vikings of old. It may still be seen in the Madras surf boats, 
and in those constructed out of driftwood by the inhabitants of 
Easter Island in the south Pacific. Virgil, who was an archae- 
ologist, represents Charon's boat on the Styx as of this con- 
struction, and notes the defect, which still survives, in the craft 
of the kind when loaded — 

" Gemuit sub pondere cymba 
Sutilis, et multam accepit rimosa paludem!" 

Aen. vi. 303. 

Next to the raft, and to be counted in direct descent from it-, 
comes the whole class of flat-bottomed boats including punts 
and lighters. As soon as the method of constructing a solid 
floor, with trenails and dowels, had been discovered, the method 
of converting it into a water-tight box was pursued, sides were 
attached plank fashion, with strong knees to stiffen them, and 
cross pieces to yoke or key (cf. £vyov, kAt/is) them together. 
These thwarts once fixed naturally suggested seats for those 
that plied the paddle or the oar. The ends of the vessel were 
shaped into bow or stern, either turned up, or with the side 
planking convergent in stem or stern post, or joined together 
fore and aft by bulkheads fitted in, while interstices were made 
water-tight by caulking, and by smearing with bitumen or some 
resinous material. 

The evolution of the boat as distinct from the punt, or flat- 
bottomed type, and following the configuration of the dug-out 
in its length and rounded bottom, must have taxed the inventive 
art and skill of constructors much more severely than that of 
the raft. It is possible that the coracle or the canoe may have 
suggested the construction of a framework of sufficient stiffness 
to carry a water-tight wooden skin, such as would successfully 
resist the pressure of wind and water. And in this regard two 
methods were open to the builder, both of which have survived 
to the present day: (1) the construction first of the shell of 
the boat, into which the stiffening ribs and cross ties were 
subsequently fitted; (2) the construction first of a framework 
of requisite size and shape, on to which the outer skin of the 
boat was subsequently attached. 

Further, besides the primitive mode of tying the parts to- 
gether, two main types of build must be noticed, in accord- 
ance with which a boat is said to be either carvel-built or 



BOAT 



97 



clinker-built, (i) A boat is carvel-built when the planks are 
laid edge to edge so that they present a smooth surface without. 
(2) A boat is clinker-built when each plank is laid on so as to 
overlap the one below it, thus presenting a series of ledges 
running longitudinally. 

The former method is said to be of Mediterranean, or perhaps 
of Eastern origin. The latter was probably invented by the 
old Scandinavian builders, and from them handed down through 
the fishing boats of the northern nations to our own time. 

The accounts of vessels used by the Egyptians and Phoe- 
nicians generally refer to larger craft which naturally fall under 
the head of Ship (q.v.). The Nile boats, however, 
boats described by Herodotus (ii. 60), built of acacia wood, 

were no doubt of various sizes, some of them quite 
small, but all following the same type of construction, built up 
brick fashion, the blocks being fastened internally to long poles 
secured by cross pieces, and the interstices caulked with papyrus. 
The ends rose high above the water, and to prevent hogging were 
often attached by a truss running longitudinally over crutches 
from stem to stern. 

The Assyrian and Babylonian vessels described by Herodotus 
(i. 194), built up of twigs and boughs, and covered with skins 
smeared with bitumen, were really more like huge coracles 
and hardly deserve the name of boats. 

The use of boats by the Greeks and Romans is attested by 
the frequent reference to them in Greek and Latin literature, 
though, as regards such small craft, the details given are 
hardly enough to form the basis of an accurate classification. 

We hear of small boats attendant on a fleet (KtkqTwv, Thuc. 
i. 53), and of similar craft employed in piracy (Thuc. iv. 9), and 
in one case of a sculling boat, or pair oar (cucanov aiufapiKov, 
Thuc. iv. 67), which was carted up and down between the town 
of Megara and the sea, being used for the purpose of marauding 
at night. We are also familiar with the passage in the Acts 
(xxvii.) where in the storm they had hard work "to come by 
the boat"; which same boat the sailors afterwards "let down 
into the sea, under colour as though they would have cast anchors 
out of the foreship," and would have escaped to land in her 
themselves, leaving the passengers to drown, if the centurion 
and soldiers acting upon St Paul's advice had not cut off the 
ropes of the boat and let her fall off. 

There can be little doubt that boat races were in vogue among 
the Greeks (see Prof. Gardner, Journal of Hellenic Studies, 
ii. 91 ff.), and probably formed part of the Panathenaic and 
Isthmian festivals. It is, however, difficult to prove that small 
boats took part in these races, though it is not unlikely that 
they may have done so. The testimony of the coins, such as it 
is, points to galleys, and the descriptive term (vtSiv a/uXXa) 
leads to the same conclusion. 

It is hardly possible now to define the differences which 
separated aKaros, anariov, from Ke\r)S, Kekqnov, or from 
Xe/i/3oJ, or Ka.pa.fios. They seem all to have been rowing 
boats, probably carvel-built, some with keels {acatii modo 
carinata, Plin. ix. 19), and to have varied in size, some being 
simply sculling boats, and others running up to as many as thirty 
oars. 

Similarly in Latin authors we have frequent mention of boats 
accompanying ships of war. Of this there is a well-known 
instance in the account of Caesar's invasion of Britain (B.C. 
iv. 26), when the boats of the fleet, and the pinnaces, were filled 
with soldiers and sent to assist the Legionaries who were being 
fiercely attacked as they waded on to the shore. There is also 
an instance in the civil war, which is a prototype of a modern 
attack of torpedo boats upon men of war, when Antonius manned 
the pinnaces of his large ships to the number of sixty, and with 
them attacked and defeated an imprudent squadron of Quad- 
riremes (B.C. hi. 24). The class of boats so frequently mentioned 
as actuariae seems to have contained craft of all sizes, and to 
have been used for all purposes, whether as pleasure boats or as 
despatch vessels, or for piracy. In fact the term was employed 
vaguely just as we speak of craft in general, 
iv. 4 



The lembus, which is often referred to in Livy and Polybius, 
seems to have been of Illyrian origin, with fine lines and sharp 
bows. The class contained boats of various sizes and with a 
variable number of oars (biremis, Livy xxiv. 40, sexdecim, 
Livy xxxiv. 35); and it is interesting to note the origin in this 
case, as the invention of the light Liburnian galleys, which won 
the battle of Actium, and altered the whole system of naval 
construction, came from the same seaboard. 

Besides these, the piratical myoparones (see Cic. In Verrem), 
and the poetical phaselus, deserve mention, but here again we 
are met with the difficulty of distinguishing boats from ships. 
There is also an interesting notice in Tacitus (Hist. iii. 47) of 
boats hastily constructed by the natives of the northern coast 
of Asia Minor, which he describes as of broad beam with narrow 
sides- (probably meaning that the sides "tumbled home"), 
joined together without any fastenings of brass or iron. In 
a sea-way the sides were raised with planks added till they were 
cased in as with a roof, whence their name camarae, and so they 
rolled about in the waves, having prow and stern alike and 
convertible rowlocks, so that it was a matter of indifference 
and equally safe, or perhaps unsafe, whichever way they 
rowed. 

Similar vessels were constructed by Germanicus in his north 
German campaign (Ann. ii. 6) and by the Suiones (Ger. 44). 
These also had stem and stern alike, and remind us of the old 
Norse construction, being rowed either way, having the oars 
loose in the rowlock, and not, as was usual in the south, attached 
by a thong to the thowl pin. 

Lastly, as a class of boat directly descended from the raft, 
we may notice the flat-bottomed boats or punts or lighters which 
plied on the Tiber as ferry-boats, or carrying go'ods, which were 
called codicariae from caudex, the old word for a plank. 

It is difficult to trace any order of development in the construc- 
tion of boats during the Byzantine period, or the middle ages. 
Sea-going vessels according to their size carried one or more 
boats, some of them small boats with two or four oars, others 
boats of a larger size fitted with masts and sail as well as with 
oars. We find lembus and phaselus as generic names in the 
earlier period, but the indications as to size and character are 
vague and variable. The same may be said of the batelli, coquets, 
chaloupes,chalans, gattes, &c, of which, in almost endless number 
and variety, the nautical erudition of M. Jal has collected the 
names in his monumental works, Archeologie navale and the 
Glossaire naulique. 

It is clear, however, that in many instances the names, 
originally applied to boats properly so called, gradually attached 
themselves to larger vessels, as in the case of chaloupe and others, 
a fact which leads to the conclusion that the type of build 
followed originally in smaller vessels was often developed on a 
larger scale, according as it was found useful and convenient, 
while the name remained the same. Many of these types still 
survive and may be found in the Eastern seas, or in the Mediter- 
ranean or in the northern waters, each of which has its own 
peculiarities of build and rig. 

It would be impossible within our limits to do justice to the 
number and variety of existing types in sea-going boats, and for 
more detailed information concerning them the reader 
would do well to consult Mast and Sail in Europe and E x,stIa z 
Asia, by H. Warington Smyth, an excellent and 
exhaustive work, from which much of the information which 
follows regarding them has been derived. 

In the Eastern seas the Chinese sanpan is ubiquitous. Origin- 
ally a small raft of three timbers with fore end upturned, it grew 
into a boat in very early times, and has given its name to a very 
large class of vessels. With flat bottom, and considerable width 
in proportion to its length, the normal sanpan runs out into two 
tails astern, the timbers rounding up, and the end being built 
in like a bulkhead, with room for the rudder to work between 
it and the transom which connects the two projecting upper 
timbers of the stern. Some of them are as much as 30 ft. in 

u 



9 8 



BOAT 



length and 8 to 10 ft. in beam. They are good carriers and 
speedy under sail. 

The Chinese in all probability were the earliest of all peoples 
to solve the chief problems of boat building, and after their own 
fashion to work out the art of navigation, which for them has 
now been set and unchanged for thousands of years. They 
appear to have used the lee-board and centre-board in junks and 
sanpans, and to have extended their trade to India and even 
beyond, centuries before anything like maritime enterprise is 
heard of in the north of Europe. 

As regards the practice of long boat racing on rivers or tidal 
waters the Chinese are easily antecedent in time to the rest of 
the world. On great festivals in certain places the Dragon boat 
race forms part of the ceremony. The Dragon boats are just 
over 73 ft. long, with 4 ft. beam, and depth 21 in. The rowing 
or paddling space is about 63 ft. and the number of thwarts 27, 
thus giving exactly the same number of rowers as that of the 
Zygites in the Greek trireme. The two extremities of the boat 
are much cambered and rise to about 2 ft. above the water. At 
about 1 5 ft. from each end the single plank gives place to three, 
so as to offer a concave surface to the water. The paddle blade 
is spade-like in form and about 65 in. broad. 

Both in Siam and Burma there is a very large river population, 
and boat racing is on festival days a common amusement. The 
typical craft, however, is the Duck-boat, which in the shape of 
hull is in direct contrast to the dug-out form, and primarily 
intended for sailing. It is interesting to note that the Siamese 
method of slinging and using quarter rudders is the oldest used 
by men in sailing craft, being in fact the earliest development 
from the simple paddle rudder, which has in all ages been the 
first method of steering boats. The king of Siam's state barge, 
we are told, is steered by long paddles, precisely in the same way 
as is figured in the case of the Egyptian boats of the 3rd dynasty 
(6000 B.C.). On the other hand the slung quarter rudders are the 
same in fashion as those used by Roman and Greek merchantmen, 
by Norsemen and Anglo-Saxons, and by medieval seamen down 
to about the 14th century. 

The Malays have generally the credit of being expert boat- 
builders, but the local conditions are not such as to favour the 
construction of a good type of boat. " Small displacement, 
hollow lines, V-shaped sections, shallow draught and lack of 
beam " result in want of stability and weatherliness. But it is 
among them that the ancient process of dug-out building still 
survives and flourishes, preserving all the primitive and ingenious 
methods of hollowing the tree trunk, of forcing its sides outwards, 
and in many cases building them up with added planks, so that 
from the dug-out a regular boat is formed, with increased though 
limited carrying power, increased though still hardly sufficient 
stability. 

To ensure this last very necessary quality many devices and 
contrivances are resorted to. 

In some cases (just as Ulysses is described as doing by Homer, 
Od. v. 256) the boatman fastens bundles of reeds or of bamboos 
all along the sides of his boat. These being very buoyant not 
only act as a defence against the wash of the waves, but are 
sufficient to keep the boat afloat in any sea. 

But the most characteristic device is the outrigger, a piece of 
floating wood sharpened at both ends, which is fixed parallel to 
the longer axis of the boat, at a distance of two or three beams, 
by two or more poles laid at right angles to it. This, while not 
interfering materially with the speed of the boat, acts as a 
counterpoise to any pressure on it which would tend, owing to its 
lack of stability, to upset it, and makes it possible for the long 
narrow dug-out to face even the open sea. It is remarkable 
that this invention, which must have been seen by the Egyptians 
and Phoenicians in very early times, was not introduced by them 
into the Mediterranean. Possibly this was owing to the lack of 
large timber suitable for dug-outs, and the consequent evolution 
by them of boat from raft, with sufficient beam to rely upon for 
stability. 

On the other hand in the boats of India the influence of 
Egyptian and Arab types of build is apparent, and the dinghy of 



the Hugh is cited as being in form strangely like the ancient 
Egyptian model still preserved in the Ghizeh museum. Coming 
westward the dominant type of build is that of the Arab dhow, 
the boat class of which has all the characteristics of the larger 
vessel developed from it, plenty of beam, overhanging stem and 
transom stern. The planking of the shell over the wooden frame 
has a double thickness which conduces to dryness and durability 
in the craft. 

On the Nile it is interesting to find the naggar preserving, in its 
construction out of blocks of acacia wood pinned together, the 
old-world fashion of building described by Herodotus. The 
gaiassa and dahabiah are too large to be classed as boats, but they 
and their smaller sisters follow the Arab type in build and rig. 

It is noteworthy that nothing apparently of the ancient 
Egyptian or classical methods of build survives in the Mediter- 
ranean, while the records of the development of boat-building 
in the middle ages are meagre arid confusing. The best illustra- 
tions of ancient methods of construction, and of ancient seaman- 
ship, are to be found, if anywhere, in the East, that conservative 
storehouse of types and fashions, to which they were either 
communicated, or from which they were borrowed, by Egyptians 
or Phoenicians, from whom they were afterwards copied by 
Greeks and Romans. 

In the Mediterranean the chief characteristics of the types 
belonging to it are " carvel-build, high bow, round stern and 
deep rudder hung on stern post outside the vessel." 

In the eastern basin the long-bowed wide-sterned caique of the 
Bosporus is perhaps the type of boat best known, but both Greek 
and Italian waters abound with an unnumbered variety of boats 
of " beautiful lines and great carrying power." In the Adriatic, 
the Venetian gondola, and the light craft generally, are of the 
type developed from the raft, flat-bottomed, and capable of 
navigating shallow waters with minimum of draught and 
maximum of load. 

In the western basin the majority of the smaller vessels are of 
the sharp-sterned build. Upon the boats of the felucca class, 
long vessels with easy lines and low free-board, suitable for 
rowing as well as sailing, the influence of the long galley of the 
middle ages was apparent. In Genoese waters at the beginning 
of the 19th century there were single-decked rowing vessels, 
which preserved the name of galley, and were said to be the 
descendants of the Liburnians that defeated the many-banked 
vessels of Antonius at Actium. But the introduction of steam 
vessels has already relegated into obscurity these memorials 
of the past. 

Along the Riviera and the Spanish coast a type of boat is 
noticeable which is peculiar for the inward curve of both stem 
and stern from a keel which has considerable camber, enabling 
them to be beached in a heavy surf. 

On the Douro, in Portugal, it is said that the boats which may 
be seen laden with casks of wine, trailing behind them an 
enormously long steering paddle, are of Phoenician ancestry, 
and that the curious signs, which many of them have painted on 
the cross board over the cabin, are of Semitic origin though now 
undecipherable. 

Coming to the northern waters, as with men, so with boats, 
we meet with a totally different type. Instead of the smooth 
exterior of the carvel-build, we have the more rugged form of 
clinker-built craft with great beam, and raking sterns and stems, 
and a wide flare forward. In the most northern waters the 
strakes of the sea-going boats are wide and of considerable 
thickness, of oak or fir, often compacted with wooden trenails, 
strong and fit to do battle with the rough seas and rough usage 
which they have to endure. 

In most of these the origin of form and character is to be 
sought for in the old Viking vessels or long keeles of the 5th century 
A.D., with curved and elevated stem and stern posts, and without 
decks or, at the most, half decked. 

In the Baltic and the North Sea most of the fishing boats 
follow this type, with, however, considerable variety in details. 
It is noticeable that here also, as in other parts of the world, and 
at other times, the pressing demand for speed and carrying power 



BOAT 



99 



has increased the size in almost all classes of boats till they pass 
into the category of ships. At the same time the carvel-build is 
becoming more common, while, in the struggle for life, steam and 
motor power are threatening to obliterate the old types of rowing 
and sailing boats altogether. 

Next to the Norse skiff and its descendants, perhaps the oldest 
type of boat in northern waters is to be found in Holland, 
where the conditions of navigation have hardly altered for 
centuries. It is to the Dutch that we chiefly owe the original 
of our pleasure craft, but, though we have developed these 
enormously, the Dutch boats have remained pretty much the 
same. The clinker-build and the wide rounded bow are now 
very much of the same character as they are represented in the 
old pictures of the 17th and 18th centuries. 

The development of boat-building in the British Isles during 
the 19th century has been unceasing and would need a treatise 
to itself to do it justice. The expansion of the fishing industry 
and the pressure of competition have stimulated constant 
improvement in the craft engaged, and here also are observable 
the same tendencies to substitute carvel, though it is more 
expensive, for clinker build, and to increase the length and size 
of the boats, and the gradual supersession of sail and oar by steam 
Dower. Under these influences we hear of the fifie and the 
skqffie classes, old favourites in northern waters, being superseded 
by the more modern Zulu, which is supposed to unite the good 
qualities of both; and these in turn running to such a size as to 
take them outside the category of boats. But even in the case 
of smaller boats the Zulu model is widely followed, so that they 
have actually been imported to the Irish coast for the use of the 
crofter fishermen in the congested districts. 

For the Shetland sexem and the broad boats of the Orkneys, 
and the nabbies of the west coast of Scotland, the curious will do 
well to refer to H. Warington Smyth's most excellent account. 

On the eastern coast of England the influence of the Dutch 
type of build is manifest in many of the flat-bottomed and mostly 
round-ended craft, such as the Yorkshire Billyboy, and partly in 
the coble, which latter is interesting as built for launching off 
beaches against heavy seas, and as containing relics of Norse 
influence, though in the main of Dutch origin. 

The life-boats of the eastern coast are in themselves an admir- 
able class of boat, with fine lines, great length, and shallow 
draught, wonderful in their daring work in foul weather and 
heavy seas, in which as a rule their services are required. Here, 
however, as in the fishing boats, the size is increasing, and steam 
is appropriating to itself the provinces of the sail and the oar. 

The wherry of the Norfolk Broads has a type of its own, and is 
often fitted out as a pleasure boat. It is safe and comfortable for 
inland waters, but not the sort of boat to live in a sea-way in 
anything but good weather. 

The Thames and its estuary rejoice in a great variety of boats, 
of which the old Peter boat (so called after the legend of the 
foundation of the abbey on Thorney Island) preserved a very 
ancient type of build, shorter and broader than the old Thames 
pleasure wherry. But these and the old hatch boat have now 
almost disappeared. Possibly survivors may still be seen on the 
upper part of the tidal river. Round the English coast from the 
mouth of the Thames southwards the conditions of landing and 
of hauling up boats above high-water mark affect the type, 
demanding strong clinker-build and stout timbers. Hence there 
is a strong family resemblance in most of the short boats in use 
from the North Foreland round to Brighton. Among these are 
the life-boats of Deal and the other Channel ports, which have 
done and are still doing heroic work in saving life from wrecks 
upon the Goodwins and the other dangerous shoals that beset 
the narrowing sleeve of the English Channel. 

Farther down, along the southern coast, and to the west, where 
harbours are more frequent, a finer and deeper class of boats, 
chiefly of carvel-build, is to be found. The Cornish ports are the 
home of a great boat-building industry, and from them a large 
number of the finest fishing boats in the world are turned out 
annually. Most of them are built with stem and stern alike, with 
full and bold quarters, and ample floor. 



13* 4' 8" 



16 



25 



4' 6" 
5' 6" 



27 5' 6" 



30 5' 6" 



30 


8'i" 


2' 8$' 


36 


10' 2" 


3' 5" 


42 


n' 6" 


4' 6" 



It is not possible here to enumerate, much less to describe 
in detail, the variety of types in sea-going boats which have 
been elaborated in England and in America. For this purpose 
reference should be made to the list of works given at the end oi 
the article. 

The following is a list of the boats at present used in the royal 
navy. They have all of them a deep fore foot, and with the 
exception of the whalers and Berthon boats, upright stems and 
transom sterns. The whalers have a raking stem and a sharp 
stern, and a certain amount of sheer in the bows. 

Length. Beam. Depth. 
Feet. Ft. In. Ft. In. 

la. Dinghy. Freeboard about 9 in. 

Weight 3 cwt. 2 qr. Between 

thwarts 2 ft. 9 in. Elm 
lb. Skiff dinghy for torpedo boats. Free- 
board about 9 in. Carry about 

ten men in moderate weather. 

Between thwarts 2 ft. 7J in. 

Weight 3 cwt. 4B5. Yellow pine . 
2a. Whaler for destroyers. 5 in. sheer. 

Yellow pine 

2b. Whaler. Between thwarts 2 ft. 10 in. 

Freeboard about 12 in. Weight, 

8 cwt. Strakes No. 13. Lap 

f in. Elm 

(All have bilge strakes with hand-holes.) 

3. Gig. Between thwarts 2 ft. 9J in. 

Weight 8 cwt. 2 qr. 15 lb. 13 
Strakes. Elm 

4. Cutter. Between thwarts 3 ft. 1 in. 

To carry 49 men. Carvel built 

5. Pinnace. Between thwarts 3 ft. 

Carvel-built. Elm .... 

6. Launch. Between thwarts 3 ft. 1 in. 

To carry 140 men. Double skin 
diagonal. Teak .... 

7. Berthon collapsible boats weighing 

7 cwt. for destroyers. 

With the exception of the larger classes, viz. cutters, pinnaces 
and launches, the V-shape of bottom is still preserved, which 
does not tend to stability, and it is difficult to see why the 
smaller classes have not followed the improvement made in their 
larger sisters. 

Though the number and variety of sea-going boats is of much 
greater importance, no account of boats in general would be com- 
plete without reference to the development of pleasure 
craft upon rivers and inland waters, especially in '^lats'and 
England, during the past century. There is a legend, racing. 
dating from Saxon times, which tells of King Edgar 
the Peaceable being rowed on the Dee from his palace in Chester 
to the church of St John, by eight kings, himself the ninth, 
steering this ancient 8-oar; but not much is heard of rowing 
in England until 1453, when John Norman, lord mayor of 
London, set the example of going by water to Westminster, 
which, we are told, made him popular with the watermen of his 
day, as in consequence the use of pleasure boats by the citizens 
became common. Thus it was that the old Thames pleasure 
wherry, with its high bows and low sharp stern and V-shaped 
section, and the old skiff came into vogue, both of which have 
now given way to boats, mostly of clinker-build, but with 
rounder bottoms and greater depth, safer and more comfortable 
to row in. 

In 171 s Thomas Doggett (q.v.) founded a race which is still 
rowed in peculiar sculling boats, straked, and with sides flaring 
up to the sill of the rowlock. Strutt tells us of a regatta in 1775 
in which watermen contended in pair-oared boats or skiffs. 

At the beginning of the 19th century numerous rowing clubs 
flourished on the upper tidal waters of the Thames, and we hear 
of four-oared races from Westminster to Putney, and from 
Putney to Kew, in what we should now consider large and 
heavy boats, clinker-built, with bluff entry. 

Longer boats, 8-oars, and 10-oars, seem to have been ex- 
istent at the end of the 18th century. Eton certainly had one 
10-oar, and three 8-oars, and two 6-oars, before 1811. The 
record of 8-oar races at Oxford begins in 1815, at Cambridge in 



IOO 



BOATSWAIN— BOBER 



1827. Pair-oar and sculling races in lighter boats seem to have 
come in soon after 1820, and the first Oxford and Cambridge 
eight-oared race was rowed in 1829, in which year also Eton 
and Westminster contended at Putney. 

Henley regatta was founded in 1839, and since that date the 
building of racing boats, eights, fours, pairs, and sculling boats, 
has made great progress. The products of the present time are 
such, in lightness of build and swiftness of propulsion, as 
would have been thought impossible between 1810 and 1830. 

In the middle of the 19th century the long boats in use were 
mostly clinker-built with a keel. At Oxford the torpids were 
rowed, as now, in clinker-built craft, but the summer races 
were rowed in carvel-built boats, which also had a keel. 

In 1855 the first keelless 8-oar made its appearance at 
Henley, built by Mat Taylor for the Royal Chester Rowing Club. 
The new type was constructed on moulds, bottom upwards, 
a cedar skin bent and fitted on to the moulds, and the ribs built 
in after the boat had been turned over. 

In 1857 Oxford rowed in a similar boat at Putney, 55 ft. long, 
25 in. beam. From that time the keelless racing boat has held 
its own, fours and pairs and sculling boats all following suit. 
But with the introduction of sliding seats racing eights have 
developed in length to 63 ft. or more, with considerable camber, 
and a beam of 23-24 in. There are, however, still advocates of 
the shorter type with broader beam, and it is noticeable that 
the Belgian boat that won the Grand Challenge at Henley in 
1906 did not exceed 60 ft. The boat in which Oxford won the 
University race in 1901 was 56 ft. long with 27 in. of beam. 

In sculling boats the acceptance of the Australian type of 
build has led to the construction of a much shorter boat with 
broader beam than that which was in vogue twenty years ago. 
The same tendency has not shown itself so pronouncedly in pair 
oars, but will no doubt be manifest in time as the build improves. 
In fact we may expect the controversy between long and short 
racing boats, and the proper method of propelling them re- 
spectively, to be carried a step farther. The tendency, with the 
long slide, and long type of boat, is to try to avoid "pinch" 
by adopting the scullers' method of easy beginning, and strong 
drive with the legs, and sharp finish to follow, but it remains 
to be seen whether superior pace is not to be obtained in a 
shorter boat by sharp beginning at a reasonable angle to 
the boat's side, and a continuous drive right out to the finish 
of the stroke. 

Appended is a list of pleasure boats in use (1909) on the 
Thames, with their measurements (in feet and inches). 



Depth. 
9" to 10" 
9" to 10" 
8" to 9" 
13" from keel to 

top of stem 
7" to 8" 
51" to 6" 
iol" to 14" 
12" 

9i' 

15" to 16" 

13" from keel to 

top of stem 
6" from keel to 

top of stem 
12" over all 
6" to 7" 
9" to 10J" 
12" to 13" 



Authorities. — For ancient boats: Diet. Ant., " Navis "; C. Torr, 
Ancient Ships; Smith, Voyage and Shipwreck of St Paul; Graser, 
De re navali; Breusing, Die Nautik der Alten; Contre-amiral Serre, 
La Marine des anciens; Jules Var, V Art nautique dans Vantiquite. 
Medieval: Jal, Archeologie navale, and Glossaire nautique; Marquis 
de Folin, Bateaux et navires, progris de la construction navale; 
W. S. Lindsay, History of Merchant Shipping and Ancient Commerce. 
Modern: H. Warington Smyth, Mast and Sail in Europe and Asia; 
Dixon Kempe, Manual of Yacht and Boat Sailing; H. C. Folkhard, 
The Sailing Boat; F. G. Aflalo, The Sea Fishing Industry of England 
and Wales; R. C. Leslie, Old Sea Wings, &c. (E. Wa.) 



Class of Boat. 


Length. 


Beam. 


Racing eight 


• 56' to 63' 


23" to 27" 


Clinker eight . 


. 56' to 60' 


24" to 27" 


Clinker four 


. 38' to 42' 


23" to 24" 


Tub fours . 


• 3°' to 32' 


3'8"- 3 ' 10" 


Outrigger pair 


30' to 34' 


14" to 16" 


Outrigger sculls 


• 25' to 30' 


10" to 13" 


Coaching gigs . 


. 26' to 28' 


3' to 3' 4" 


Skiffs (Thames) 


. 24' to 26' 


3' 9" to 4' 


Skiffs (Eton) . 


27' 


2/ 3" 


Gigs (pleasure) . 


. 24' to 26' 


4' 


Randans 


. 27' to 30' 


4' to 4' 6" 


Whiffs . . . 


20' to 23' 


1' 4" to i'6" 


Whiff Gigs 


19' to 20' 


2' 8" to 2' 10" 


Punts racers 


30' to 34' 


1' 3" to 1' 6" 


,, semi racers 


28' to 30' 


2' 


„ pleasure 


26' to 28' 


2' 9" to 3' 



BOATSWAIN (pronounced " bo 'sun "; derived from " boat " 
and " swain," a servant), the warrant officer of the navy who 
in sailing-ships had particular charge of the boats, sails, rigging, 
colours, anchors and cordage. He superintended the rigging 
of the ship in dock, and it was his duty to summon the crew 
to work by a whistle. The office still remains, though with 
functions modified by the introduction of steam. In a merchant 
ship the boatswain is the foreman of the crew and is sometimes 
also third or fourth mate. 

BOBBILI, a town of British India, in the Vizagapatam district 
of Madras, 70 m. north of Vizagapatam town. Pop. (1901) 
17,387. It is the residence of a raja of old family, whose estate 
covers an area of 227 sq. m.; estimated income, £40,000; 
permanent land revenue, £9000. 

The attack on the fort at Bobbili made by General Bussy in 
1756 is one of the most memorable episodes in Indian history. 
There was a constant feud between the chief of Bobbili and the 
raja of Vizianagram; and when Bussy marched to restore order 
the raja persuaded him that the fault lay with the chief of 
Bobbili and joined the French with 11,000 men against his rival. 
In spite of the fact that the French field-pieces at once made 
practicable breaches in the mud walls of the fort, the defenders 
held out with desperate valour. Two assaults were repulsed 
after hours of hand-to-hand fighting; and when, after a fresh 
bombardment, the garrison saw that their case was hopeless, 
they killed their women and children, and only succumbed at 
last to a third assault because every man of them was either 
killed or mortally wounded. An old man, however, crept out 
of a hut with a child, whom he presented to Bussy as the son 
of the dead chief. Three nights later four followers of the chief 
of Bobbili crept into the tent of the raja of Vizianagram and 
stabbed him to death. The child, Chinna Ranga Rao, was 
invested by Bussy with his father's estate, but during his minority 
it was seized by his uncle. After a temporary arrangement of 
terms with the raja of Vizianagram the old feud broke out again, 
and the Bobbili chief was forced to take refuge in the nizam's 
country. In 1794, however, on the break-up of the Vizianagram 
estate, Chinna Ranga Rao was restored by the British, and 
in 1801 a permanent settlement was made with his son. The 
title of raja was recognized as hereditary in the family; that 
of maharaja was conferred as a personal distinction on Sir 
Venkataswetachalapati Ranga Rao, K.C.I.E., the adopted 
great-great-grandson of Chinna Ranga Rao. 

For the siege see Imp. Gazetteer of India (Oxford, 1908), s. v. 
" Bobbili Estate." 

BOBBIO, a town and episcopal see of Lombardy, Italy, in the 
province of Pa via, 32! m. S.W. of Piacenza by road. Pop. 
(1901) 4848. Its most important building is the church dedicated 
to St Columban, who became first abbot of Bobbio in 595 or 612, 
and died there in 615. It was erected in Lombard style in the 
nth or 1 2th century (to which period the campanile belongs) 
and restored in the 13th. The cathedral is also interesting. 
Bobbio was especially famous for the manuscripts which belonged 
to the monastery of St Columban, and are now dispersed, the 
greater part being in the Vatican library at Rome, and others 
at Milan and Turin. The cathedral archives contain documents 
of the 10th and nth centuries. 

See M. Stokes, Six Months in the Apennines (London, 1892), 154 
seq.; C. Cipolla, in L 'Arte (1904), 241. 

BOBER, a river of Germany, the most considerable of the 
left bank tributaries of the Oder; it rises at an altitude of 2440 ft., 
on the northern (Silesian) side of the Riesengebirge. In its 
upper course it traverses a higher plateau, whence, after passing 
the town of Landeshut, it descends through a narrow and fertile 
valley to Kupferberg. Here its romantic middle course begins, 
and after dashing through a deep ravine between the towns of 
Hirschberg and Lowenberg, it gains the plain. In its lower 
course it meanders through pleasant pastures, bogland and pine 
forests in succession, receives the waters of various mountain 
streams, passes close by Bunzlau and through Sagan, and finally, 
after a course of 160 m., joins the Oder at Crossen. Swollen by 
the melting of the winter snows and by heavy rains in the 



BOBRUISK— BOCAGE 



IOI 



mountains, it is frequently a torrent, and is thus, except in the 
last few miles, unnavigable for either boats or rafts. 

BOBRUISK, a town and formerly a first-class fortress of 
Russia, in the government of Minsk, and ioo m. by rail S.E. 
of the town of Minsk, in 53° 15' N. lat. and 28° 52' E. long., on 
the right bank of the Berezina river, and on the railway from 
Libau and Vilna to Ekaterinoslav. Pop. (i860) 23,761; (1897) 
35,177, of whom one-half were Jews. In the reign of Alexander I. 
there was erected here, at the confluence of the Bobruiska with 
the Berezina, nearly a mile from the town, a fort, which success- 
fully withstood a bombardment by Napoleon in 181 2, and was 
made equal to the best in Europe by the emperor Nicholas I. 
It was demolished in 1897, the defences being antiquated. The 
town has a military hospital and a departmental college. There 
are ironworks and flour-mills; and corn and timber are shipped 
to Libau. The town was half burnt down in 1902. 

BOCAGE, MANUEL MARIA BARBOSA DE (1765-1805), 
Portuguese poet, was a native of Setubal. His father had held 
important judicial and administrative appointments, and his 
mother, from whom he took his last surname, was the daughter 
of a Portuguese vice-admiral of French birth who had fought 
at the battle of Matapan. Bocage began to make verses in 
infancy, and being somewhat of a prodigy grew up to be flattered, 
self-conscious and unstable. At the age of fourteen, he suddenly 
left school and joined the 7th infantry regiment; but tiring of 
garrison life at Setubal after' two years, he decided to enter the 
navy. He proceeded to the royal marine academy in Lisbon, 
but instead of studying he pursued love adventures, and for the 
next five years burnt incense on many altars, while his retentive 
memory and extraordinary talent for improvisation gained him 
a host of admirers and turned his head. The Brazilian modinhas, 
little rhymed poems sung to a guitar at family parties, were then 
in great vogue, and Bocage added to his fame by writing a number 
of these, by his skill in extemporizing verses on a given theme, 
and by allegorical idyllic pieces, the subjects of which are similar 
to those of Watteau's and Boucher's pictures. In 1786 he was 
appointed gimrdamarinha in the Indian navy, and he reached 
Goa by way of Brazil in October. There he came into an ignorant 
society full of petty intrigue, where his particular talents found 
no scope to display themselves; the glamour of the East left 
him unmoved and the climate brought on a serious illness. In 
these circumstances he compared the heroic traditions of Portugal 
in Asia, which had induced him to leave home, with the reality, 
and wrote his satirical sonnets on " The Decadence of the 
Portuguese Empire in Asia," and those addressed to Affonso 
de Albuquerque and D. Joao de Castro. The irritation caused 
by these satires, together with rivalries in love affairs, made it 
advisable for him to leave Goa, and early in 1 789 he obtained the 
post of lieutenant of the infantry company at Damaun; but 
he promptly deserted and made his way to Macao, where he 
arrived in July- August. According to a modern tradition much 
of the Lusiads had been written there, and Bocage probably 
travelled to China under the influence of Camoens, to whose life 
and misfortunes he loved to compare his own. Though he 
escaped the penalty of his desertion, he had no resources and 
lived on friends, whose help enabled him to return to Lisbon in 
the middle of the following year. 

Once back in Portugal he found his old popularity, and 
resumed his vagabond existence. The age was one of reaction 
against the Pombaline reforms, and the famous, intendant of 
police, Manique, in his determination to keep out French revolu- 
tionary and atheistic propaganda, forbade the importation of 
foreign classics and the discussion of all liberal ideas. Hence 
the only vehicle of expression left was satire, which Bocage 
employed with an unsparing hand. His poverty compelled him 
to eat and sleep with friends like the turbulent friar Jose Agos ; 
tinho de Macedo (q.v.), and he soon fell under suspicion with 
Manique. He became a member of the New Arcadia, a literary 
society founded in 1790, under the name of Elmano Sadino, but 
left it three years later. Though including in its ranks most 
of the poets of the time, the New Arcadia produced little of 
real merit, and before long its adherents became enemies and 



descended to an angry warfare of words. But Bocage's reputa- 
tion among the general public and with foreign travellers grew 
year by year. Beckford, the author of Vathek, for instance, 
describes him as " a pale, limber, odd-looking young man, the 
queerest but perhaps the most original of God's poetical creatures. 
This strange and versatile character may be said to possess 
the true wand of enchantment which at the will of its master 
either animates or petrifies." In 1797 enemies of Bocage belong- 
ing to the New Arcadia delated him to Manique, who on the 
pretext afforded by some anti-religious verses, the Epistola 
a Marilia, and by his loose life, arrested him when he was about 
to flee the country and lodged him in the Limoeiro, where he 
spent his thirty-second birthday. His sufferings induced him 
to a speedy recantation, and after much importuning of friends, 
he obtained his transfer in November from the state prison to 
that of the Inquisition, then a mild tribunal, and shortly after- 
wards recovered his liberty. He returned to his bohemian life 
and subsisted by writing empty Elogios Dramaticos for the 
theatres, printing volumes of verses and translating the didactic 
poems of Delillc, Castel and others, some second-rate French 
plays and Ovid's Metamorphoses. These resources and the help 
of brother Freemasons just enabled him to exist, and a purifying 
influence came into his life in the shape of a real affection for the 
two beautiful daughters of D. Antonio Bersane Leite, which 
drew from him verses of true feeling mixed with regrets for the 
past. He would have married the younger lady, D. Anna 
Perpetua (Analia), but excesses had ruined his health. In 1801 
his poetical rivalry with Macedo became more acute and personal, 
and ended by drawing from Bocage a stinging extempore poem, 
Pena de Taliao, which remains a monument to his powers of 
invective. In 1804 the malady from which he suffered increased, 
and the approach of death inspired some beautiful sonnets, 
including one directed to D. Maria (Maroia), elder sister of 
Analia, who visited and consoled him. He became reconciled 
to his enemies, and breathed his last on the 21st of December 
1805. His end recalled that of Camoens, for he expired in 
poverty on the eve of the French invasion, while the singer of 
the Lusiads just failed to see the occupation of Portugal by the 
duke of Alva's army. The gulf that divides the life and.achieve- 
ments of these two poets is accounted for, less by difference of 
talent and temperament than by their environment, and it 
gives an accurate measure of the decline of Portugal in the two 
centuries that separate 1580 from 1805. 

To Beckford, Bocage was " a powerful genius," and Link 
was struck by his nervous expression, harmonious versification 
and the fire of his poetry. He employed every variety of lyric 
and made his mark in all. His roundels are good, his epigrams 
witty, his satires rigorous and searching, his odes often full of 
nobility, but his fame must rest on his sonnets, which almost 
rival those of Camoens in power, elevation of thought and tender 
melancholy, though they lack the latter's scholarly refinement 
of phrasing. So dazzled were contemporary critics by his 
brilliant and inspired extemporizations that they ignored 
Bocage's licentiousness, and overlooked the slightness of his 
creative output and the artificial character of most of his 
poetry. In 1871 a monument was erected to the poet in the 
chief square of Setubal, and the centenary of his death was 
kept there with much circumstance in 1905. 

The best editions of his collected works are those of I. F. da 
Silva, with a biographical and literary study by Rebello da Silva, in 
6 vols. (Lisbon, 1853), and of Dr Theophilo Braga, in 8 vols. (Oporto, 
1875-1876). See also I. F. da Silva. Diccionario Bibliographico 
Portuguez, vol. vi. pp. 45-53, and vol. xvi. pp. 260-264; Dr T. Braga, 
Bocage, sua vida e epocalitteraria, (Oporto, 1902). A striking portrait 
of Bocage by H. J. da Silva was engraved by Bartolozzi, who spent 
his last years in Lisbon. (E. Pr.) 

BOCAGE (from 0. Fr. boscage, Late Lat. boscum, a wood), a 
French topographical term applied to several regions of France, 
the commonest characteristics of which are a granite formation 
and an undulating or hilly surface, consisting largely of heath 
or reclaimed land, and dotted with clumps of trees. The 
most important districts designated by the word are (1) the 
Bocage of Normandy, which comprises portions of the 



102 



BOCCACCIO 



departments of Calvados, Manche and Orne; (2) the Bocage of 
Vendee, situated in the departments of Vendee, Deux-Sevres, 
Maine-et-Loire, and Loire-Inferieure. 

BOCCACCIO, GIOVANNI (1313-1375), Italian author, whose 
Decameron is one of the classics of literature, was born in 13 13, 
as we know from a letter of Petrarch, in which that poet, 
who was born in 1304, calls himself the senior of his friend by- 
nine years. The place of his birth is somewhat doubtful — 
Florence, Paris and Certaldo being all mentioned by various 
writers as his native city. Boccaccio undoubtedly calls himself 
a Florentine, but this may refer merely to the Florentine citizen- 
ship acquired by his grandfather. The claim of Paris has been 
supported by Baldelli and Tiraboschi, mainly on the ground 
that his mother was a lady of good family in that city, where 
she met Boccaccio's father. There is a good deal in favour of 
Certaldo, a small town or castle in the valley of the Elsa, 20 m. 
from Florence, where the family had some property, and where 
the poet spent much of the latter part of his life. He always 
signed his name Boccaccio da Certaldo, and named that town 
as his birthplace in his own epitaph. Petrarch calls his friend 
Certaldese; and Filippo Villani, a contemporary, distinctly says 
that Boccaccio was born in Certaldo. 

Boccaccio, an illegitimate son, as is put beyond dispute by the 
fact that a special licence had to be obtained when he desired 
to become a priest, was brought up with tender care by his 
father, who seems to have been a merchant of respectable rank. 
His elementary education he received from Giovanni da Strada, 
an esteemed teacher of grammar in Florence. But at an early 
age he was apprenticed to an eminent merchant, with whom he 
remained for six years, a time entirely lost to him, if we may 
believe his own statement. For from his tenderest years his soul 
was attached to that " alma poesis," which, on his tombstone, 
he names as the task and study of his life. In one of his works 
he relates that, in his seventh year, before he had ever seen 
a book of poetry or learned the rules of metrical composition, 
he began to write verse in his childish fashion, and earned for 
himself amongst his friends the name of " the poet." It is un- 
certain where Boccaccio passed these six years of bondage; 
most likely he followed his master to various centres of commerce 
in Italy and France. We know at least that he was in Naples 
and Paris for some time, and the youthful impressions received 
in the latter city, as well as the knowledge of the French 
language acquired there, were of considerable influence on his 
later career. Yielding at last to his son's immutable aversion 
to commerce, the elder Boccaccio permitted him to adopt a 
course of study somewhat more congenial to the literary tastes 
of the young man. He was sent to a celebrated professor of 
canon law, at that time an important field of action both to the 
student and the practical jurist. According to some accounts 
—far from authentic, it is true — this professor was Cino da 
Pistoia, the friend of Dante, and himself a celebrated poet and 
scholar. But, whoever he may have been, Boccaccio's master 
was unable to inspire his pupil with scientific ardour. " Again," 
Boccaccio says, " I lost nearly six years. And so nauseous was 
this study to my mind, that neither the teaching of my master, 
nor the authority and command of my father, nor yet the 
exertions and reproof of my friends, could make me take to it, 
for my love of poetry was invincible." 

About 1333 Boccaccio settled for some years at Naples, 
apparently sent there by his father to resume his mercantile 
pursuits, the canon law being finally abandoned. The place, 
it must be confessed, was little adapted to lead to a practical 
view of life one in whose heart the love of poetry was firmly 
rooted. The court of King Robert of Anjou at Naples was 
frequented by many Italian and French men of letters, the great 
Petrarch amongst the number. At the latter's public examina- 
tion in the noble science of poetry by the king, previous to his 
receiving the laurel crown at Rome, Boccaccio was present, — 
without, however, making his personal acquaintance at this 
period. In the atmosphere of this gay court, enlivened and 
adorned by the wit of men and the beauty of women, Boccaccio 
lived for several years. We can imagine how the tedious duties 



of the market and the counting-house became more and mort 
distasteful to his aspiring nature. We are told that, finding 
himself by chance on the supposed grave of Virgil, near Naples, 
Boccaccio on that sacred spot took the firm resolution of devoting 
himself for ever to poetry. But perhaps another event, which 
happened some time after, led quite as much as the first-men- 
tioned occurrence to this decisive turning-point in his life. On 
Easter-eve, 1341, in the church of San Lorenzo, Boccaccio saw 
for the first time the natural daughter of King Robert, Maria, 
whom he immortalized as Fiammetta in the noblest creations 
of his muse. Boccaccio's passion on seeing her was instantaneous, 
and (if we may accept as genuine the confessions contained in 
one of her lover's works) was returned with equal ardour on the 
part of the lady. But not till after much delay did she yield to 
the amorous demands of the poet, in spite of her honour and her 
duty as the wife of another. All the information we have with 
regard to Maria or Fiammetta is derived from the works of 
Boccaccio himself, and owing to several apparently contradictory 
statements occurring in these works, the very existence of the 
lady has been doubted by commentators, who seem to forget 
that, surrounded by the chattering tongues of a court, and 
watched perhaps by a jealous husband, Boccaccio had all possible 
reason to give the appearance of fictitious incongruity to the 
effusions of his real passion. But there seems no more reason to 
call into question the main features of the story, or even the 
identity of the person, than there would be in the case of Petrarch's 
Laura or of Dante's Beatrice. It has been ingeniously pointed 
out by Baldelli, that the fact of her descent from King Robert 
being known only to Maria herself, and through her to Boccaccio, 
the latter was the more at liberty to refer to this circumstance, — • 
the bold expression of the truth serving in this case to increase 
the mystery with which the poets of the middle ages loved, or 
were obliged, to surround the objects of their praise. From 
Boccaccio's Ameto we learn that Maria's mother was, like his 
own, a French lady, whose husband, according to Baldelli's 
ingenious conjecture, was of the noble house of Aquino, and 
therefore of the same family with the celebrated Thomas Aquinas. 
Maria died, according to his account, long before her lover, who 
cherished her memory to the end of his life, as we see from a 
sonnet written shortly before his death. 

The first work of Boccaccio, composed by him at Fiammetta's 
command, was the prose tale, Filocopo, describing the romantic 
love and adventures of Florio and Biancafiore, a favourite 
subject with the knightly minstrels of France, Italy and Germany. 
The treatment of the story by Boccaccio is not remarkable for 
originality or beauty, and the narrative is encumbered by classical 
allusions and allegorical conceits. The style also cannot be held 
worthy of the future great master of Italian prose. Considering, 
however, that this prose was in its infancy, and that this was 
Boccaccio's first attempt at remoulding the unwieldy material 
at his disposal, it would be unjust to deny that Filocopo is a 
highly interesting work, full of promise and all but articulate 
power. Another work, written about the same time by Fiam- 
metta's desire and dedicated to her, is the Teseide, an epic poem, 
and indeed the first heroic epic in the Italian language. The 
name is chosen somewhat inappropriately, as King Theseus plays 
a secondary part, and the interest of the story centres in the two 
noble knights, Palemone and Arcito, and their wooing of the 
beautiful Emelia. The Teseide is of particular interest to the 
student of poetry, because it exhibits the first example of the 
ottava rima, a metre which was adopted by Tasso and Ariosto, 
and in English by Byron in Bon Juan. Another link between 
Boccaccio's epic and English literature is formed by the fact of 
Chaucer having in the Knight's Tale adopted its main features. 

Boccaccio's poetry has been severely criticized by his country- 
men, and most severely by the author himself. On reading 
Petrarch's sonnets, Boccaccio resolved in a fit of despair to burn 
his own attempts, and only the kindly encouragement of his 
great friend prevented the holocaust. Posterity has justly 
differed from the author's sweeping self-criticism. It is true, 
that compared with Dante's grandeur and passion, and with 
Petrarch's absolute mastership of metre, and language, Boccaccio's 



BOCCACCIO 



103 



poetry seems to be somewhat thrown into shade. His verse is 
occasionally slip-shod, and particularly his epic poetry lacks 
what in modern parlance is called poetic diction, — the quality, 
that is, which distinguishes the elevated pathos of the recorder 
of heroic deeds from the easy grace of the mere conleur. This 
latter feature, so charmingly displayed in Boccaccio's prose, has 
to some extent proved fatal to his verse. At the same time, his 
narrative is always fluent and interesting, and his lyrical pieces, 
particularly the poetic interludes in the Decameron, abound with 
charming gallantry, and frequently rise to lyrical pathos. 

About the year 1341 Boccaccio returned to Florence by 
command of his father, who in his old age desired the assistance 
and company of his son. Florence, at that time disturbed by 
civil feuds, and the silent gloom of his father's house could not 
but appear in an unfavourable light to one accustomed to the 
gay life of the Neapolitan court. But more than all this, Boccaccio 
regretted the separation from his beloved Fiammetta. The 
thought of her at once embittered and consoled his loneliness. 
Three of his works owe their existence to this period. With all 
of them Fiammetta is connected; of one of them she alone is the 
subject. The first work, called Ameto, describes the civilizing 
influence of love, which subdues the ferocious manners of the 
savage with its gentle power. Fiammetta, although not the 
heroine of the story, is amongst the nymphs who with their tales 
of true love soften the mind of the huntsman. Ameto is written 
in prose alternating with verse, specimens of which form occur 
in old and middle Latin writings. It is more probable, however, 
that Boccaccio adopted it from that sweetest and purest blossom 
of medieval French literature, Aucassin et Nicolette, which dates 
from the 13th century, and was undoubtedly known to him. So 
pleased was Boccaccio with the idea embodied in the character 
of Ameto that he repeated its essential features in the Cimone of 
his Decameron (Day 5th, tale i.). The second work referred to is 
a poem in fifty chapters, called U amorosa Visione. It describes 
a dream in which the poet, guided by a lady, sees the heroes and 
lovers of ancient and medieval times. Boccaccio evidently has 
tried to imitate the celebrated Trionfi of Petrarch, but without 
much success. There is little organic development in the poem, 
which reads like the catalogue raisonne of a picture gallery; but 
it is remarkable from another point of view. It is perhaps the 
most astounding instance in literature of ingenuity wasted on 
trifles; even Edgar Poe, had he known Boccaccio's puzzle, 
must have confessed himself surpassed. For the whole of the 
Amorosa Visione is nothing but an acrostic on a gigantic scale. 
The poem is written, like the Divina Commedia, in terza rima, and 
the initial letters of all the triplets throughout the work compose 
three poems of considerable length, in the first of which the whole 
is dedicated to Boccaccio's lady-love, this time under her real 
name of Maria. In addition to this, the initial letters of the first, 
third, fifth, seventh and ninth lines of the dedicatory poem form 
the name of Maria; so that here we have the acrostic in the 
second degree. No wonder that thus entrammelled the poet's 
thought begins to flag and his language to halt. The third 
important work written by Boccaccio during his stay at Florence, 
or soon after his return to Naples, is called L' amorosa Fiammetta; 
and although written in prose, it contains more real poetry than 
the elaborate production just referred to. It purports to be 
Fiammetta's complaint after her lover, following the call of 
filial duty, had deserted her. Bitterly she deplores her fate, and 
upbraids her lover with coldness and want of devotion. Jealous 
fears add to her torture, not altogether unfounded, if we believe 
the commentators' assertion that the heroine of Ameto is in 
reality the beautiful Lucia, a Florentine lady loved by Boccaccio. 
Sadly Fiammetta recalls the moments of former bliss, the first 
meeting, the stolen embrace. Her narrative is indeed our chief 
source of information for the incidents of this strange love-story. 
It has been thought unlikely, and indeed impossible, that 
Boccaccio should thus have become the mouthpiece of a real 
lady's real passion for himself; but there seems nothing in- 
congruous in the supposition that after a happy reunion the poet 
should have heard with satisfaction, and surrounded with the 
halo of ideal art, the story of his lady's sufferings. Moreover, the 



language is too full of individual intensity to make the conjecture 
of an entirely fictitious love affair intrinsicaUy probable. L' amo- 
rosa Fiammetta is a monody of passion sustained even to the 
verge of dulness, but strikingly real, and therefore artistically 
valuable. 

By the intercession of an influential friend, Boccaccio at last 
obtained (in 1344) his father's permission to return to Naples, 
where in the meantime Giovanna, grand-daughter of King Robert, 
had succeeded to the crown. Being young and beautiful, fond of 
poetry and of the praise of poets, she received Boccaccio with all 
the distinction due to his literary fame. For many years she 
remained his faithful friend, and the poet returned her favour 
with grateful devotion. Even when the charge of having 
instigated, or at least connived at, the murder of her husband 
was but too clearly proved against her, Boccaccio was amongst 
the few who stood by her, and undertook the hopeless task of 
clearing her name from the dreadful stain. It was by her desire, 
no less than by that of Fiammetta, that he composed (between 
1344 and 1350) most of the stories of his Decameron, which 
afterwards were collected and placed in the mouths of the 
Florentine ladies and gentlemen. During this time he also 
composed the Filostrato, a narrative poem, the chief interest of 
which, for the English reader, lies in its connexion with Chaucer. 
With a boldness pardonable only in men of genius, Chaucer 
adopted the main features of the plot, and literally translated 
1 parts of Boccaccio's work, without so much as mentioning the 
name of his Italian source. 

In 1350 Boccaccio returned to Florence, owing to the death 
of his father, who had made him guardian to his younger brother 
Jacopo. He was received with great distinction, and entered 
the service of the Republic, being at various times sent on 
important missions to the margrave of Brandenburg, and to the 
courts of several popes, both in Avignon and Rome. Boccaccio 
boasts of the friendly terms on which he had been with the great 
potentates of Europe, the emperor and pope amongst the number. 
But he was never a politician in the sense that Dante and 
Petrarch were. As a man of the world he enjoyed the society 
of the great, but his interest in the internal commotions of the 
Florentine state seems to have been very slight. Besides, he 
never liked Florence, and the expressions used by him regarding 
his fellow-citizens betray anything but patriotic prejudice. In 
a Latin eclogue he applies to them the term " Batrachos " (frogs), 
by which, he adds parenthetically — Ego intclligo Florentinorum 
morem; loquacissimi enim sumus, verum in rebus bellicis nihil 
valemus. The only important result of Boccaccio's diplomatic 
career was his intimacy with Petrarch. The first acquaintance 
of these two great men dates from the year 1350, when Boccaccio, 
then just returned to Florence, did all in his power to make the 
great poet's short stay in that city agreeable. When in the 
following year the Florentines were anxious to draw men of 
great reputation to their newly-founded university, it was again 
Boccaccio who insisted on the claims of Petrarch to the most 
distinguished position. He himself accepted the mission of 
inviting his friend to Florence, and of announcing to Petrarch 
at the same time that the forfeited estates of his family had been 
restored to him. In this manner an intimate friendship grew up 
between them to be parted only by death. Common interests 
and common literary pursuits were the natural basis of their 
friendship, and both occupy prominent positions in the early 
history of that great intellectual revival commonly called the 
Renaissance. 

During the 14th century the study of ancient literature was 
at a low ebb in Italy. The interest of the lay world was engrossed 
by political struggles, and the treasures of classical history and 
poetry were at the mercy of monks, too lazy or too ignorant to 
use, or even to preserve them. Boccaccio himself told that, 
on asking to see the library of the celebrated monastery of 
Monte Cassino, he was shown into a dusty room without a door 
to it. Many of the valuable manuscripts were mutilated; and 
his guide told him that the monks were in the habit of tearing 
leaves from the codices to turn them into psalters for children, 
or amulets for women at the price of four or five soldi apiece. 



10 4 



BOCCACCIO 



Boccaccio did all in his power to remove by word and example 
this barbarous indifference. He bought or copied with his own 
hand numerous valuable manuscripts, and an old writer remarks 
that if Boccaccio had been a professional copyist, the amount of 
his work might astonish us. His zealous endeavours for the 
revival of the all but forgotten Greek language in western 
Europe are well known. The most celebrated Italian scholars 
about the beginning of the 15th century were unable to read the 
Greek characters. Boccaccio deplored the ignorance of his age. 
He took lessons from Leone Pilato, a learned adventurer of the 
period, who had lived a long time in Thessaly and, although born 
in Calabria, pretended to be a Greek. By Boccaccio's advice 
Leone Pilato was appointed professor of Greek language and 
literature in the university of Florence, a position which he held 
for several years, not without great and lasting benefit for the 
revival of classical learning. Boccaccio was justly proud of 
having been intimately connected with the -foundation of the 
first chair of Greek in Italy. But he did not forget, in his admira- 
tion of classic literature, the great poets of his own country. 
He never tires in his praise of the sublime Dante, whose works 
he copied with his own hand. He conjures his friend Petrarch 
to study the great Florentine, and to defend himself against 
the charges of wilful ignorance and envy brought against him. 
A life of Dante, and the commentaries on the first sixteen 
cantos of the Inferno, bear witness to Boccaccio's learning and 
enthusiasm. 

In the chronological enumeration of our author's writings we 
now come to his most important work, the Decameron, a collection 
of one hundred stories, published in their combined form in 1353, 
although mostly written at an earlier date. This work marks in 
a certain sense the rise of Italian prose. It is true that Dante's 
Vita Nuova was written before, but its involved sentences, 
founded essentially on Latin constructions, cannot be compared 
with the infinite suppleness and precision of Boccaccio's prose. 
The Cento Novelle Antiche, on the other hand, which also precedes 
the Decameron in date, can hardly be said to be written in 
artistic language according to definite rules of grammar and 
style. Boccaccio for the first time speaks a new idiom, flexible 
and tender, like the character of the nation, and capable of 
rendering all the shades of feeling, from the coarse laugh of 
cynicism to the sigh of hopeless love. It is by the name of 
" Father of Italian Prose " that Boccaccio ought to be chiefly 
remembered. 

Like most progressive movements in art and literature, 
Boccaccio's remoulding of Italian prose may be described as a 
" return to nature." It is indeed the nature of the Italian people 
itself which has become articulate in the Decameron; here we 
find southern grace and elegance, together with that unveiled 
naivete of impulse which is so striking and so amiable' a quality 
of the Italian character. The undesirable complement of the 
last-mentioned feature, a coarseness and indecency of conception 
and expression hardly comprehensible to the northern mind, 
also appears in the Decameron, particularly where the life and 
conversation of the lower classes are the subject of the story. 
At the same time, these descriptions of low life are so admir- 
able, and the character of popular parlance rendered with such 
humour, as often to make the frown of moral disgust give way 
to a smile. 

It is not surprising that a style so concise and yet so pliable 
so typical and yet so infiivddual, as that of Boccaccio wao of 
enormous influence on the further progress of a prose in a manner 
created by it. This influence has indeed prevailed down to the 
present time, to an extent beneficial upon the whole, although 
frequently fatal to the development of individual writers. 
Novelists like Giovanni Fiorentino or Franco Sacchetti are 
completely under the sway of their great model; and Boccaccio's 
influence may be discerned equally in the plastic fulness of 
Machiavelli and in the pointed satire of Aretino. Without 
touching upon the individual merits of La.sca, Bandello and other 
novelists of the cinque-cento, it may be asserted that none of them 
created a style independent of their great predecessor. One 
cannot indeed but acquiesce in the authoritative utterance of 



the Accademia della Crusca, which holds up the Decameron as 
the standard and model of Italian prose. Even the Della Cruscan 
writers themselves have been unable to deprive the language 
wholly of the fresh spontaneity of Boccaccio's manner, which 
in modern literature we again admire in Manzoni's Promessi 
sposi. 

A detailed analysis of a work so well known as the Decameron 
would be unnecessary. The description of the plague of Florence 
preceding the stories is universally acknowledged to be a master- 
piece of epic grandeur and vividness. It ranks with the paintings 
of similar calamities by Thucydides, Defoe and Manzoni. Like 
Defoe, Boccaccio had to draw largely on hearsay and his own 
imagination, it being almost certain that in 1348 he was at Naples, 
and therefore no eye-witness of the scenes he describes. The 
stories themselves, a hundred in number, range from the highest 
pathos to the coarsest licentiousness. A creation like the patient 
Griselda, which international literature owes to Boccaccio, ought 
to atone for much that is morally and artistically objectionable 
in the Decameron. It may be said on this head, that his age and 
his country were not only deeply immoral, but in addition 
exceedingly outspoken. Moreover, his sources were anything 
but pure. Most of his improper stories are either anecdotes 
from real life, or they are taken from the fabliaux of medieval 
French poets. On comparing the latter class of stories (about 
one-fifth of the whole Decameron) with their French originals, 
one finds that Boccaccio has never added to, but has sometimes 
toned down the revolting ingredients. Notwithstanding this, 
it cannot be denied that the artistic value of the Decameron is 
greatly impaired by descriptions and expressions, the intentional 
licentiousness of which is but imperfectly veiled by an attempt 
at humour. 

Boccaccio has been accused of plagiarism, particularly by 
French critics, who correctly state that the subjects of many 
stories in the Decameron are borrowed from their literature. A 
similar objection might be raised against Chaucer, Shakespeare, 
Goethe (in Faust), and indeed most of the master minds of all 
nations. Power of invention is not the only nor even the chief 
criterion of a great poet. He takes his subjects indiscriminately 
from his own fancy, or from the consciousness of his and other 
nations. Stories float about in the air, known to all yet realized 
by few; the poet gathers their disjecta membra into an organic 
whole, and this he inspires and calls into life with the breath 
of his genius. It is in this sense that Boccaccio is the creator of 
those innumerable beautiful types and stories, which have since 
become household words amongst civilized nations. No author 
can equal him in these contributions to the store of international 
literature. There are indeed few great poets who have not in 
some way become indebted to the inexhaustible treasure of 
Boccaccio's creativeness. One of the greatest masterpieces of 
German literature, Lessing's Nathan the Wise, contains a story 
from Boccaccio {Decameron, Day 1st, tale iii.), and the list of 
English poets who have drawn from the same source comprises, 
among many others, the names of Chaucer, Lydgate, Dryden, 
Keats and Tennyson. 

For ten years Boccaccio continued to reside in Florence, 
leaving the city only occasionally on diplomatic missions or on 
visits to his friends. His fame in the meantime began to spread 
far and wide, and his Decameron, in particular, was devoured 
by the fashionable ladies and gentlemen of the age. About 
1360 he seems to have retired from the turbulent scenes of 
Florence to his native Certaldo, the secluded charms of which 
he describes with rapture. In the following year took place that 
strange turning-point in Boccaccio's career which is generally 
described as his conversion. It seems that a Carthusian monk 
came to him while at Certaldo charged with a posthumous 
message from another monk of the same order, to the effect 
that if Boccaccio did not at once abandon his godless ways in 
life and literature his death would ensue after a short time. It 
is also mentioned that the revelation to the friar on his deathbed 
of a secret known only to Boccaccio gave additional import to 
this alarming information. Boccaccio's impressionable nature 
was deeply moved. His life had been far from virtuous; in his 



BOCCALINI— BOCCHERINI 



!°5 



writings he had frequently sinned against the rules of morality, 
and worse still, he had attacked with bitter satire the institutions 
and servants of holy mother church. Terrified by the approach 
of immediate death, he resolved to sell his library, abandon 
literature, and devote the remainder of his life to penance and 
religious exercise. To this effect he wrote to Petrarch. We 
possess the poet's answer; it is a masterpiece of writing, and 
what is more, a proof of tenderest friendship. The message of 
the monk Petrarch is evidently inclined to treat simply as pious 
fraud, without, however, actually committing himself to that 
opinion. " No monk is required to tell thee of the shortness 
and precariousness of human life. Of the advice received accept 
what is good; abandon worldly cares, conquer thy passions, 
and reform thy soul and life of degraded habits. But do not 
give up the studies which are the true food of a healthy mind." 
Boccaccio seems to have acted on this valuable advice. His 
later works, although written in Latin and scientific in character, 
are by no means of a religious kind. It seems, however, that 
his entering the church in 1362 is connected with the events 
just related. 

In 1363 Boccaccio went on a visit to Naples to the seneschal 
Acciajuoli (the same Florentine who had in 1344 persuaded the 
elder Boccaccio to permit his son's return to Naples), who 
commissioned him to write the story of his deeds of valour. 
On his arrival, however, the poet was treated with shameful 
neglect, and revenged himself by denying the possibility of relat- 
ing any valorous deeds for want of their existence. This de- 
claration, it must be confessed, came somewhat late, but it was 
provoked by a silly attack on the poet himself by one of the 
seneschal's indiscreet friends. 

During the next ten years Boccaccio led an unsettled life, 
residing chiefly at Florence or Certaldo, but frequently leaving 
his home on visits to Petrarch and other friends, and on various 
diplomatic errands in the service of the Republic. He seems to 
have been poor, having spent large sums in the purchase of books, 
but his independent spirit rejected the numerous splendid offers 
of hospitality made to him by friends and admirers. During 
this period he wrote four important Latin works — De Genealogia 
Deorum libri XV., a. compendium of mythological knowledge 
full of deep learning; De Montium, Silvarum, Lacuum, et 
Marium nominibus liber, a treatise on ancient geography; and 
two historical books — De Casibus Virorum et Feminarum 
Illustrium libri IX., interesting to the English reader as the 
original of John Lydgate's Fall of Princes; and De Claris 
Mulieribus. To the list of his works ought to be added II Ninfale 
Fiesolano, a beautiful love-story in verse, and II Corbaccio ossia 
II Laberinto a" Amor e, a coarse satire on a Florentine widow who 
had jilted the poet, written about 1355, not to mention many 
eclogues in Latin and miscellaneous Rime in Italian (the latter 
collected by his biographer Count Baldelli in 1802). 

In 1373 we find Boccaccio again settled at Certaldo. Here 
he was attacked by a terrible disease which brought him to the 
verge of death, and from the consequences of which he never 
quite recovered. But sickness could not subdue his intellectual 
vigour. When the Florentines established a chair for the ex- 
planation of the Divina Commedia in their university, and 
offered it to Boccaccio, the senescent poet at once undertook 
the arduous duty. He delivered his first lecture on the 23rd 
of October 1373. The commentary on part of the Inferno, 
already alluded to, bears witness of his unabated power of 
intellect. In 1374 the news of the loss of his dearest friend 
Petrarch reached Boccaccio, and from this blow he may be said 
to have never recovered. Almost his dying efforts were devoted 
to the memory of his friend; urgently he entreated Petrarch's 
son-in-law to arrange the publication of the deceased poet's 
Latin epic Africa, a work of which the author had been far more 
proud than of his immortal sonnets to Laura. 

In his last will Boccaccio left his library to his father confessor, 
and after his decease to the convent of Santo Spirito in Florence. 
His small property he bequeathed to his brother Jacopo. His 
own natural children had died before him. He himself died on 
the 21st of December 1375 at Certaldo, and was buried in the 



church of SS. Jacopo e Filippo of that town. On his tombstone 
was engraved the epitaph composed by himself shortly before 
his death. It is calm and dignified, worthy indeed of a grea> 
life with a great purpose. These are the lines : — 

" Hac sub mole jacent cineres ac ossa Joannis; 
Mens sedet ante Deum, meritis ornata laborum 
Mortalis vitae. Genitor Boccaccius ill! ; 
Patria Certaldum; studium fuit alma poesis." 
A complete edition of Boccaccio's Italian writings, in 17 vols., 
was published by Moutier (Florence, 1834). The life of Boccaccio 
has been written by Tiraboschi, Mazzuchelli, Count Baldelli (Vita 
di Boccaccio, Florence, 1806), and others. In English the best 
biography is Edward Hutton (1909.) The first printed edition 
of the Decameron is without date, place or printer's name ; but it is 
believed to belong to the year 1469 or 1470, and to have been printed 
at Florence. Besides this, Baldelli mentions eleven editions during 
the 15 th century. The entire number of editions by far exceeds a 
hundred. A curious expurgated edition, authorized by the pope, 
appeared at Florence, 1573. Here, however, the grossest in- 
decencies remain, the chief alteration being the change of the im- 
proper personages from priests and monks into laymen. The best 
old edition is that of Florence, 1527. Of modern reprints, that by 
Forfoni (Florence, 1857) deserves mention. Manni has written a 
Storia del Decamerone (1742), and a German scholar, M. Landau, 
who published (Vienna, 1869) a valuable investigation of the sources 
of the Decameron, subsequently brought out in 1877 a general study 
of Boccaccio's life and works. An interesting English translation 
of the Decameron appeared in 1624, under the title The Model oj 
Mirth, Wit, Eloquence and Conversation.- (F. H.) 

BOCCALINI, TRAJANO (1556-1613), Italian satirist, was born 
at Loretto in 1556. The son of an architect, he himself adopted 
that profession, and it appears that he commenced late in life to 
apply to literary pursuits. Pursuing his studies at Rome, he had 
the honour of teaching Bentivoglio, and acquired the friendship 
of the cardinals Gaetano and Borghesi, as well as of other 
distinguished personages. By their influence he obtained various 
posts, and was even appointed by Gregory XIII. governor of 
Benevento in the states of the church. Here, however, he seems 
to have acted imprudently, and he was soon recalled to Rome, 
where he shortly afterwards composed his most important work, 
the Ragguagli di Parnaso, in which Apollo is represented as 
receiving the complaints of all who present themselves, and 
distributing justice according to the merits of each particular 
case. The book is full of light and fantastic satire on the actions 
and writings of his eminent contemporaries, and some of its 
happier hits are among the hackneyed felicities of literature. To 
escape, it is said, from the hostility of those whom his shafts had 
wounded, he returned to Venice, and there, according to the 
register in the parochial church of Sta Maria Formosa, died of 
colic, accompanied with fever, on the 16th of November 1613. 
It was asserted, indeed, by contemporary writers that he had 
been beaten to death with sand-bags by a band of Spanish 
bravadoes, but the story seems without foundation. At the 
same time, it is evident from the Pietra del Paragone, which 
appeared after his death in 161 5, that whatever the feelings of 
the Spaniards towards him, he cherished against them feelings of 
the bitterest hostility. The only government, indeed, which is 
exempt from his attacks is that of Venice, a city for which he 
seems to have had a special affection. 

The Ragguagli, first printed in 1612, has frequently been re- 
published. The Pietra has been translated into French, German, 
English and Latin; the English translator was Henry, earl of 
Monmouth, his version being entitled The Politicke Touchstone 
(London, 1674). Another posthumous publication of Boccalini 
was his Commentarii sopra Cornelio Tacito (Geneva, 1669). Many 
of his manuscripts are preserved still unprinted. 

BOCCHERINI, LUIGI (1743-1805), Italian composer, son of 
an Italian bass-player, was born at Lucca, and studied at Rome, 
where he became a fine 'cellist, and soon began to compose. He 
returned to Lucca, where for some years he was prominent as a 
player, and there he produced two oratorios and an opera. He 
toured in Europe, and in 1768 was received in Paris by Gossec 
and his circle with great enthusiasm, his instrumental pieces being 
highly applauded; and from 1769 to 1785 he held the post of 
" composer and virtuoso " to the king of Spain's brother, the 
infante Luis, at Madrid. He afterwards became " chamber- 
composer " to King Frederick William II. of Prussia, till 1797, 



io6 



BOCCHUS— BOCKH 



when he returned to Spain. He died at Madrid on the 28th of 
May 1805. 

As an admirer of Haydn, and a voluminous writer of instru- 
mental music, chiefly for the violoncello, Boccherini represents 
the effect of the rapid progress of a new art on a mind too refined 
to be led into crudeness, too inventive and receptive to neglect 
any of the new artistic resources within its cognizance, and too 
superficial to grasp their real meaning. His mastery of the 
violoncello, and his advanced sense of beauty in instrumental 
tone-colour, must have made even his earlier works seem to 
contemporaries at least as novel and mature as any of those 
experiments at which Haydn, with eight years more of age and 
experience, was labouring in the development of the true new 
forms. Most of Boccherini's technical resources proved useless 
to Haydn, and resemblances occur only in Haydn's earliest works 
(e.g. most of the slow movements of the quartets in op. 3 and in 
some as late as op. 17); whichever derived the characteristics of 
such movements from the other, the advantage is decidedly with 
Boccherini. But the progress of music did not lie in the pro- 
duction of novel beauties of instrumental tone in a style in which 
polyphonic organization was either deliberately abandoned or 
replaced by a pleasing illusion, while the form in its larger aspects 
was a mere inorganic amplification of the old suite-forms, which 
presupposed a genuine polyphonic organization as the vitalizing 
principle of their otherwise purely decorative nature. The true 
tendency of the new sonata forms was to make instrumental 
music dramatic in its variety and contrasts, instead of merely 
decorative. Haydn from the outset buried himself with the 
handling of new rhythmic proportions; and if it is hardly an 
exaggeration to say that the surprising beauty of colour in such 
a specimen of Boccherini's 125 string-quintets as that in E major 
(containing the popular minuet) is perhaps more modern and 
certainly safer in performance than any special effect Haydn ever 
achieved, it is nevertheless true that even this beauty fails to 
justify the length and monotony of the work. Where Haydn 
uses any fraction of the resources of such a, style, the ultimate 
effect is in proportion to a purpose of which Boccherini, with all 
his genuine admiration of his elder brother in art, could form no 
conception. Boccherini's works are, however, still indispensable 
for violoncellists, both in their education and their concert 
repertories; and his position in musical history is assured as that 
of the most original and, next to Tartini, perhaps the greatest 
writer of music for stringed instruments in the late Italian 
amplifications of the older quasi-polyphonic sonata or suite-form 
that survived into the beginning of the 19th century in the works 
of Nardini. Boccherini may safely be regarded as its last real 
master. He was wittily characterized by the contemporary 
violinist Puppo as " the wife of Haydn "; which is very true, if 
man and woman are two different species; but not as true as 
e.g. the equally common saying that " Schubert is the wife of 
Beethoven," and still less true than that " Vittoria is the wife of 
Palestrina." 

His life, with a Catalogue raisonne, was published by L. Picquot 
(1851). (D. F. T.) 

BOCCHUS, king of Mauretania (about no B.C.), and father-in- 
law of Jugurtha. In 108 he vacillated between Jugurtha and 
the Romans, and joined Jugurtha only on his promising him the 
third part of his kingdom. The two kings were twice defeated. 
Bocchus again made overtures to the Romans, and after an 
interview with Sulla, who was Marius's quaestor at that time, 
sent ambassadors to Rome. At Rome the hope of an alliance 
was encouraged, but on condition that Bocchus showed himself 
deserving of it. After further negotiations with Sulla, he finally 
agreed to send a message to Jugurtha requesting his presence. 
Jugurtha fell into the trap and was given up to Sulla. Bocchus 
concluded a treaty with the Romans, and a portion of Numidia 
was added to his kingdom . Further to conciliate the Romans and 
especially Sulla,he sent to the Capitol a group of Victories guarding 
a device in gold showing Bocchus handing over Jugurtha to Sulla. 

See Jugurtha; also Sallust, Jugurtha, 80-120; Plutarch, Marius, 
8-32, Sulla, 3 ; A. H. J. Greenidge, History of Rome (London, 1904). 

His son, Bocchus, was king of Mauretania, jointly with a 



younger brother Bogud. As enemies of the senatorial party, 
their title was recognized by Caesar (49 B.C.). During the African 
war they invaded Numidia and conquered Cirta, the capital of 
the kingdom of Juba, who was thus obliged to abandon the idea 
of joining Metellus Scipio against Caesar. At the end of the war, 
Caesar bestowed upon Bocchus part of the territory of Massinissa, 
Juba's ally, which was recovered after Caesar's murder by 
Massinissa's son Arabion.. Dio Cassius says that Bocchus sent 
his sons to support Sextus Pompeius in Spain, while Bogud 
fought on the side of Caesar, and there is no doubt that after 
Caesar's death Bocchus supported Octavian, and Bogud Antony. 
During Bogud's absence in Spain, his brother seized the whole of 
Numidia, and was confirmed sole ruler by Octavian. After his 
death in 33, Numidia was made a Roman province. 

Bell. Afric, 25; Dio Cassius xli. 42, xliii. 36, xlviii. 45;Appian, 
Bell. Civ. ii. 96, iv. 54. 

BOCHART, SAMUEL (1599-1667), French scholar, was born 
at Rouen on the 30th of May 1599. He was for many years a 
pastor of a Protestant church at Caen, and became tutor to 
Went worth Dillon, earl of Roscommon. In 1646 he published 
his Phaleg and Chanaan (Caen, 1646 and 1651), the two parts 
of his Geographia Sacra. His Hierozoicon, which treats of the 
animals of Scripture, was printed in London (2 vols., 1663). In 
1652 Christina of Sweden invited him to Stockholm, where he 
studied the Arabian manuscripts in the queen's possession. 
He was accompanied by Pierre Daniel Huet, afterwards bishop 
of Avranches. On his. return to Caen he was received into 
the academy of that city. Bochart was a man of profound 
erudition; he possessed a thorough knowledge of the principal 
Oriental languages, including Hebrew, Syriac, Chaldaic and 
Arabic; and at an advanced age he wished to learn Ethiopic. 
He was so absorbed in his favourite study, that he saw Phoe- 
nician and nothing but Phoenician in everything, even in Celtic 
words, and hence the number of chimerical etymologies which 
swarm in his works. He died at Caen on the 16th of May 1667. 

A complete edition of his works was published at Leiden, under 
the title of Sam. Bochart Opera Omnia (1675, 2 vols, folio; 4th ed., 
3 vols., 1712). An Essay on the Life and Writings of Samuel Bochart, 
by W. R. Whittingham, appeared in 1829. 

BOCHOLT, a town of Germany, in the Prussian province of 
Westphalia, near the frontier of Holland, 12 m. by rail north 
of Wesel. It is a seat of the cotton industry. Pop. (1900) 
21,278. 

BOCHUM, a town of Germany, in the Prussian province of 
Westphalia, n m. by rail west from Dortmund. Pop. (1905) 
1 18,000. It is a centre of the iron and steel industries, producing 
principally cast steel, cast iron, iron pipes, wire and wire ropes, 
and lamps, with tin and zinc works, coal-mining, factories for 
carpets, calcium carbide and paper-roofing, brickworks and 
breweries. The Bochumer Verein fur Bergbau (mining) und 
Gusstahl Fabrication (steel manufacture) is one of the principal 
trusts in this industry, founded in 1854. There are a mining 
and a metallurgical school. 

BOCKH, PHILIPP AUGUST (1785-1867), German classical 
scholar and antiquarian, was born in Karlsruhe on the 24th of 
November 1785. He was sent to the gymnasium of his native 
place, and remained there until he left for the university of 
Halle (1803), where he devoted himself to the study of theology. 
F. A. Wolf was then creating there an enthusiasm for classical 
studies; Bockh fell under the spell, passed from theology to 
philology, and became the greatest of all Wolf's scholars. In 
1807 he established himself as privat-docent in the university 
of Heidelberg and was shortly afterwards appointed a professor 
extraordinarius, becoming professor two years later. In 181 1 
he removed to the new Berlin University, having been appointed 
professor of eloquence and classical literature. He remained 
there till his death on the 3rd of August 1867. He was elected 
a member of the Academy of Sciences of Berlin in 1814, and 
for a long time acted as its secretary. Many of the speeches 
contained in his Kleine Schriften were delivered in this latter 
capacity. 

Bockh worked out the ideas of Wolf in regard to philology, 



BOCKLIN 



107 



and illustrated them by his practice. Discarding the old notion 
that philology consisted in a minute acquaintance with words 
and the exercise of the critical art, he regarded it as the entire 
knowledge of antiquity, historical and philosophical. He 
divides philology into five parts: first, an inquiry into public 
acts, with a knowledge of times and places, into civil institutions, 
and also into law; second, an inquiry into private affairs; 
third, an exhibition of the religions and arts of the ancient 
nations; fourth, a history of all their moral and physical specula- 
tions and beliefs, and of their literatures; and fifth, a complete 
explanation of the language. These ideas in regard to philology 
Bockh set forth in a Latin oration delivered in 1822 (Gesammelte 
Heine Schriften, i.). In his speech at the opening of the congress 
of German philologists in 1850, he defined philology as the 
historical construction of the entire life — therefore, of all forms 
of culture and all the productions of a people in its practical 
and spiritual tendencies. He allows that such a work is too great 
for any one man; but the very infinity of subjects is the stimulus 
to the pursuit of truth, and men strive because they have not 
attained (ib. ii.). An account of Bockh's division of philology 
will be found in Freund's Wie slndirt man Philologie ? 

From 1806 till his death Bockh's literary activjty was unceas- 
ing. His principal works were the following: — (1) An edition 
of Pindar, the first volume of which (181 1) contains the text of 
the Epinician odes; a treatise, De Melris Pindari, in three books; 
and Notae Criticae: the second (1819) contains the Scholia; 
and part ii. of volume ii. (1821) contains a Latin translation, a 
commentary, the fragments and indices. It is still the most 
complete edition of Pindar that we have. But it was especially 
the treatise on the metres which placed Bockh in the first rank 
of scholars. This treatise forms an epoch in the treatment of 
the subject. In it the author threw aside all attempts to deter- 
mine the Greek metres by mere subjective standards, pointing 
out at the same time the close connexion between the music 
and the poetry of the Greeks. He investigated minutely the 
nature of Greek music as far as it can be ascertained, as well as 
all the details regarding Greek musical instruments; and he 
explained the statements of the ancient Greek writers on rhythm. 
In this manner he laid the foundation for a scientific treatment 
of Greek metres. (2) Die Staatshaushaltung der Athener, 181 7 
(2nd ed. 1851, with a supplementary volume Urkunden iiber das 
Seewesen des attischen Staats; 3rd ed. by Frankel, 1886), 
translated into English by Sir George Cornewall Lewis (1828) 
under the title of The Public Economy of Athens. In it he 
investigated a subject of peculiar difficulty with profound 
learning. He amassed information from the whole range of 
Greek literature, carefully appraised the value of the informa- 
tion given, and shows throughout every portion of it rare 
critical ability and insight. A work of a similar kind was his 
Melrologische Untersuchungen iiber Gewichte, Miinzfilsse, und 
Masse des Alterthums (1838). (3) Bockh's third great work arose 
out of his second. In regard to the taxes and revenue of the 
Athenian state he derived a great deal of his most trustworthy 
information from inscriptions, many of which are given in his 
book. It was natural, therefore, that when the Berlin Academy 
of Sciences projected the plan of a Corpus Inscriptionum Grae- 
carum, Bockh should be chosen as the principal editor. This 
great work (1828-1877) is in four volumes, the third and fourth 
volumes being edited by J. Franz, E. Curtius, A. Kirchhoff and 
H. Rohl. 

Bockh's activity was continually digressing into widely 
different fields. He gained for himself a foremost position 
amongst the investigators of ancient chronology, and his name 
occupies a place by the side of those of Ideler and Mommsen. 
His principal works on this subject were : Zur Geschichte der 
Mondcyclen der Hellenen (1855); Epigraphisch-chronologische 
Studien (1856); Uber die vierjahrigen Sonnenkreise der Allen 
(1863), and several papers which he published in the Transactions 
of the Berlin Academy. Bockh also occupied himself with 
philosophy. One of his earliest papers was on the Platonic 
doctrine of the world, De Platonica corporis mundani fabrica 
(1809), followed by De Platonico Systemale Caelestium globorum 



el de vera Indole Astronomiae Philolaice (1810), to which may be 
added Manetho und die Hundstemperiode (1845). In opposition 
to Otto Gruppe (1804-1876), he denied that Plato affirmed the 
diurnal rotation of the earth (Untersuchungen iiber das kosmische 
System des Platon, 1852), and when in opposition to him Grote 
published his opinions on the subject (Plato and the Rotation 
of the Earth) Bockh was ready with his reply. Another of his 
earlier papers, and one frequently referred to, was Commentatio 
Academica de simultate quae Platoni cum Xenophonle inlercessisse 
fertur (1811). Other philosophical writings were Commentatio 
in Platonis qui vulgo fertur Minoem (1806), and Philolaos' des 
Pythagoreers Lehren nebst den Bruchstiicken (181 9), in which he 
endeavoured to show the genuineness of the fragments. 

Besides his edition of Pindar, Bockh published an edition 
of the Antigone of Sophocles (1843) with a poetical translation 
and essays. An early and important work on the Greek tra- 
gedians is his Graecae Tragoediae Principum . . . num ea quae 
super sunt et genuina omnia sint el forma primitive servala (1808). 

The smaller writings of Bockh began to be collected in his lifetime. 
Three of the volumes were published before his death, and four after 
(Gesammelte kleine Schriften, 1858-1874). The first two consist of 
orations delivered in the university or academy of Berlin, or on 
public occasions. The third, fourth, fifth and sixth contain his 
contributions to the Transactions of the Berlin Academy, and the 
seventh contains his critiques. Bockh's lectures, delivered from 
1809-1865, were published by Bratuschek under the title of Encyclo- 
pddie und Methodologie der philologischcn Wissenschaften (2nd ed., 
Klussmann, 1886). His philological and scientific theories are set 
forth in Elze, Uber Philologie als System (1845), and Reichhardt, Die 
Gliederung der Philologie entwickelt (1846). His correspondence with 
Ottfried Muller appeared at Leipzig in 1883. See Sachse, Erin- 
nerungen an August Bockh (1868); Stark, in the Verhandlungen der 
Wurzburger Philologensammlung (1868); Max Hoffmann, August 
Bockh (1901); and S. Reiter, in Neue Jahrbiicher fur das klassische 
Altertum (1902), p. 436. 

BOCKLIN, ARNOLD (1827-1901), Swiss painter, was born 
at Basel on the 16th of October 1827. His father, Christian 
Frederick Bocklin (b. 1802), was descended from an old family 
of Schaffhausen, and engaged in the silk trade. His mother, 
Ursula Lippe, was a native of the same city. In 1846 he began 
his studies at the Dusseldorf academy under Schirmer, who 
recognized in him. a student of exceptional promise, and sent him 
to Antwerp and Brussels, where he copied the works of Flemish 
and Dutch masters. Bocklin then went to Paris, worked at the 
Louvre, and painted several landscapes; his " Landscape and 
Ruin " reveals at the same time a strong feeling for nature and 
a dramatic conception of scenery, After serving his time in the 
army he set out for Rome in March 1850, and the sight of the 
Eternal City was a fresh stimulus to his mind. So, too, was 
the influence of Italian nature and that of the dead pagan world. 
At Rome he married (June 20, 1853) Angela Rosa Lorenza 
Pascucci. In 1856 he returned to Munich, and remained there 
four years. He then exhibited the " Great Park," one of his 
earliest works, in which he treated ancient mythology with the 
stamp of individuality, which was the basis of his reputation. 
Of this period, too, are his " Nymph and Satyr," " Heroic 
Landscape" (Diana Hunting), both of 1858, and "Sappho" 
(1859). These works, which were much discussed, together with 
Lenbach's recommendation, gained him his appointment as 
professor at the Weimar academy. He held the office for two 
years, painting the " Venus and Love," a " Portrait of Lenbach," 
and a " Saint Catherine." He was again at Rome from 1862 to 
1866, and there gave his fancy and his taste for violent colour 
free play in his " Portrait of Mme Bocklin," now in the Basel 
gallery, in " An Anchorite in the Wilderness " (1863) ; a " Roman 
Tavern," and " Villa on the Sea-shore " (1864) ; this last, one of his 
best pictures. He returned to Basel in 1866 to finish his frescoes 
in the gallery, and to paint, besides several portraits, " The 
Magdalene with Christ" (1868); " Anacreon's Muse" (1869); 
and " A Castle and Warriors " (1871). His " Portrait of Myself," 
with Death playing a violin (1873), was painted after his return 
again to Munich, where he exhibited his famous " Battle of the 
Centaurs" (in the Basel gallery); "Landscape with Moorish 
Horsemen" (in the Lucerne gallery); and "A Farm" (1875), 
From 1876 to 1885 Bocklin was working at Florence, and painted 



ro8 



BOCLAND— BODEL 



a " Pieta," " Ulysses and Calypso," " Prometheus," and the 
" Sacred Grove." From 1886 to 1892 he settled at Zurich. 
Of this period are the " Naiads at Play," " A Sea Idyll," and 
" War." After 1892 Bocklin resided at San Domenico, near 
Florence. An exhibition of his collected works was held at 
Basel from the 20th of September to the 24th of October 1897. 
He died on the 16th of January 1901. 

His life has been written by Henri Mendelssohn. See also F. 
Hermann, Gazette des Beaux Arts (Paris, 1893); Max Lehrs, Arnold 
Bocklin, Ein Leitfaden znm Verstandniss seiner Kunst (Munich, 
1897); W. Ritter, Arnold Bocklin (Gand, 1895); Katalog der 
Bocklin Jubilaums Ausstellung (Basel, 1897). (H. Fr.) 

BOCLAND, Bockland or Bookxand (from A.S. hoc, book), 
an original mode of tenure of land, also called charter-land or 
deed-land. Bocland was folk-land granted to individuals in 
private ownership by a document (charter or book) in writing, 
with the signatures of the king and witenagemot; at first it was 
rarely, if ever, held by laymen, except for religious purposes. 
Bocland to a certain extent resembled full ownership in the 
modern sense, in that the owner could grant it in his lifetime, 
in the same manner as he had received it, by hoc or book, and 
also dispose of it by will. (See also Folkland.) 

BOCSKAY, STEPHEN [Istvan] (1557-1606), prince of Tran- 
sylvania, the most eminent member of the ancient Bocskay 
family, son of Gyorgy Bocskay and Krisztina Sulyok, was born 
at Kolozsvar, Hungary. As the chief councillor of Prince 
Zsigmond Bathory, he advised his sovereign to contract an 
alliance with the emperor instead of holding to the Turk, and 
rendered important diplomatic services on frequent missions to 
Prague and Vienna. The enmity towards him of the later 
Bathory princes of Transylvania, who confiscated his estates, 
drove him to seek protection at the imperial court (1599); but 
the attempts of the emperor Rudolph II. to deprive Hungary 
of her constitution and the Protestants of their religious liberties 
speedily alienated Bocskay, especially after the terrible outrages 
inflicted on the Transylvanians by the imperial generals Basta 
and Belgiojoso from 1602 to 1604. Bocskay, to save the inde- 
pendence of Transylvania, assisted the Turks; and in 1605, as 
a reward for his part in driving Basta out of Transylvania, the 
Hungarian diet, assembled at Modgyes, elected him prince (1605), 
on which occasion the Ottoman sultan sent a special embassy 
to congratulate him and a splendid jewelled crown made in Persia. 
Bocskay refused the royal dignity, but made skilful use of the 
Turkish alliance. To save the Austrian provinces of Hungary, 
the archduke Matthias, setting aside his semi-lunatic imperial 
brother Rudolph, thereupon entered into negotiations with 
Bocskay, and ultimately the peace of Vienna was concluded 
(June 23, 1606), which guaranteed all the constitutional and 
religious rights and privileges of the Hungarians both in Tran- 
sylvania and imperial Hungary. Bocskay, at the same time, was 
acknowledged as prince of Transylvania by the Austrian court, 
and the right of the Transylvanians to elect their own independent 
princes in future was officially recognized. The fortress of 
Tokaj and the counties of Bereg, Szatmar and Ugocsa were at 
the same time ceded to Bocskay, with reversion to Austria if 
he should die childless. Simultaneously, at Zsitvatorok, a peace, 
confirmatory of the peace of Vienna, was concluded with the 
Turks. Bocskay survived this signal and unprecedented triumph 
only a few months. He is said to have been poisoned (Decem- 
ber 29, 1606) by his chancellor, Mihaly Katay, who was hacked 
to bits by Bocskay's adherents in the market-place of Kassa. 

See Political Correspondence of Stephen Bocskay (Hung.), edited by 
Karoly Szabo (Budapest, 1882); Jeno Thury, Stephen Bocskay's 
Rebellion (Hung.), Budapest, 1899. (R. N. B.) 

BODE, JOHANN ELERT (1 747-1826), German astronomer, 
was born at Hamburg on the 19th of January 1747. Devoted 
to astronomy from his earliest years, he eagerly observed the 
heavens at a garret window with a telescope made by himself, 
and at nineteen began his career with the publication of a short 
work on the solar eclipse of the 5th of August 1766. This was 
followed by an elementary treatise on astronomy entitled 
Anleitung zur Kenntniss des gestirnten Himmels (1768, 10th ed. 



1844), the success of which led to his being summoned to Berlin 
in 1772 for the purpose of computing ephemerides on an 
improved plan. There resulted the foundation by him, in 1774, 
of the well-known Astronomisches Jahrbuch, 51 yearly volumes 
of which he compiled and issued. He became director of the 
Berlin observatory in 1786, withdrew from official life in 1825, 
and died at Berlin on the 23rd of November 1826. His works 
were highly effective in diffusing throughout Germany a taste 
for astronomy. Besides those already mentioned he wrote: — 
Sammlung astronomischer Tafeln (3 vols., 1776); Erlauterung 
der Sternkunde (1776, 3rd ed. 1808); Uranographia (1801), a 
collection of 20 star-maps accompanied by a catalogue of 17,240 
stars and nebulae. In one of his numerous incidental essays he 
propounded, in 1776, a theory of the solar constitution similar 
to that developed in 1795 by Sir William Herschel. He gave 
currency, moreover, to the empirical rule known as " B ode's 
Law," which was actually announced by Johann Daniel Titius 
of Wittenberg in 1772. It is expressed by the statement that 
the proportionate distances of the several planets from the sun 
may be represented by adding 4 to each term of the series; 
o, 3, 6, 12, 24, &c. The irregularity will be noticed of the first 
term, which shpuld be i| instead of o. (See Solar System.) 

See J. F. Encke, Berhn Abhandlungen (1827), p. xi. ; H. C. Schu- 
macher, Astr. Nach. v. 255, 367 (1827); Poggendorff, Biog. litera- 
risches Handwbrterbuch; Allgemeine deutsche Biographie, iii. 1. 

BODEL, JEHAN (died c. 12 10), French tr owner e, was born at 
Arras in the second half of the 12th century. Very little is 
known of his life, but in 1205 he was about to start for the 
crusade when he was attacked by leprosy. In a touching poem 
called Le Conge (pr. by Meon in Recueil de fabliaux et contes, vol. i.) , 
he bade farewell to his friends and patrons, and begged for a 
nomination to a leper hospital. He wrote Le Jeu de Saint 
Nicolas, one of the earliest miracle plays preserved in French 
(printed in Monmerque and Michel's Thedtre franqais du moyen 
Age, 1839, and for the Soc. des bibliophiles franqais, 1831); the 
Chanson des Saisnes (ed. F. Michel 1839), four pastourelles 
(printed in K. Bartsch's Altfranz. Romanzen und Pastourellen, 
Leipzig, 1870); and probably, the eight fabliaux attributed to 
an unknown Jean Bedel. The legend of Saint Nicholas had 
already formed the subject of the Latin Ludus Sancti Nicholai 
of Hilarius. Bodel placed the scene partly on a field of battle in 
Africa, where the crusaders perish in a hopeless struggle, and 
partly in a tavern. The piece, loosely connected by the miracle 
of Saint Nicholas narrated in the prologue, ends with a wholesale 
conversion of the African king and his subjects. The dialogue 
in the tavern scenes is written in thieves' slang, and is very 
obscure. The Chanson des Saisnes, Bodel's authorship of which 
has been called in question, is a chanson de geste belonging to the 
period of decadence, and is really a ropian d'aventures based on 
earlier legends belonging to the Charlemagne cycle. It relates 
the wars of Charlemagne against the Saxons under Guiteclin de 
Sassoigne (Witikind or Widukind),with the second revolt of the 
Saxons and their final submission and conversion. Jehan Bodel 
makes no allusion to Ogier the Dane and many other personages 
of the Charlemagne cycle, but he mentions the defeat of Roland 
at Roncevaux. The romance is based on historical fact, but is 
overlaid with romantic detail. It really embraces three distinct 
legends — those of the wars against the Saxons, of Charlemagne's 
rebellious barons, and of Baudouim and Sebille. The earlier 
French poems on the subject are lost, but the substance of them 
is preserved in the Scandinavian versions of the Charlemagne 
cycle (supposed to have been derived from English sources) 
known as the Karlamagnussaga (ed. Unger, Christiania, i860) 
and Keiser Karl Magnus Kronike (Romantisk Digtnung, ed. 
C. J. Brandt, Copenhagen, 1877). 

See also the article on Jehan Bodel by Paulin Paris in Hist. litt. 
de la France, xx. pp. 605-638 ; Gaston Paris, Histoire poetique de 
Charlemagne (1865); Leon Gautier, Les Epopees francaises (revised 
edition, vol. iii. pp. 650-684), where there is a full analysis of the 
Chanson des Saisnes and a bibliography ; H. Meyer, in Ausgaben und 
Abhandlungen aus . . . der romanischen Philologie (Marburg, 1883), 
pp. 1-76, where its relation to the rest of the Charlemagne cycle is 
discussed. 



BODENBACH— BODIN 



109 



BODENBACH (Czech Podmokly), a town of Bohemia, Austria, 
83 m. N.N.E. of Prague by rail. Pop. (1900) 10,782, almost 
exclusively German. It is situated on the left bank of the Elbe 
opposite Tetschen, and is an important railway junction, con- 
taining also an Austrian and a Saxon custom-house. Bodenbach, 
which in the middle of the 19th century had only a few hundred 
inhabitants, has become a very important industrial centre. 
Its principal manufactures include cotton and woollen goods, 
earthenware and crockery, chemicals, chicory, chocolate, sweet- 
meats and preserves, and beer. It has also a very active transit 
trade. 

BODENSTEDT, FRIEDRICH MARTIN VON (1819-1892), 
German author, was born at Peine, in Hanover, on the 22nd of 
April 1819. He studied in Gottingen, Munich and Berlin. His 
career was determined by his engagement in 1841 as tutor in the 
family of Prince Gallitzin at Moscow, where he gained a thorough 
knowledge of Russian. This led to his appointment in 1844 as 
the head of a public school at Tiflis, in Transcaucasia. He took 
the opportunity of his proximity to Persia to study Persian 
literature, and in 185 1 published a volume of original poetry in 
oriental guise under the fanciful title, Die Lieder des Mirza 
Schajfy (English trans, by E. d'Esterre, 1880). The success of 
this work can only be compared with that of Edward FitzGcrald's 
Omar Khayyam, produced in somewhat similar circumstances, 
but differed from it in being immediate. It has gone through 
160 editions in Germany, and has been translated into almost all 
literary languages. Nor is this celebrity undeserved, for although 
Bodsnstedt does not attain the poetical elevation of FitzGcrald, 
his view of life is wider, more cheerful and more sane, while the 
execution is a model of grace. On his return from the East, 
Bodenstedt engaged for a while in journalism, married the 
daughter of a Hessian officer (Ma tilde, the Edlitam of his poems), 
and was in 1854 appointed professor of Slavonic at Munich. The 
rich stores of knowledge which Bodenstedt brought back from 
the East were turned to account in two important books, Die 
Volker des Kaukasus mid ihre Freiheils-Kampfe gegen die Russen 
(1848), and Tcusend und ein Tag im Orient (1850). For some 
time Bodenstedt continued to devote himself to Slavonic subjects, 
producing translations of Pushkin, Lermontov, Turgweniev, and 
of the poets of the Ukraines, and writing a tragedy on the false 
Demetrius, and an epic, Ada die Lesghierin, on a Circassian 
theme. Finding, probably, this vein exhausted, he exchanged 
his professorship in 1858 for one of Early English literature, and 
published (1858-1860) a valuable work on the English drama- 
tists contemporary with Shakespeare, with copious translations. 
In 1862 he produced a standard translation of Shakespeare's 
sonnets, and between 1866 and 1872 published a complete 
version of the plays, with the help of many coadjutors. In 1867 
he undertook the direction of the court theatre at Meiningen, 
and was ennobled by the duke. After 1873 he lived successively 
at Altona, Berlin and Wiesbaden, where he died on the 19th of 
April 1892. His later works consist of an autobiography (1888), 
successful translations from Hafiz and Omar Khayyam, and 
lyrics and dramas which added little to his reputation. 

An edition of his collected works in 12 vols, was published at 
Berlin (1866-1869), and his Erzdhlungen und Romane at Jena (1871- 
1872). For further biographical details, see Bodenstedt's Erin- 
nerungen aus meinem Leben (2 vols., Berlin, 1888-1890); and 
G. Schenck, Friedrich von Bodenstedt. Ein Dichterleben in seinen 
Briefen (Berlin, 1893). 

BODHI VAMSA, a prose poem in elaborate Sanskritized Pali, 
composed by Upatissa in the reign of Mahinda IV. of Ceylon 
about a.d. 980. It is an adaptation of a previously existing 
work in Sinhalese on the same subject, and describes the bringing 
of a branch of the celebrated Bo or Bodhi tree (i.e. Wisdom Tree, 
under which the Buddha had attained wisdom) to Ceylon in the 
3rd century B.C. The Bodhi Vamsa quotes verses from the 
Mahavamsa, but draws a great deal of its material from other 
sources; and it has occasionally preserved details of the older 
tradition not found in any other sources known to us. 

Edition in Pali for the Pali Text Society by S. Arthur Strong 
(London, 1891). 



BODICHON, BARBARA LEIGH SMITH (1827-1891), English 
educationalist, was born at Watlington, Norfolk, on the 8th of 
April 1827, the daughter of Benjamin Smith (1783-1860), long 
M.P. for Norwich. She early showed a force of character and 
catholicity of sympathy that later won her a prominent place 
among philanthropists and social workers. In 1857 she married 
an eminent French physician, Dr Eugene Bodichon, and, 
although wintering many years in Algiers, continued to lead the 
movements she had initiated in behalf of Englishwomen. In 
1869 she published her Brief Summary of the Laws of England 
concerning Women, which had a useful effect in helping forward 
the passage of the Married Women's Property Act. In 1866, 
co-operating with Miss Emily Davies, she matured a scheme for 
the extension of university education to women, and the first 
small experiment at Hitchin developed into Girton College, to 
which Mme Bodichon gave liberally of her time and money. 
With all her public interests she found time for society and her 
favourite art of painting. She studied under William H. Hunt, 
and her water-colours, exhibited at the Salon, the Academy and 
elsewhere, showed great originality and talent, and were admired 
by Corot and Daubigny. Her London salon included many of 
the literary and artistic celebrities of her day; she was George 
Eliot's most intimate friend, and, according to her, the first 
to recognize the authorship of Adam Bede. Her personal 
appearance is said to be described in that of Romola. Mme 
Bodichon died at Robertsbridge, Sussex, on the nth of June 
1891. 

BODIN, JEAN ( 1 530-1 596), French political philosopher, was 
born at Angers in 1530. Having studied law at Toulouse and 
lectured there on jurisprudence, he settled in Paris as an advocate, 
but soon applied himself to literature. In 1555 he published his 
first work, a translation of Oppian's Cynegeticon into Latin verse, 
with a commentary. The celebrated scholar, Turnebus, com- 
plained that some of his emendations had been appropriated 
without acknowledgment. In 1588, in refutation of the views 
of the seigneur de Malestroit, comptroller of the mint, who 
maintained that there had been no rise of prices in France during 
the three preceding centuries, he published his Responsio ad 
Paradoxa Malestretti (Reponse aux paradoxes de M. Malestroit), 
which the first time explained in a nearly satisfactory manner 
the revolution of prices which took place in the 16th century. 
Bodin showed a more rational appreciation than many of his 
contemporaries of the causes of this revolution, and the relation 
of the variations in money to the market values of wares in 
general as well as to the wages of labour. He saw that the 
amount of money in circulation did not constitute the wealth 
of the community, and that the prohibition of the export of the 
precious metals was rendered inoperative by the necessities 
of trade. This tract, the Discours stir les causes de I'extreme 
cherte qui ist aujourdhuy en France (1574), and the disquisi- 
tion on public revenues in the sixth book of the Ripublique, 
entitle Bodin to a distinguished position among the earlier 
economists. 

His learning, genial disposition, and conversational powers 
won him the favor of Henry III. and of his brother, the due 
d'Alencon; and he was appointed king's attorney at Laon in 
1576. In this year he married, performed his most brilliant 
service to his country, and completed his greatest literary work. 
Elected by the tiers Hat of Vermandois to represent it in the 
states-general of Blois, he contended with skill and boldness in 
extremely difficult circumstances for freedom of conscience, 
justice and peace. The nobility and clergy favoured the League, 
and urged the king to force his subjects to profess the Catholic 
religion. When Bodin found he could not prevent this resolution 
being carried, he contrived to get inserted in the petition drawn 
up by the states the clause " without war," which practically 
rendered nugatory all its other clauses. While he thus resisted 
the clergy and nobility he successfully opposed the demand of 
the king to be allowed to alienate the public lands and royal 
demesnes, although the chief deputies had been won over to 
assent. This lost him the favour of the king, who wanted money 
on any terms. In 1381 he acted as secretary to the due d'Alengon 



no 



BODKIN— BODLEY 



when that prince came over to England to seek the hand of 
Queen Elizabeth. Here he had the pleasure of finding that the 
Ripublique was studied at London and Cambridge, although 
in a barbarous Latin translation. This determined him to 
translate his work into Latin himself (1586). The latter part of 
Bodin's life was spent at Laon, which he is said to have per- 
suaded to declare for the League in 1589, and for Henry IV. 
five years afterwards. He died of the plague in 1596, and was' 
buried in the church of the Carmelites. 

With all his breadth and liberality of mind Bodin was a 
credulous believer in witchcraft, the virtues of numbers and the 
power of the stars, and in 1580 he published the Demonomanie 
des sorciers, a work which shows that he was not exempt from the 
prejudices of the age. Himself regarded by most of his con- 
temporaries as a sceptic, and by some as an atheist, he denounced 
all who dared to disbelieve in sorcery, and urged the burning of 
witches and wizards. It might, perhaps, have gone hard with 
him if his counsel had been strictly followed, as he confessed to 
have had from his thirty-seventh year a friendly demon, who, 
if properly invoked, touched his right ear when he purposed 
doing what was wrong, and his left when he meditated doing 
good. 

His chief work, the Six livres de la Ripublique (Paris, 1576), 
which passed through several editions in his lifetime, that of 
1583 having as an appendix L'Apologie de Rene Her pin (Bodin 
himself), was the first modern attempt to construct an elaborate 
system of political science. It is perhaps the most important 
work of its kind between Aristotle and modern writers. Though 
he was much indebted to Aristotle he used the material to 
advantage, adding much from his own experience and historical 
knowledge. In harmony with the conditions of his age, he 
approved of absolute governments, though at the same time 
they must, he thought, be controlled by constitutional laws. 
He entered into an elaborate defence of individual property 
against Plato and More, rather perhaps because the scheme of 
his work required the treatment of that theme than because it 
was practically urgent in his day, when the excesses of the Ana- 
baptists had produced a strong feeling against communistic 
doctrines. He was under the general influence of the mercan- 
tilist views, and approved of energetic governmental inter- 
ference in industrial matters, of high taxes on foreign manufac- 
tures and low duties on raw materials and articles of food, and 
attached great importance to a dense population. But he was 
not a blind follower of the system; he wished for unlimited 
freedom of trade in many cases; and he was in advance of his 
more eminent contemporary Montaigne in perceiving that the 
gain of one nation is not necessarily the loss of another. To the 
public finances, which he called " the sinews of the state," he 
devoted much attention, and insisted on the duties of the govern- 
ment in respect to the right adjustment of taxation. In general 
he deserves the praise of steadily keeping in view the higher aims 
and interests of society in connexion with the regulation and 
development of its material life. 

Among his other works are Oratio de inslituenda in republica 
juventate (1559); Methodus ad facilem historiarum cognitionem 
(1566); Universale Naturae Theatrum (1596, French trans, by 
Fougerolles, 1597), and the Colloquium Heptaplomeres de abditis 
rerum sublimium arcanis, written in 1588, published first by 
Guhrauer(i84i), and in a complete form by L.Noack (1857). The 
last is a philosophy of naturalism in the form of a conversation 
between seven learned men — a Jew, a Mahommedan, a Lutheran, 
a Zwinglian, a Roman Catholic, an Epicurean and a Theist. 
The conclusion to which they are represented as coming is that 
they will live together in charity and toleration, and cease from 
further disputation as to religion. It is curious that Leibnitz, 
who originally regarded the Colloquium as the work of a pro- 
fessed enemy of Christianity, subsequently described it as 
a most valuable production (cf. M. Carriere, Weltanschauung, 
P- 3i7)- 

See H. Baudrillart, /. Bodin et son temps (Paris, 1853) ; Ad. 
Franck, Reformateurs et publicistes de VEurope (Paris, 1864); N. 
Planchenault, Etudes sur Jean Bodin (Angers, 1858); E. de Barthe- 



lemy, £tude sur J. Bodin (Paris, 1876) ; for the political philosophy 
of Bodin, see P. Janet, Hist, de la science polit. (3rd ed., Paris, 1887) ; 
Hancke, B. Studien iiber d. Begriff d. Souverdnitdt (Breslau, 1894), 
A. Bardoux. Les Legistes et leur influence sur la soc.francaise ; Fournol, 
Bodin predecesseur de Montesquieu (Paris, 1896) ; for his political 
economy, J. K. Ingram, Hist, of Pol. Econ. (London, 1888) ; for 
his ethical teaching, A. Desjardins, Les Moralistes francais du 
seizieme Steele, ch. v. ; and for his historical views, R. Flint's 
Philosophy of History in Europe (ed. 1893), pp. 190 foil. 

BODKIN (Early Eng. boydekin, a dagger, a word of unknown 
origin, possibly connected with the Gaelic biodag, a short sword), 
a small, needle-like instrument of steel or bone with a flattened 
knob at one end, used in needlework. It has one or more slits 
or eyes, through which cord, tape or ribbon can be passed, for 
threading through a hem or series of loops. The word is also 
used of a small piercing instrument for making holes in cloth, &c. 
BODLE or Boddle (said to be from Bothwell, the name of a 
mint-master), a Scottish copper coin worth about one-sixth of an 

1 English penny, first issued under Charles II. It survives in the 
phrase " not to care a bodle." 

BODLEY, GEORGE FREDERICK (1827 -1907), English 
architect, was the youngest son of a physician at Brighton, his 
elder brother, the Rev. W. H. Bodley, becoming a well-known 
Roman Catholic preacher and a professor at Oscott. He was 
articled to the famous architect Sir Gilbert Scott, under whose 
influence he became imbued with the spirit of the Gothic revival, 
and he gradually became known as the chief exponent of 14th- 
century English Gothic, and the leading ecclesiastical architect 
in England. One of his first churches was St Michael and All 
Angels, Brighton (1855), and among his principal erections may 
be mentioned All Saints, Cambridge; Eton Mission church, 
Hackney Wick; Clumber church; Eccleston church; Hoar 
Cross church; St Augustine's, Pendlebury; Holy Trinity. 
Kensington; Chapel Allerton, Leeds; St Faith's, Brentford; 
Queen's College chapel, Cambridge; Marlborough College 
chapel; and Burton church. His domestic work included the 
London School Board offices, the new buildings at Magdalen, 
Oxford, and Hewell Grange (for Lord Windsor). From 1872 he 
had for twenty years the partnership of Mr T. Garner, who worked 
with him. He also designed (with his pupil James Vaughan) the 
cathedral at Washington, D.C., U.S.A., and cathedrals at San 
Francisco and in Tasmania; and when Mr Gilbert Scott's design 
for his new Liverpool cathedral was successful in the competition 
he collaborated with the young architect in preparing for its 
erection. Bodley began contributing to the Royal Academy in 
1854, and in 1881 was elected A.R.A., becoming R.A. in 1902. 
In addition to being a most learned master of architecture, he 
was a beautiful draughtsman, and a connoisseur in art; he pub- 
lished a volume of poems in 1899; and he was a designer of 
wall-papers and chintzes for Watts & Co., of Baker Street, 
London; in early life he had been in close alliance with the 
Pre-Raphaelites, and he did a great deal, like William Morris, to 
improve public taste in domestic decoration and furniture. He 
died on the 21st of October 1907, at Water Eaton, Oxford. 

BODLEY, SIR THOMAS (1545-1613), English diplomatist and 
scholar, founder of the Bodleian library, Oxford, was born at 
Exeter on the 2nd of March 1545. During the reign of Queen 
Mary, his father, John Bodley, being obliged to leave the kingdom 
on account of his Protestant principles, went to live at Geneva. 

1 In that university, in which Calvin and Beza were then teaching 
divinity, young B odley studied for a short time. On the accession 
of Queen Elizabeth he returned with his father to England, and 

1 soon after entered Magdalen College, Oxford. In 1 563 he took 
his B. A. degree, and was admitted a fellow of Merton College. In 
1 565 he read a Greek lecture in hall, took his M. A. degree the year 
after, and read natural philosophy in the public schools. In 1 569 
he was proctor, and for some time after was deputy public orator. 
Quitting Oxford in 1576, he made the tour of Europe; shortly 
after his return he became gentleman-usher to Queen Elizabeth; 
and in 1587, apparently, he married Ann Ball, a widow lady of 
considerable fortune, the daughter of a Mr Carew of Bristol. In 
1584 he entered parliament as member for Portsmouth, and 
represented St German's in 1586. In 1585 Bodley was entrusted 



BODMER— -BODONI 



in 



with a mission to form a league between Frederick II. of Denmark 
and certain German princes to assist Henry of Navarre. He was 
next despatched on a secret mission to France; and in 1588 he 
was sent to the Hague as minister, a post which demanded great 
diplomatic skill, for it was in the Netherlands that the power of 
Spain had to be fought. The essential difficulties of his mission 
were complicated by the intrigues of the queen's ministers at 
home, and Bodley repeatedly begged that he might be recalled. 
He was finally permitted to return to England in 1 596, but finding 
his preferment obstructed by the jarring interests of Burleigh 
and Essex, he retired from public life. He was knighted on the 
18th of April 1604. He is, however, remembered specially as the 
founder of the Bodleian at Oxford, practically the earliest public 
library in Europe (see Libraries). He determined, he said, " to 
take his farewell of state employments and to set up his staff at 
the library door in Oxford." In 1598 his offer to restore the old 
library was accepted by the university. Bodley not only used 
his private fortune in his undertaking, but induced many of his 
friends to make valuable gifts of books. In 1611 he began its 
permanent endowment, and at his death in London on the 28th 
of January 1613, the greater part of his fortune was left to it. 
He was buried in the choir of Merton College chapel where a 
monument of black and white marble was erected to him. 
. Sir Thomas wrote his own life to the year 1609, which, with the 
first draft of the statutes drawn up for the library, and his letters 
to the librarian, Thomas James, was published by Thomas Hearne, 
under the title of Reliquiae Bodleianae, or Authentic Remains of Sir 
Thomas Bodley (London, 1703, 8vo). 

BODMER, JOHANN JAKOB (1698-1783), Swiss-German 
author, was born at Greifensee, near Zurich, on the 19th of July 
1698. After first studying theology and then trying a commercial 
career, he finally found his vocation in letters. In 1725 he was 
appointed professor of Helvetian history in Zurich, a chair which 
he held for half a century, and in 1735 became a member of the 
" Grosser Rat." He published (1721-1723), in conjunction with 
J. J. Breitinger (1 701-17 74) and several others, Die Discourse der 
Mahlern, a weekly journal after the model of the Spectator. 
Through his prose translation of Milton's Paradise Lost (1732) 
and his successful endeavours to make a knowledge of English 
literature accessible to Germany, he aroused the hostile criticism 
of Gottsched (q.v.) and his school, a struggle which ended in 
the complete discomfiture of the latter. His most important 
writings are the treatises Von dem Wunderbaren in der Poesie 
(1740) and Kritische Betrachtungen iiber die poetischen Gemalde 
der Dichter (1741), in which he pleaded for the freedom of the 
imagination from the restriction imposed upon it by French 
pseudo-classicism. Bodmer's epics Die Sundfiuth (1751) and 
Noah (1751) are weak imitations of Klopstock's Messias, and 
his plays are entirely deficient in dramatic qualities. He did 
valuable service to German literature by his editions of the 
Minnesingers and part of the Nibelungenlied. He died at Zurich 
on the 2nd of January 1783. 

See T. W. Danzel, Gottsched und seine Zeit (Leipzig, 1848); J. 
Criiger, J. C. Gottsched, Bodmer und Breitinger (Stuttgart, 1884); 
F. Braitmaier, Geschichte der poetischen Theorie und Kritik von den 
Diskursen der Maler bis auf Lessing (Leipzig, 1888) ; Denkschrift zu 
Bodmers 200. Geburtstag (Ziirich, 1900). 

BODMIN, a market town and municipal borough in the Bodmin 
parliamentary division of Cornwall, England, the county town, 
30J m. W.N.W. of Plymouth, on branches of the Great Western 
and London & South-Western railways. Pop. (1901) 5353. It 
lies between two hills in a short valley opening westward upon 
that of the Camel, at the southern extremity of the high open 
Bodmin Moor. The large church of St Petrock, mainly Per- 
pendicular, has earlier portions, and a late Norman font. 
East of it there is a ruined Decorated chapel of St Thomas of 
Canterbury, with a crypt. A tower of Tudor date, in the ceme- 
tery, marks the site of a chapel of the gild of the Holy Rood. 
Part of the buildings of a Franciscan friary, founded c. 1 240, are 
incorporated in the market-house, and the gateway remains 
in an altered form. At Bodmin are a prison, with civil and 
naval departments, the county gaol and asylum, the head- 
quarters of the constabulary, and those of the duke of Cornwall's 



Light Infantry. Cattle, sheep and horse fairs are held, and 
there is a considerable agricultural trade. The borough is under 
a mayor, four aldermen and twelve councillors. Area, 2797 
acres. 

Traces of Roman occupation have been found in the western 
part of the parish, belonging to the first century a.d. Possibly 
tin-mining was carried on here at that period. The grant of a 
charter by King Edred to the prior and canons of Bodmin 
(Bomine, Bodman, Bodmyn) in respect of lands in Devonshire 
appears in an inspeximus of 1252. To its ecclesiastical associa- 
tions it owed its importance at the time of the Domesday survey, 
when St Petrock held the manor of Bodmin, wherein were sixty- 
eight houses and one market. To successive priors, as mesne 
lords, it also owed its earliest municipal privileges. King John's 
charter to the prior and convent, dated the 17th of July 1199, 
contained a clause (subsequently cancelled by Richard II.) by 
which burgesses were exempt from being impleaded, touching 
any tenements in their demesne, except before the king and 
his chief justice. Richard of Cornwall, king of the Romans, 
confirmed to the burgesses their gild merchant, Edward I. the 
pesage of tin, and Edward II. a market for tin and wool. Queen 
Elizabeth in 1563 constituted the town a free borough and the 
burgesses a body corporate, granting at the same time two fairs 
and a Saturday market. There are still held also three other 
fairs whose origin is uncertain. An amended charter granted 
in 1594 remained in force until 1789, when the corporation 
became extinct owing to the diminution of the burgesses. By 
virtue of a new charter of incorporation granted in 1798 and 
remodelled by the act of 1835, the corporation now consists of 
a mayor, four aldermen and twelve councillors. The first 
members for Bodmin were summoned in 1295. Retaining both 
its members in 1832, losing one in 1868 and the other in 1885, 
it has now become merged in the south-eastern division of the 
county. From 1715 to 1837 the assizes were generally held 
alternately at Launceston and Bodmin; since 1837 they have 
been held at Bodmin only. A court of probate has also been 
held at Bodmin since 1773. A festival known as "Bodmin 
Riding " was formerly celebrated here on the Sunday and 
Monday following St Thomas's day (July 7). It is thought by 
some to have been instituted in n 77 to celebrate the recovery 
of the bones of St Petrock. 

See Victoria County History , Cornwall; Sir John Maclean, Parochial 
and Family History of the Deanery of Trigg Minor, Cornwall (3 vols., 
1873-1879). 

BODO, a seaport on the north-western coast of Norway, in 
Nordland amt (county), lat. 67° 17' N. Pop. (1900) 4827. The 
rock-bound harbour admits large vessels, and there is a brisk 
trade in fish and eider-down. The neighbouring country has 
many scenic attractions. Sixty miles inland (E.) rises the great 
massif of Sulitelma on the Swedish frontier, with its copper 
mines, broad snow-fields and glaciers. The fjords of the district 
include the imposing Beierenfjord, the Saltenfjord, and the 
Skjerstadf jord, at the narrow mouths of which, between islands, 
a remarkable cataract (Saltstrom) is formed at the turn of the 
tide. On this fjord is Skjerstad, a large scattered village. 

BODONI, GIAMBATTISTA (1740-1813), Italian printer, was 
born in 1740 at Saluzzo in Piedmont, where his father owned 
a printing establishment. While yet a boy he began to engrave 
on wood. He at length went to Rome, and there became a 
compositor for the press of the Propaganda. He made himself 
acquainted with the Oriental languages, and thus was enabled 
to render essential service to the Propaganda press, by restoring 
and accurately distributing the types of several Oriental alpha- 
bets which had fallen into disorder. The infante Don Ferdinand, 
afterwards duke of Parma, having established, about 1760, a 
printing-house on the model of those in Paris, Madrid and Turin, 
Bodoni was placed at the head of this establishment, which he 
soon rendered the first of the kind in Europe. The beauty of his 
typography, &c, leaves nothing further to be desired; but the 
intrinsic value of his editions is seldom equal to their outward 
splendour. His Homer, however, is a truly magnificent work; 
and, indeed, his Greek letters are faultless imitations of the best 



112 



BODY-SNATCHING— BOEHM VON BAWERK 



Greek manuscript. His editions of the Greek, Latin, Italian 
and French classics are all highly prized for their typographical 
elegance, and some of them are not less remarkable for their 
accuracy. Bodoni died at Padua in 1813. In 1818 a magnifi- 
cent work appeared in two volumes quarto, entitled Manuale 
Tipografico, containing specimens of the vast collection of types 
which had belonged to him. 

See De Lama, Vita del Cavaliere Giambattista Bodoni (1816). 

BODY-SNATCHING, the secret disinterring of dead bodies 
in churchyards in order to sell them for the purpose of dissection. 
Those who practised body-snatching were frequently called 
resurrectionists or resurrection-men. Previous to the passing 
of the Anatomy Act 1832 (see Anatomy: History), no licence 
was required in Great Britain for opening an anatomical school, 
and there was no provision for supplying subjects to students 
for anatomical purposes. Therefore, though body-snatching 
was a misdemeanour at common law, punishable with fine and 
imprisonment, it was a sufficiently lucrative business to run the 
risk of detection. Body-snatching became so prevalent that 
it was not unusual for the relatives and friends of a deceased 
person to watch the grave for some time after burial, lest it 
should be violated. Iron coffins, too, were frequently used for 
burial, or the graves were protected by a framework of iron 
bars called mortsafes, well-preserved examples of which may 
still be seen in Greyfriars' churchyard, Edinburgh. 

For a detailed history of body-snatching, see The Diary of a 
Resurrectionist, edited by I. B. Bailey (London, 1896), which also 
contains a full bibliography and the regulations in force in foreign 
countries for the supply of bodies for anatomical purposes. 

BOECE (or Boyce), HECTOR (c. 1465 - c. 1536), Scottish 
historian, was born at Dundee about the year 1465, being 
descended of a family which for several generations had pos- 
sessed the barony of Panbride in Forfarshire. He received his 
early education at Dundee, and completed his course of study 
in the university of Paris, where he took the degree of B.D. 
He was appointed regent, or professor, of philosophy in the 
college of Montaigu; and there he was a contemporary of 
Erasmus, who in two epistles has spoken of him in the highest 
terms. When William Elphinstone, bishop of Aberdeen, was 
laying his plans for the foundation of the university of Aberdeen 
(King's College) he made Boece his chief adviser; and the latter 
was persuaded, after receipt of the papal bull erecting the 
university (1494), to be the first principal. He was in Aberdeen 
about 1500 when lectures began in the new buildings, and he 
appears to have been well received by the canons of the 
cathedral, several of whom he has commemorated as men of 
learning. It was a part of his duty as principal to read lectures 
on divinity. 

The emoluments of his office were poor, but he also enjoyed 
the income of a canonry at Aberdeen and of the vicarage of 
Tullynessle. Under the date of 14th July 1527, we find a 
" grant to Maister Hector " of an annual pension of £50, to be 
paid by the sheriff of Aberdeen out of the king's casualties; 
and on the 26th of July 1529 was issued a " precept for a lettre 
to Mr Hector Boys, professor of theology, of a pension of £50 
Scots yearly, until the king promote him to a benefice of 100 
marks Scots of yearly value; the said pension to be paid him 
by the custumars of Aberdeen." In 1533 and 1534, one-half 
of his pension was, however, paid by the king's treasurer, and 
the other half by the comptroller; and as no payment sub- 
sequent to that of Whitsuntide 1534 has been traced in the 
treasurer's accounts, he is supposed to have obtained the benefice 
soon after that period. This benefice was the rectorship of Tyrie. 

In 1528, soon after the publication of his history, Boece 
received the degree of D.D. at Aberdeen; and on this occasion 
the magistrates voted him a present of a tun of wine when the 
new wines should arrive, or, according to his option, the sum 
of £20 to purchase bonnets. He appears to have survived till 
the year 1536; for on the 22nd of November in that year, the 
king presented John Garden to the rectory of Tyrie, vacant by 
the death of " Mr Hector Boiss." He died at Aberdeen, and 
was buried before the high altar at King's College, beside the 
tomb of his patron Bishop Elphinstone. 



His earliest publication, Episcoporum MurMacensium et 
Aberdonensium per Hector em Boetium Vitae, was printed at the 
press of Jodocus Badius (Paris, 1522). The notices of the early 
prelates are of little value, but the portion of the book in which 
he speaks of Bishop Elphinstone is of enduring merit. Here we 
likewise find an account of the foundation and constitution of 
the college, together with some notices of its earliest members. 
His fame rests chiefly on his History of Scotland, published in 
1527 under the title Scolorum Historiae a prima gentis origine 
cum aliarum et rerum et gentium illustratione non vulgari. This 
edition contains seventeen books. Another edition, containing 
the eighteenth book and a fragment of the nineteenth, was 
published by Ferrerius, who has added an appendix of thirty- 
five pages (Paris, 1574). 

The composition of the history displays much ability; but 
Boece's imagination was, however, stronger than his judgment: 
of the extent of the historian's credulity, his narrative exhibits 
many unequivocal proofs; and of deliberate invention or dis- 
tortion of facts not a few, though the latter are less flagrant 
and intentional than early 19th-century criticism has assumed. 
He professed to have obtained from the monastery of Icolmkill, 
through the good offices of the earl of Argyll, and his brother, 
John Campbell of Lundy, the treasurer, certain original his- 
torians of Scotland, and among the rest Veremundus, of whose 
writings not a single vestige is now to be found. In his dedication 
to the king he is pleased to state that Veremundus, a Spaniard 
by birth, was archdeacon of St Andrews, and that he wrote in 
Latin a history of Scotland from the origin of the nation to the 
reign of Malcolm III., to whom he inscribed his work. His 
propensity to the marvellous was at an early period exposed 
in the following verses by Leland: — 

" Hectoris historic! tot quot mendacia scripsit 
Si vis ut numerem, lector amice, tibi, 
Me jubeas etiam ductus numerare marinos 
Et liquidi Stellas connumerare poli." 

Boece's History of Scotland was translated into Scottish prose by 
John Bellenden, and into verse by William Stewart. The Lives of 
the Bishops was reprinted for the Bannatyne Club, Edin., 1825, in a 
limited edition of sixty copies. A commonplace verse-rendering of 
the Life of Bishop Elphinstone, which was written by Alexander 
Gardyne in 1619, remains in MS. There is no modern edition of the 
history, though the versions of Bellenden and Stewart have been 
edited. 

BOEHM, SIR JOSEPH EDGAR, Bart. (1834-1890), British 
sculptor, was born of Hungarian parentage on the 4th of July 
1834 at Vienna, where his father was director of the imperial 
mint. After studying the plastic art in Italy and at Paris, he 
worked for a few years as a medallist in his native city. After 
a further period of study in England, he was so successful as an 
exhibitor at the Exhibition of 1862 that he determined to aban- 
don the execution of coins and medals, and to give his mind 
to portrait busts and statuettes, chiefly equestrian. The colossal 
statue of Queen Victoria, executed in marble (1869) for Windsor 
Castle, and the monument of the duke of Kent in St George's 
chapel, were his earliest great works, and so entirely to the taste 
of 'his royal patrons that he rose rapidly in favour with the court. 
He was made A.R.A. in 1878, and produced soon afterwards 
the statue of Carlyle on the Thames embankment at Chelsea. 
In 1881 he was appointed sculptor in ordinary to the queen, 
and in the ensuing year became full Academician. On the death 
of Dean Stanley, Boehm was commissioned to execute his 
sarcophagus in Westminster Abbey, and his achievement, a 
recumbent statue, has been pronounced to be one of the best 
portraits in modern sculpture. Less successful was his monu- 
ment to General Gordon in St Paul's cathedral. He executed 
the equestrian statue of the duke of Wellington at Hyde Park 
Corner, and designed the coinage for the Jubilee of Queen Victoria 
in 1887. Among his ideal subjects should be noted the " Herds- 
man and Bull." He died suddenly in his studio at South 
Kensington on the 12th of December 1890. 

BOEHM VON BAWERK, EUGEN (1851- ), Austrian 
economist and statesman, was born at Briinn on the 12th of 
February 1851. Entering the Austrian department of finance 
in 1872, he held various posts until 1880, when he became 



BOEHME 



"3 



qualified as a teacher of political economy in the university of 
Vienna. The following year, however, he transferred his services 
to the university of Innsbruck, where he became professor in 
1884. In 1889 he became councillor in the ministry of finance, 
and represented the government in the Lower House on all 
questions of taxation. In 1895 and again in 1897-1898 he was 
minister of finance. In 1899 he was made a member of the 
Upper House, and in 1900 again became minister of finance. 
One of the leaders of the Austrian school of economists, he has 
made notable criticisms on the theory of value in relation to 
cost as laid down by the " classical school." His more important 
works are Kapital und Kapitalzins (Innsbruck, 1884-1889), in 
two parts, translated by W. Smart, viz. Capital and Interest 
(part i., 1890), and The Positive Theory of Capital (part ii., 1891) ; 
Karl Marx and the Close of his System (trans. A. M. Macdonald, 
) ; Recent Literature on Interest (trans. W. A. Scott and 



S. Feilbogen, 1903). 

BOEHME (or Behmen), JAKOB (1575-1624), German mystical 
writer, whose surname (of which Fechner gives eight German 
varieties) appears in English literature as Beem, Behmont, &c, 
and notably Behmen, was born at Altseidenberg, in Upper 
Lusatia, a straggling hamlet among the hills, some 10 m. S.E. of 
Gorlitz. His father was a well-to-do peasant, and his first 
employment was that of herd boy on the Landskrone, a hill in 
the neighbourhood of Gorlitz; the only education he received 
was at the town-school of Seidenberg, a mile from his home. 
Seidenberg, to this day, is filled with shoemakers, and to a shoe- 
maker Jakob was apprenticed in his fourteenth year (1589), 
being judged not robust enough for husbandry. Ten years later 
(1599) we find him settled at Gorlitz as master-shoemaker, and 
married to Katharina, daughter of Hans Kuntzschmann, a 
thriving butcher in the town. After industriously pursuing his 
vocation for ten years, he bought (1610) the substantial house, 
which still preserves his name, close by the bridge, in the Neiss- 
Vorstadt. Two or three years later he gave up business, and did 
not resume it as a shoemaker; but for some years before his 
death he made and sold woollen gloves, regularly visiting Prague 
fair for this purpose. 

Boehme's authorship began in his 37th year (1612) with a 
treatise, Aurora, oder die Morgenrote im Aufgang, which though 
unfinished was surreptitiously copied, and eagerly circulated 
in MS. by Karl von Ender. This raised him at once out of his 
homely sphere, and made him the centre of a local circle of liberal 
thinkers, considerably above him in station and culture. The 
charge of heresy was, however, soon directed against him by 
Gregorius Richter, then pastor primarius of Gorlitz. Feeling ran 
so high after Richter's pulpit denunciations, that, in July 161 3, 
the municipal council, fearing a disturbance of the peace, made 
a show of examining Boehme, took possession of his fragmentary 
quarto, and dismissed the writer with an admonition to meddle 
no more with such matters. For five years he obeyed this 
injunction. But in 1618 began a second period of authorship; 
he poured forth, but did not publish, treatise after treatise, 
expository and polemical, in the next and the two following years. 
In 1622 he composed nothing but a few short pieces on true 
repentance, resignation, &c, which, however, devotionally 
speaking, are the most precious of all his writings. They were 
the only pieces offered to the public in his lifetime and with his 
permission, a fact which is evidence of the essentially religious 
and practical character of his mind. Their publication at Gorlitz, 
on New Year's day 1624, under the title of Der Weg zu Christo, 
was the signal for renewed clerical hostility. Boehme had by 
this time entered on the third and most prolific though the 
shortest period (1623-1624) of his speculation. His labours at 
the desk were interrupted in May 1624 by a summons to Dresden, 
where his famous " colloquy " with the Upper Consistorial court 
was made the occasion of a flattering but transient ovation on 
the part of a new circle of admirers. Richter died in August 
1624, and Boehme did not long survive his pertinacious foe. 
Seized with a fever when away from home, he was with difficulty 
conveyed to Gorlitz. His wife was at Dresden on business; 
and during the first week of his malady he was nursed by a 



literary friend. He died, after receiving the rites of the church, 
grudgingly administered by the authorities, on Sunday, the 
17 th of November. 

Boehme always professed that a direct inward opening or 
illumination was the only source of his speculative power. He 
pretended to no other revelation. Ecstatic raptures we should 
not expect, for he was essentially a Protestant mystic. No "thus 
saith the Lord " was claimed as his warrant, after the manner 
of Antoinette Bourignon, or Ludowick Muggleton; no spirits or 
angels held converse with him as with Swedenborg. It is needless 
to dwell, in the way either of acceptance or rejection, on the very 
few occasions in which his outward life seemed to him to come 
into contact with the invisible world. The apparition of the pail 
of gold to the herd boy on the Landskrone, the visit of the 
mysterious stranger to the young apprentice, the fascination of 
the luminous sheen, reflected from a common pewter dish, which 
first, in 1600, gave an intuitive turn to his meditations, the 
heavenly music which filled his ears as he lay dying— none of 
these matters is connected organically with the secret of Ins 
special power. The mysteries of which he discoursed were not 
reported to him: he " beheld " them. He saw the root of all 
mysteries, the Ungrund or Urgrund, whence issue all contrasts 
and discordant principles, hardness and softness, severity and 
mildness, sweet and bitter, love and sorrow, heaven and hell. 
These he " saw " in their origin; these he attempted to describe 
in their issue, and to reconcile in their eternal result. He saw 
into the being of God; whence the birth or going forth of the 
divine manifestation. Nature lay unveiled to him, he was at 
home in the heart of things. " His own book, which he himself 
was," the microcosm of man, with his threefold life, was patent 
to his vision. Such was his own account of his qualification. 
If he failed it was in expression; he confessed himself a poor 
mouthpiece, though he saw with a sure spiritual eye. 

It must not be supposed that the form in which Boehme's 
pneumatic realism worked itself out in detail was shaped entirely 
from within. In his writings we trace the influence of Theophr. 
Bombast von Hohenheim, known as Paracelsus (1493-1541), of 
Kaspar Schwenkfeld (1490-1561), the first Protestant mystic, 
and of Valentin Weigel (1533-1588). From the school of 
Paracelsus came much of his puzzling phraseology, — his Turba 
and Tinctur and so forth, — a phraseology embarrassing to himself 
as well as to his readers. His friends plied him with foreign 
terms, which he was delighted to receive, interpreting them by an 
instinct, and using them often in a corrupted form and always 
in a sense of his own. Thus the word Idea called up before him. 
the image of " a very fair, heavenly, and chaste virgin." The 
title Aurora, by which his earliest treatise is best known, was 
furnished by Dr Balthasar Walther. These, however, were false 
helps, which only serve to obscure a difficult study, like the 
Flagrat and Lubet, with which his English translator veiled 
Boehme's own honest Schreck and Lust. There is danger lest his 
crude science and his crude philosophical vocabulary conceal the 
fertility of Boehme's ideas and the transcendent greatness of his 
religious insight. Few will take the pains to follow him through 
the interminable account of his seven Quellgeister, which remind 
us of Gnosticism; or even of his three first properties of eternal 
nature, in which his disciples find Newton's formulae anticipated, 
and which certainly bear a marvellous resemblance to the three 
apxai- of Schelling's Theogonische Natur. Boehme is always 
greatest when he breaks away from his fancies and his trammels, 
and allows speech to the voice of his heart. Then he is artless, 
clear and strong; and no man can help listening to him, whether 
he dive deep down with the conviction " ohne Gift und Grimm 
kein Leben," or rise with the belief that " the being of all beings 
is a wrestling power," or soar with the persuasion that Love " in 
its height is as high as God." The mystical poet of Silesia, 
Angelus Silesius, discerned where Boehme's truest power lay 
when he sang — 

" Im Wasser lebt der Fisch, die Pflanze in der Erdea, 
Der Vogel in der Luft, die Sonn' am Firmament, 
Der Salamander muss im Feu'r erhaiten werden, 
Und Gottes Herz ist Jakob Bohme's Element." 



ii4 



BOEOTIA 



The three periods of Boehme's authorship constitute three 
distinct stages in the development of his philosophy. He 
himself marks a threefold division of his subject-matter: — i. 
Philosophia, i.e. the pursuit of the divine Sophia, a study of 
God in himself; this was attempted in the Aurora. 2. Asteo- 
logia, i.e., in the largest sense, cosmology, the manifestation 
of the divine in the structure of the world and of man; hereto 
belong, with others, Die drei Principien gottlichen Wesens; Vom 
dreifachen Leben der Menschen; Von der Menschwerdung Christi; , 
Von der Geburt und Bezeichnung alter Wesen (known as Signatura 
Rerum). 3. Theologia, i.e., in Scougall's phrase, " the life of 
God in the soul of man." Of the speculative writings under this 
head the most important are Von der Gnadenwahl; Mysterium 
Magnum (a spiritual commentary on Genesis); Von Christi 
Testamenlen (the Sacraments). 

Although Boehme's philosophy is essentially theological, and 
his theology essentially philosophical, one would hardly describe 
him as a philosophical theologian; and, indeed, his position is 
not one in which either the philosopher or the theologian finds 
it easy to make himself completely at home. The philosopher 
finds no trace in Boehme of a conception of God which rests its 
own validity on an accord with the highest canons of reason or 
of morals; it is in the actual not in the ideal that Boehme seeks 
God, whom he discovers as the spring of natural powers and 
forces, rather than as the goal of advancing thought. The 
theologian is staggered by a language which breaks the fixed 
association of theological phrases, and strangely reversing the 
usual point of view, characteristically pictures God as underneath 
rather than above. Nature rises out of Him; we sink into Him. 
The Ungrund of the unmanifested Godhead is boldly represented 
in the English translations of Boehme by the word Abyss, in a 
sense altogether unexplained by its Biblical use. In the Theologia 
Germanica this tendency to regard God as the substantia, the 
underlying ground of all things, is accepted as a foundation for 
piety; the same view, when offered in the colder logic of Spinoza, 
is sometimes set aside as atheistical. The procession of spiritual 
forces and natural phenomena out of the Ungrund is described 
by Boehme in terms of a threefold manifestation, commended 
no doubt by the constitution of the Christian Trinity, but 
exhibited in a form derived from the school of Paracelsus. From 
Weigel he learned a purely idealistic explanation of the universe, 
according to which it is not the resultant of material forces, but 
the expression of spiritual principles. These two explanations 
were fused in his mind till they issued forth as equivalent forms 
of one and the same thought. Further, Schwenkfeld supplied 
him with the germs of a transcendental exegesis, whereby the 
Christian Scriptures and the dogmata of Lutheran orthodoxy 
were opened up in harmony with his new-found views. Thus 
equipped, Boehme's own genius did the rest. A primary effort 
of Boehme's philosophy is to show how material powers are 
substantially one with moral forces. This is the object with 
which he draws out the dogmatic scheme which dictates the 
arrangement of his seven Quellgeister. Translating Boehme's 
thought out of the uncouth dialect of material symbols (as to 
which one doubts sometimes whether he means them as concrete 
instances, or as pictorial illustrations, or as a mere memoria 
teehnica), we find that Boehme conceives of the correlation of two 
triads of forces. Each triad consists of a thesis, an antithesis 
and a synthesis; and the two are connected by an important 
link. In the hidden life of the Godhead, which is at once Nichts 
and Alles, exists the original triad, viz. Attraction, Diffusion, 
and their resultant, the Agony of the unmanifested Godhead. 
The transition is made; by an act of will the divine Spirit comes 
to Light; and immediately the manifested life appears in the 
triad of Love, Expression, and their resultant, Visible Variety. 
As the action of contraries and their resultant are explained the 
relations of soul, body and spirit; of good, evil and free will; 
of the spheres of the angels, of Lucifer, and of this world. It is 
a more difficult problem to account on this philosophy for the 
introduction of evil. Boehme does not resort to dualism, nor 
has he the smallest sympathy with a pantheistic repudiation of 
the fact of sin. That the difficulty presses him is clear from the 



progressive changes in his attempted solution of the problem. 
In the Aurora nothing save good proceeds from the Ungrund, 
though there is good that abides and good that falls — Christ and 
Lucifer. In the second stage of his writing the antithesis is 
directly generated as such; good and its contrary are coinci- 
dently given from the one creative source, as factors of life and 
movement; while in the third period evil is a direct outcome of 
the primary principle of divine manifestation — it is the wrath 
side of God. Corresponding to this change we trace a significant 
variation in the moral end contemplated by Boehme as the 
object of this world's life and history. In the first stage the 
world is created in remedy of a decline; in the second, for the 
adjustment of a balance of forces; in the third, to exhibit the 
eternal victory of good over evil, of love over wrath. 

Editions of Boehme's works were published by H. Betke (Amster- 
dam, 1675); by J. G. Gichtel (Amsterdam, 1682-1683, 10 vols.); 
by K. W. Schiebler (Leipzig, 1831-1847, 7 vols.). Translations of 
sundry treatises have been made into Latin (by J. A. Werdenhagen, 
1632), Dutch (complete, by W. v. Bayerland, 1634-1641), and 
French (by Jean Made, c. 1640, and L. C. de Saint-Martin, 1800- 
1809). Between 1644 and 1662 all Boehme's works were translated 
by John Ellistone (d. 1652) and John Sparrow, assisted by Durand 
Hotham and Humphrey Blunden, who paid for the undertaking. 
At that time regular societies of Behmenists, embracing not only 
the cultivated but the vulgar, existed in England and in Holland, 
They merged into the Quaker movement, holding already in common 
with Friends that salvation is nothing short of the very presence 
and life of Christ in the believer, and only kept apart by an objective 
doctrine of the sacraments which exposed them to the polemic of 
Quakers (e.g. J. Anderdon). Muggleton led an anthropomorphic 
reaction against them, and between the two currents they were 
swept away. The Philadelphian Society at the beginning of the 
l8tn century consisted of cultured mystics, Jane Lead, Pordage, 
Francis Lee, Bromley, &c, who fed upon Boehme. William Law 
(1686-I761) somewhat later recurred to the same spring, with the 
result, however, in those dry times of bringing his own good sense 
into question rather than of reviving the credit of his author. After 
Law's death the old English translation was in great part re-edited 
(4 vols., 1762-1784) as a tribute to his memory, by George Ward 
and Thomas Langcake, with plates from the designs of D. A. Freher 
(Brit. Mus. Add. MSS. 57 6 7~5794)- This forms what is commonly 
called Law's translation; to complete it a 5th vol. (l2mo, Dublin, 
1820) is needed. 

See also J. Hambetger, Die Lehre des deutschen Philosophen J. 
Boehmes (1844) ; Alb. Peip, J. Boehme der deutsche Philosoph (i860) ; 
von Harless, J. Boehme und die Alchimisten (1870, 2nd ed. 1882). 
For Boehme's life see the Memoirs by Abraham von Frankenberg 
(d. 1652) and others, trans, by F. Okely (1870) ; La Motte Fouque, 
J. Boehm, ein biographischer Denkstein (1831); H. A. Fechner, J. 
Boehme, sein Leben und seine Schriften (1857); H. L. Martensen, 
/. Boehme, Theosophiske Studier (Copenhagen, 1881; English trans. 
t885); J. Claassen, J. Boehme, sein Leben und seine theosophische 
Werke (Gutersloh, 1885) ; P. Deussen, J. Boehme, iiber sein Leben 
und seine Philosophie (Kiel, 1897). 

BOEOTIA, a district of central Greece, stretching from Phocis 
and Locris in the W. and N. to Attica and Megaris in the S. 
between the strait of Euboea and the Corinthian Gulf. This 
area, amounting in all to 1100 sq. m., naturally falls into two 
main divisions. In the north the basin of the Cephissus and 
Lake Copais lies between parallel mountain-walls continuing 
eastward the line of Parnassus in the extensive ridge of Helicon, 
the " Mountain of the Muses " (5470 ft.) and the east Locrian 
range in Mts. Ptoiim, Messapium and other smaller peaks. 
These ranges, which mostly lie close to the seaboard, form by 
their projecting spurs a narrow defile on the Phocian frontier, 
near the famous battlefield of Chaeroneia, and shut in Copais 
closely on the south between Coronea and Haliartus. The 
north-east barrier was pierced by underground passages (kata- 
vothra) which carried off the overflow from Copai's. The southern 
portion of the land forms a plateau which slopes to Mt. Cithaeron, 
the frontier range between Boeotia and Attica. Within this terri- 
tory the low ridge of Teumessus separates the plain of Ismenus 
and Dirce, commanded by the citadel of Thebes, from the 
upland plain of the Asopus, the only Boeotian river that finds 
the eastern sea. Though the Boeotian climate suffered from the 
exhalations of Copais, which produced a heavy atmosphere with 
foggy winters and sultry summers, its rich soil was suited alike 
for crops, plantations and pasture; the Copais plain, though 
able to turn into marsh when the choking of the katavothra 



BOER— BOERHAAVE 



IJ 5 



caused the lake to encroach, being among the most fertile 
in Greece. The central position of Boeotia between two seas, 
the strategic strength of its frontiers and the ease of communi- 
cation within its extensive area were calculated to enhance its 
political importance. On the other hand the lack of good 
harbours hindered its maritime development; and the Boeotian 
nation, although it produced great men like Pindar, Epami- 
nondas, Pelopidas and Plutarch, was proverbially as dull as 
its native air. But credit should be given to the people for 
their splendid military qualities: both their cavalry and heavy 
infantry achieved a glorious record. 

In the mythical days Boeotia played a prominent part. Of 
the two great centres of legends, Thebes with its Cadmean 
population figures as a military stronghold, and Orchomenus, 
the home of the Minyae, as an enterprising commercial city. 
The latter's prosperity is still attested by its archaeological 
remains (notably the " Treasury of Minyas ") and the traces of 
artificial conduits by which its engineers supplemented the 
natural outlets. The " Boeotian " population seems to have 
entered the land from the north at a date probably anterior 
to the Dorian invasion. With the exception of the Minyae, 
the original peoples were soon absorbed by these immigrants, 
and the Boeotians henceforth appear as a homogeneous nation. 
In historical times the leading city of Boeotia was Thebes, 
whose central position and military strength made it a suitable 
capital. It was the constant ambition of the Thebans to absorb 
the other townships into a single state, just as Athens had 
annexed the Attic communities. But the outlying cities success- 
fully resisted this policy, and only allowed the formation of a 
loose federation which in early times seems to have possessed 
a merely religious character. While the Boeotians, unlike the 
Arcadians, generally acted as a united whole against foreign 
enemies, the constant struggle between the forces of central- 
ization and disruption perhaps went further than any other 
cause to check their development into a really powerful nation. 
Boeotia hardly figures in history before the late 6th century. 
Previous to this its people is chiefly known as the producer of 
a type of geometric pottery similar to the Dipylon ware of 
Athens. About 519 the resistance of Plataea to the federating 
policy of Thebes led to the interference of Athens on behalf of 
the former; on this occasion, and again in 507, the Athenians 
defeated the Boeotian levy. During the Persian invasion of 
480, while some of the cities fought whole-heartedly in the ranks 
of the patriots, Thebes assisted the invaders. For a time the 
presidency of the Boeotian League was taken away from Thebes, 
but in 457 the Spartans reinstated that city as a bulwark against 
Athenian aggression. Athens retaliated by a sudden advance 
upon Boeotia, and after the victory of Oenophyta brought under 
its power the whole country excepting the capital. For ten 
years the land remained under Athenian control, which was 
exercised through the newly installed democracies; but in 447 
the oligarchic majority raised an insurrection, and after a victory 
at Coronea regained their freedom and restored the old con- 
stitutions. In the Peloponnesian War the Boeotians, em- 
bittered by the early conflicts round Plataea, fought zealously 
against Athens. Though slightly estranged from Sparta after 
the peace of Nicias, they never abated their enmity against their 
neighbours. They rendered good service at Syracuse and 
Arginusae; but their greatest achievement was the decisive 
victory at Delium over the flower of the Athenian army (424), 
in which both their heavy infantry and their cavalry displayed 
unusual efficiency. 

About this time the Boeotian League comprised eleven groups 
of sovereign cities and associated townships, each of which 
elected one Boeotarch or minister of war and foreign affairs, 
contributed sixty delegates to the federal council at Thebes, 
and supplied a contingent of about a thousand foot and a 
hundred horse to the federal army. A safeguard against undue 
encroachment on the part of the central government was pro- 
vided in the councils of the individual cities, to which all im- 
portant questions of policy had to be submitted for ratification. 
These local councils, to which the propertied classes alone were 



eligible, were subdivided into four sections, resembling the 
prytaneis of the Athenian council, which took it in turns to take 
previous cognizance of all new measures. 1 

Boeotia took a prominent part in the war of the Corinthian 
League against Sparta, especially at Haliartus and Coronea 
(395~394)- This change of policy seems due mainly to the 
national resentment against foreign interference. Yet dis- 
affection against Thebes was now growing rife, and Sparta 
fostered this feeling by stipulating for the complete independ- 
ence of all the cities in the peace of Antalcidas (387). In 374 
Pelopidas restored the Theban dominion. Boeotian contingents 
fought in all the campaigns of Epaminondas, and in the later 
wars against Phocis (356-346); while in the dealings with 
Philip of Macedon the federal cities appear merely as the tools 
of Thebes. The federal constitution was also brought into 
accord with the democratic governments now prevalent through- 
out the land. The sovereign - power was vested in the popular 
assembly, which elected the Boeotarchs (between seven and 
twelve in number), and sanctioned all laws. After the battle 
of Chaeroneia, in which the Boeotian heavy infantry once again 
distinguished itself, the land never rose again to prosperity. 
The destruction of Thebes by Alexander (335) seems to have 
paralysed the political energy of the Boeotians, though it led 
to an improvement in the federal constitution, by which each 
city received an equal vote. Henceforth they never pursued 
an independent policy, but followed the lead of protecting 
powers. Though the old military training and organization 
continued, the people proved unable to defend the frontiers, 
and the land became more than ever the " dancing-ground of 
Ares." Though enrolled for a short time in the Aetolian League 
(about 245 B.C.) Boeotia was generally loyal to Macedonia, and 
supported its later kings against Rome. In return for the 
excesses of the democracies Rome dissolved the league, which, 
however, was allowed to revive under Augustus, and merged 
with the other central Greek federations in the Achaean synod. 
The death-blow to the country's prosperity was given by the 
devastations during the first Mithradatic War. 

Save for a short period of prosperity under the Frankish 
rulers of Athens (1205-13 10), who repaired the kalavothra and 
fostered agriculture, Boeotia long continued in a state of decay, 
aggravated by occasional barbarian incursions. The first step 
towards the country's recovery was not until 1895, when the 
outlets of Copais were again put into working order. Since then 
the northern plain has been largely reclaimed for agriculture, 
and the natural riches of the whole land are likely to develop 
under the influence of the railway to Athens. Boeotia is at 
present a Nomos with Livadia (the old Turkish capital) for its 
centre; the other surviving townships are quite unimportant. 
The population (65,816 in 1907) is largely Albanian. 

Authorities. — Thuc. iv. 76-101; Xenophon, Hellenica, iii.-vii. ; 
Strabo, pp. 400-412 ; Pausanias ix. ; Theopompus (or Cratippus) 
in the Oxyrhynchus Papyri, vol. v. (London, 1908), No. 842, col. 12 ; 
W. M. Leake, Travels in Northern Greece, chs. xi.-xix. (London, 1835) '< 
H. F. Tozer, Geography of Greece (London, 1873), pp. 233-238; 
W. Rhys Roberts, The Ancient Boeotians (Cambridge, 1895); E. A. 
Freeman, Federal Government (ed. 1893, London), ch. iv. § 2; B. V. 
Head, Historia Numorum, pp. 291 sqq. (Oxford, 1887); W. Larfeld, 
Sylloge Inscriptionum Boeoticarum (Berlin, 1883). (See also Thebes.) 

BOER, the Dutch form of the Eng. " boor," in its original 
signification of husbandman (Ger. Bauer), a name given to the 
Dutch farmers of South Africa, and especially to the Dutch 
population of the Transvaal and Orange River States. (See 
South Africa and, Transvaal.) 

BOERHAAVE, HERMANN (1668-1738), Dutch physician 
and man of science, was born at Voorhout near Leiden on the 
31st of December 1668. Entering the university of Leiden he 
took his degree in philosophy in 1689, with a dissertation De 
distinctione mentis a corpore, in which he attacked the doctrines 
of Epicurus, Hobbes and Spinoza. He then turned to the study . 
of medicine, in which he graduated in 1693 at Harderwyck in 
Guelderland. In 1701 he was appointed lecturer on the institutes 

1 Thucydides (v. 38), in speaking of the " four councils of the 
Boeotians," is referring to the plenary bodies in the various states. 



n6 



BOETHUS— BOETIUS 



of medicine at Leiden; in his inaugural discourse, De commen- 
dando Hippocratis studio, he recommended to his pupils that 
great physician as their model. In 1709 he became professor of 
botany and medicine, and in that capacity he did good service, 
not only to his own university, but also to botanical science, by 
his improvements and additions to the botanic garden of Leiden, 
and by the publication of numerous works descriptive of new 
species of plants. In 17 14, when he was appointed rector of the 
university, he succeeded Govert Bidloo (1649-17 13) in the chair 
of practical medicine, and in this capacity he had the merit of 
introducing the modern system of clinical instruction. Four 
years later he was appointed also to the chair of chemistry. In 
1728 he was elected into the French Academy of Sciences, and 
two years later into the Royal Society of London. In 1729 
declining health obliged him to resign the chairs of chemistry 
and botany; and he died, after a lingering and painful illness, 
on the 23rd of September 1738 at Leiden. His genius so raised 
the fame of the university of Leiden, especially as a school of 
medicine, that it became a resort of strangers from every part of 
Europe. All the princes of Europe sent him disciples, who found 
in this skilful professor not only an indefatigable teacher, but an 
affectionate guardian. When Peter the Great went to Holland 
in 1715, to instruct himself in maritime affairs, he also took 
lessons from Boerhaave. His reputation was not confined to 
Europe; a Chinese rflandarin wrote him a letter directed " To 
the illustrious Boerhaave, physician in Europe," and it reached 
him in due course. 

His principal works are — Inslilutiones medicae (Leiden, 1 708) ; 
Aphorismi de cognoscendis et curandis morbis (Leiden, 1709), on 
which his pupil and assistant, Gerard van Swieten (1700-17 7 2) 
published a commentary in 5 vols. ; and Elementa chemiae (Paris, 
1724). 

BOETHUS, a sculptor of the Hellenistic age, a native of 
Carthage (or possibly Chalcedon) . His date cannot be accurately 
fixed, but was probably the 2nd century B.C. He was noted for 
his representations of children, in dealing with whom earlier 
Greek art had not been very successful; and especially for a 
group representing a boy struggling with a goose, of which several 
copies survive in museums. 

BOETIUS (or Boethius), ANICIUS MANLIUS SEVERINUS 
(c. A.D. 480-524), Roman philosopher and statesman, described 
by Gibbon as " the last of the Romans whom Cato or Tully could 
have acknowledged for their countryman." The historians of 
the day give us but imperfect records or make unsatisfactory 
allusions. Later chroniclers indulged in the fictitious and the 
marvellous, and it is almost exclusively from his own books that 
trustworthy information can be obtained. There is considerable 
diversity among authorities as to his name. One editor of his 
De Consolatione, Bertius, thinks that he bore the praenomen of 
Flavius, but there is no authority for this supposition. His 
father was Flavius Manlius Boetius, and it is probable that the 
Flavius Boetius, the praetorian prefect who was put to death in 
a.d. 455 by order of Valentinian III., was his grandfather, but 
these facts do not prove that he also had the praenomen of 
Flavius. Many of the earlier editions inserted the name of 
Torquatus, but it is not found in any of the best manuscripts. 
The last name is commonly written Boethius, from the idea that 
it is connected with the Greek j3ojj0os; but the best manuscripts 
agree in reading Boetius. 

His boyhood was spent in Rome during the reign of Odoacer. 
We know nothing of his early years. A passage in a treatise 
falsely ascribed to him {De Disciplina Scholarium) and a mis- 
interpretation of a passage in Cassiodorus led early scholars to 
suppose that he spent some eighteen years in Athens pursuing 
his studies, but there is no foundation for this opinion. His 
father, consul in 487, seems to have died soon after; for Boetius 
states that, when he was bereaved of his parent, men of the 
highest rank took him under their charge {De Con. lib. ii. c. 3), 
especially the senator Q. Aur. Memmius Symmachus, whose 
daughter Rusticiana he married. By her he had two sons, 
Anicius Manlius Severinus Boetius and Q. Aurelius Memmius 
Symmachus. He became a favourite with Theodoric, the 



Ostrogoth, who ruled in Rome from 500, and was one of his 
intimate friends. Boetius was consul in 510, and his sons, while 
still young, held the same honour together (522). Boetius 
regarded it as the height of his good fortune when he witnessed 
his two sons, consuls at the same time, convoyed from their home 
to the senate-house amid the enthusiasm of the masses. On that 
day, he tells us, while his sons occupied the curule chairs in the 
senate-house, he himself had the honour of pronouncing a 
panegyric on the monarch. But his good fortune did not last, 
and he attributes the calamities that came upon him to the 
ill-will which his bold maintenance of justice had caused, and to 
his opposition to every oppressive measure. Of this he mentions 
particular cases. A famine had begun to rage. The prefect of 
the praetbrium was determined to satisfy the soldiers, regardless 
altogether of the feelings of the provincials. He accordingly 
issued an edict for a coemptio, that is, an order compelling the 
provincials to sell their corn to the government, whether they 
would or not. This edict would have utterly ruined Campania. 
Boetius interfered. The case was brought before the king, and 
Boetius succeeded in averting the coemptio from the Campanians. 
And he gives as a crowning instance that he exposed himself to 
the hatred of the informer Cyprianus by preventing the punish- 
ment of Albinus, a man of consular rank. He mentions in 
another place that when at Verona the king was anxious to 
transfer the accusation of treason brought against Albinus to 
the whole senate, he defended the senate at great risk. In 
consequence of the ill-will that Boetius had thus roused, he was 
accused of treason towards the end of the reign of Theodoric. 
The charges were that he had conspired against the king, that 
he was anxious to maintain the integrity of the senate, and to 
restore Rome to liberty, and that for this purpose he had written 
to the emperor Justin. Justin had, no doubt, special reasons 
for wishing to see an end to the reign of Theodoric. Justin was 
orthodox, Theodoric was an Arian. The orthodox subjects of 
Theodoric were suspicious of their ruler; and many would gladly 
have joined in a plot to displace him. The knowledge of this fact 
may have rendered Theodoric suspicious. But Boetius denied 
the accusation in unequivocal terms. He did indeed wish the 
integrity of the senate. He would fain have desired liberty, but 
all hope of it was gone. The letters addressed by him to Justin 
were forgeries, and he had not been guilty of any conspiracy. 
Notwithstanding his innocence he was condemned and sent to 
Ticinum (Pavia) where he was thrown into prison. It was during 
his confinement in this prison that he wrote his famous work De 
Consolatione Philosophiae. His goods were confiscated, and after 
an imprisonment of considerable duration he was put to death in 
524. Procopius relates that Theodoric soon repented of his cruel 
deed, and that his death, which took place soon after, was 
hastened by remorse for the crime he had committed against his 
great counsellor. 

Two or three centuries after the death of Boetius writers began 
to view his death as a martyrdom. Several Christian books were 
ascribed to him, and there was one especially on the Trinity (see 
below) which was regarded as proof that he had taken an active 
part against, the heresy of Theodoric. It was therefore for his 
orthodoxy that Boetius was put to death. And these writers 
delight to paint with minuteness the horrible tortures to which 
he was exposed and the marvellous actions which the saint 
performed at his death. He was locally regarded as a saint, but 
he was not canonized. The brick tower in Pavia in which he 
was confined was, and still is, an object of reverence to the 
country people. Finally, in the year 996, Otho III. ordered the 
bones of Boetius to be taken out of the place in which they had 
lain hid, and to be placed in the church of S. Pietro in Ciel d'Oro 
within a splendid tomb, for which Gerbert, afterwards Pope. 
Silvester II., wrote an inscription. Thence they were subsequently 
removed to a tomb beneath the high altar of the cathedral. It 
should be mentioned also that some have given him a decidedly 
Christian wife, of the name of Elpis, who wrote hymns, two of 
which are still extant (Daniel, Thes. Hymn. i. p. 156). This is a 
pure supposition inconsistent with chronology, and based only 
on a misinterpretation of a passage in the De Consolatione. 



BOETIUS 



117 



The contemporaries of Boetius regarded him as a man of 
profound learning. Priscian the grammarian speaks of him as 
having attained the summit of honesty and of all sciences. 
Cassiodorus, magister officiorum under Theodoric and the intimate 
acquaintance of the philosopher, employs language equally 
strong, and Ennodius, the bishop of Pavia, knows no bounds 
for his admiration. Theodoric had a profound respect for his 
scientific abilities. He employed him in setting right the coinage. 
When he visited Rome with Gunibald, king of the Burgundians, 
he took him to Boetius, who showed them, amongst other 
mechanical contrivances, a sun-dial and a water-clock. The 
foreign monarch was astonished, and, at the request of Theodoric, 
Boetius had to prepare others of a similar nature, which were 
sent as presents to Gunibald. 

The fame of Boetius increased after his death, and his influence 
during the middle ages was exceedingly powerful. His circum- 
stances peculiarly favoured this influence. He appeared at a 
time when contempt for intellectual pursuits had begun to 
pervade society. In his early years he was seized with a pas- 
sionate enthusiasm for Greek literature, and this continued 
through life. Even amidst the cares of the consulship he found 
time for commenting on the Categories of Aristotle. The idea 
laid hold of him of reviving the spirit of his countrymen by 
imbuing them with the thoughts of the great Greek writers. 
He formed the resolution to translate all the works of Aristotle 
and all the dialogues of Plato, and to reconcile the philosophy 
of Plato with that of Aristotle. He did not succeed in all t,hat 
he designed; but he did a great part of his work. He translated 
into Latin Aristotle's Analytica Priora et Posteriora, the Topica, 
and Elenchi Sophistici; and he wrote commentaries on Aristotle's 
Categories, on his book ittpl epfi-qvelas, also a commentary on 
the Isagoge of Porphyrius. These works formed to a large extent 
the source from which the middle ages derived their knowledge 
of Aristotle. (See Stahr, Aristoteles bei den Romern, pp. 196-234.) 
Boetius wrote also a commentary on the Topica of Cicero; and 
he was also the author of independent works on logic: — Intro- 
ductio ad Categoricos Syllogismos, in one book; De Syllogismis 
Categoricis, in two books; De Syllogismis Hypotheticis, in two 
books; De Divisione, in one book; De Definitione, in one book; 
De Differentiis Topicis, in four books. 

We see from a statement of Cassiodorus that he furnished 
manuals for the quadrivium of the schools of the middle ages 
(the " quattuor matheseos disciplinae," as Boetius calls them) on 
arithmetic, music, geometry and astronomy. The statement 
of Cassiodorus that he translated Nicomachus is rhetorical. 
Boetius himself tells us in his preface addressed to his father-in- 
law Symmachus that he had taken liberties with the text of 
Nicomachus, that he had abridged the work when necessary, 
and that he had introduced formulae and diagrams of his own 
where he thought them useful for bringing out the meaning. 
His work on music also is not a translation from Pythagoras, 
who left no writing behind him. But Boetius belonged to the 
school of musical writers who based their science on the method 
of Pythagoras. They thought that it was not sufficient to trust 
to the ear alone, to determine the principles of music, as did 
practical musicians like Aristoxenus, but that along with the 
ear, physical experiments should be employed. The work of 
Boetius is in five books and is a very complete exposition of the 
subject. It long remained a text-book of music in the univer- 
sities of Oxford and Cambridge. It is still very valuable as a 
help in ascertaining the principles of ancient music, and gives 
us the opinions of some of the best ancient writers on the art. 
The manuscripts of the geometry of Boetius differ widely from 
each other. One editor, Godofredus Friedlein, thinks that there 
are only two manuscripts which can at all lay claim to contain 
the work of Boetius. He published the Ars Gcometriae, in two 
books, as given in these manuscripts; but critics are generally 
inclined to doubt the genuineness even of these. Professor Rand, 
Georgius Ernst and A. P. McKinlay regard the Ars as certainly 
inauthentic, while they accept the Interpretatio Euclidis (see 
works quoted in bibliography). 

By far the most important and most famous of the works 



of Boetius is his book De Consolatione Philosophiae. Gibbon 
justly describes it as " a golden volume, not unworthy of the 
leisure of Plato or Tully, but which claims incomparable merit 
from the barbarism of the times and the situation of the author." 
The high reputation it had in medieval times is attested by the 
numerous translations, commentaries and imitations of it which 
then appeared. Among others Asser, the instructor of Alfred 
the Great, and Robert Grosseteste, bishop of Lincoln, commented 
on it. Alfred translated it into Anglo-Saxon. Versions of it 
appeared in German, French, Italian, Spanish and Greek before 
the end of the 15th century. Chaucer translated it into English 
prose before the year 1382; and this translation was published 
by Caxton at Westminster, 1480. Lydgate followed in the wake 
of Chaucer. It is said that, after the invention of printing, 
amongst others Queen Elizabeth translated it, and that the work 
was well known to Shakespeare. It was the basis of the earliest 
specimen of Provencal literature. 

This famous work consists of five books. Its form is peculiar, 
and is an imitation of a similar work by Marcianus Capella, De 
Nuptiis Philologiae et Mercurii. It is alternately in prose and verse. 
The verse shows great facility of metrical composition, but a con- 
siderable portion of it is transferred from the tragedies of Seneca. 
The first book opens with a few verses, in which Boetius describes 
how his sorrows had brought him to a premature old age. As he is 
thus lamenting, a woman appears to him of dignified mien, whom 
he recognizes as his guardian, Philosophy. She, resolving to apply 
the remedy for his grief, questions him for that purpose. She finds 
that he believes that God rules the world, but does not know what he 
himself is; and this absence of self-knowledge is the cause of his 
weakness. In the second book Philosophy presents to Boetius 
Fortune, who is made to state to him the blessings he has enjoyed, 
and after that proceeds to discuss with him the kind of blessings that 
fortune can bestow, which are shown to be unsatisfactory and un- 
certain. In the third book Philosophy promises to lead him to true 
happiness, which is to be found in God alone, for since God is the 
highest good, and the highest good is true happiness, God is true 
happiness. Nor can real evil exist, for since God is all-powerful, 
and since he does not wish evil, evil must be non-existent. In the 
fourth book Boetius raises the question, Why, if the governor of the 
universe is good, do evils exist, and why is virtue often punished and 
vice rewarded? Philosophy proceeds to show that in fact vice is 
never unpunished nor virtue unrewarded. From this Philosophy 
passes into a discussion in regard to the nature of providence and 
fate, and shows that every fortune is good. The fifth and last 
book takes up the question of man's free will and God's foreknow- 
ledge, and, by an exposition of the nature of God, attempts to show 
that these doctrines are not subversive of each other; and the con- 
clusion is drawn that God remains a foreknowing spectator of all 
events, and the ever-present eternity of his vision agrees with the 
future quality of our actions, dispensing rewards to the good and 
punishments to the wicked. 

Several theological works have been ascribed to Boetius, as has 
been already mentioned. The Consolatio affords conclusive proof 
that the author was not a practical believer in Christianity. The 
book contains expressions such as daemones, angelica virtus, and 
purgatoria dementia, which have been thought to be derived from 
the Christian faith; but they are used in a heathen sense, and are 
explained sufficiently by the circumstance that Boetius was on 
intimate terms with Christians. The writer nowhere finds consola- 
tion in any Christian belief, and Christ is never named in the work. 
It is not impossible, however, that Boetius may have been brought 
up a Christian, and that in his early years he may have written 
some Christian books. Peiper thinks that the first three treatises 
are the productions of the early years of Boetius. The first, De 
Sancta Trinitate, is addressed to Symmachus (Domino Patri Sym- 
macho), and the result of the short discussion, which is of an abstract 
nature, and deals partly with the ten categories, is that unity is 
predicated absolutely, or, in regard to the substance of the Deity, 
trinity is predicated relatively. The second treatise is addressed to 
John the deacon ("Ad Joannem Diaconum"), and its subject is 
" Utrum Pater et Filius et Spiritus Sanctus de divinitate sub- 
stantialiter praedicentur." This treatise is shorter than the first, 
occupying only two or three pages, and the conclusion of the argu- 
ment is the same. The third treatise bears the title, Quomodo 
substantiae in eo quod sint bonae sint cum non sint substantialia bona. 
It contains nothing distinctly Christian, and it contains nothing of 
great value ; therefore its authorship is a matter of little consequence. 
Peiper thinks that, as the best MSS. uniformly assign these treatises 
to Boetius, they are to be regarded as his; that it is probable that 
Symmachus and John (who afterwards became Pope) were the men 
of highest distinction who took charge of him when he lost his father ; 
and that these treatises are the first-fruits of his studies, which he 
dedicates to his guardians and benefactors. He thinks that the 
variations in the inscriptions of the fifth treatise, which is not found 
in the best manuscript, are so great that the name of Boetius could 



n8 



BOG— BOGO 



not have originally been in the title. The fourth book is also not 
found in the best manuscript, and two manuscripts have no inscrip- 
tion. He infers, from these facts, that there is no sure evidence for 
the authorship of the fourth and fifth treatises. The fifth treatise is 
Contra Eutychen et Nestorium. Both Eutyches and Nestorius are 
spoken of as living. A council is mentioned, in which a letter was 
read, expounding the opinion of the Eutychians for the first time. 
The novelty of the opinion is also alluded to. All these circumstances 
point to the council of Chalcedon (45l). The treatise was therefore 
written before the birth of Boetius, if it be not a forgery ; but there 
is no reason to suppose that the treatise was not a genuine production 
of the time to which it professes to belong. The fourth treatise, 
De Fide Catholica, does not contain any distinct chronological data ; 
but the tone and opinions of the treatise produce the impression 
that it probably belonged to the same period as the treatise against 
Eutyches and Nestorius. Several inscriptions ascribe both these 
treatises to Boetius. It will be seen from this statement that Peiper 
bases his conclusions on grounds far too narrow; and on the whole 
it is perhaps more probable that Boetius wrote none of the four 
Christian treatises, particularly as they are not ascribed to him by 
any of his contemporaries. Three of them express in the strongest 
language the orthodox faith of the church in opposition to the 
Arian heresy, and these three put in unmistakable language the 
procession of the Holy Spirit from both Father and Son. The 
fourth argues for the orthodox belief of the two natures and one 
person of Christ. When the desire arose that it should be believed 
that Boetius perished from his opposition to the heresy of Theodoric, 
it was natural to ascribe to him works which were in harmony with 
this supposed fact. The works may really have been written by 
one Boetius, a bishop of Africa, as Jourdain supposes, or by some 
Saint Severinus, as Nitzsch conjectures, and the similarity of name 
may huve aided the transference of them to the heathen or neutral 
Boetius. 

Important and, if genuine, decisive evidence upon this point is 
afforded by a passage in the Anecdoton Holderi, a fragment contained 
in a 10th-century MS. (ed. H. Usener, Leipzig, 1877). The fragment 
gives an extract from a previously unknown letter of Cassiodorus, 
the important words being " Scripsit {i.e. Boetius) librum de sancta 
trinitate, et capita quaedam dogmatica, et librum contra Nestorium." 
Nitzsch, however, held that this was a copyist's gloss, harmonizing 
with the received Boetius legend, which had been transferred to 
the text, and did not consider that it outweighed the opposing 
internal evidence from De Cons. Phil. 

Editions. — The first collected edition of the works of Boetius was 
published at Venice in 1492 (Basel, 1570) ; the last in J. P. Migne's 
Patrologia, lxiii., lxiv. (Paris, 1847). Of the numerous editions of 
the De Consolatione the best are those of Theodorus Obbarius (Jena, 
1843) and R. Peiper (Leipzig, 1871). The first contains prolegomena 
on the life and writings of Boetius, on his religion and philosophy, 
and on the manuscripts and editions, a critical apparatus, and notes. 
The text of the second was based on the fullest collation of MSS. 
up to that time, though a considerable number of MSS. still remained 
to be collated. In addition to an account of the MSS. used, it gives 
the Book of Lupus, " De Metris Boetii," the "Vita Boetii " contained 
in some MSS., " Elogia Boetii," and a short list of the commentators, 
translators and imitators of the Consolatio. It contains also an 
account of the metres used by Boetius in the Consolatio, and a list 
of the passages which he has borrowed from the tragedies of Seneca. 
The work also includes the five treatises, four of them Christian, 
of which mention has been made above. King Alfred's Anglo-Saxon 
version of the De Consolatione, with literal English translation, 
notes and glossary, was published by S. Fox (1835) and again by 
W. J. Sedgefield (1900); that of G. Colville (Colvile, Coldewel, 
1556) was republished by E. B. Bax (1897); translation (mixed 
prose and verse) by H. R. James (1897). Queen Elizabeth's 
" Englishings " was reprinted in 1899; on the style, see A. Engel- 
brecht in Sitzungsber. der Wiener Akad. der Wissenschaften (1902), 
pp. 15-36. The De Institutione Arithmetica, De Institutione Musica, 
and the doubtful Geometria (for which see G. Ernst, De Geometricis 
Mis quae sub Boethii nomine nobis tradita sunt quaestiones, 1903 ; 
A. P. McKinlay in Harvard Classical Studies, 1907; M. Cantor, 
Geschichte der Mathematik, i., Leipzig, 1894; G. Friedlein, Gerbert, 
die Geometrie des Boethius, und die indischen Ziffern, Erlangen, 1861, 
are edited by G. Friedlein (Leipzig, 1867) ; German translation of the 
De Musica, with explanatory notes, by O. Paul (Leipzig, 1872), 
and on the sources W. Miekley, De Boethii libri de musica primi 
fontibus (Jena, 1899). Commentary on Aristotle's De Interpretation 
xepi «pM'!»'«as), ed. C. Meiser (Leipzig, 1877), and on Porphyry's 
Isagoge, ed. S. Brandt (Vienna, 1906). 

Authorities. — On Boetius generally, see J. G. Sutterer, Der 
letzte Romer (Eichstadt, 1852); H. IJsener, Anecdoton Holderi 
(Leipzig, 1877); H. F. Stewart, Boethius: an Essay (Edinburgh 
1891) ; T. Hodgkin, Italy and her Invaders, iii. bk. iv. ch. xii. (1896) 
A. Ebert, Allgemeine Geschichte der Lilt, des Mittelalters, i. (1889) 
Teuffel-Schwabe, Hist, of Roman Literature (Eng. trans., 1900), §478 
on the date and order of his works, S. Brandt in Philologus, lxii, 
pp. 141-154, 234-279, and A. P. McKinlay, as above, with refs. 
on his " Songs," H. Huttinger, Studia in Boetii carmina collata 
(Regensburg, 1900) : on his style, G. Bednarz, De universo orationis 
colore Boethii (Breslau, 1883) : on his theological attitude and works, 



F. A. B. Nitzsch, Das System des Boethius und die ihm zugeschriebenen 
theologischen Schriften (Berlin, i860), and art. in Herzog-Hauck's 
Realencyklopddie (1897) ; C. Jourdain, De I'Origine des traditions sur 
le christianisme de Boece (1861) ; Gaston Boissier, " Le Christianisme 
de Boece," in Journal des Savants (1889), pp. 449-462; A. Hilde- 
brand, Boethius und seine Stellung zum Christentume (Regensburg, 
1885); G. Schepps, " Zu Pseudo-Boethius de fide catholica," in 
Zeitschrift fur wissenschaftliche Theologie, xxxviii. (1895). 

BOG (from Ir. and Gael, bogach, bog, soft), a tract of soft, 
spongy, water-logged ground, composed of vegetation, chiefly 
mosses, in various stages of decomposition. This vegetable 
matter when partially decomposed forms the substance known 
as " peat " (q.v.). When the accumulation of water is rapidly 
increased by excessive rainfall, there is a danger of a " bog-slide," 
or " bog-burst," which may obliterate the neighbouring culti- 
vated land with a deposit of the contents of the bog. Destructive 
bog-slides have occurred in Ireland, such as that of the Knock- 
nageeha Bog, Rathmore, Kerry, in 1896, at Castlerea, Ros- 
common, 1901, and at Kilmore, Galway, 1909. 

There is a French game of cards called " bog," said to be of 
Italian origin, played with a piquet pack on a table with six 
divisions, one of which is known by the name of the game and 
forms the pool. It was fashionable during the Second Empire. 

BOGATZKY, KARL HEINRICH VON (1690-17 74), German 
hymn-writer, was born at Jankowe in Lower Silesia on the 7th 
of September 1690. At first a page at the ducal court of Saxe- 
Weissenfels, he next studied law and theology at Jena and 
Halle; but ill-health preventing his preferment he settled at 
Glancha in Silesia, where he founded an orphanage. After 
living for a time at Kostritz, and from 1740 to 1745 at the court 
of Christian Ernst, duke of Saxe-Coburg, at Saalfeld, he made 
his home at the Waisenhaus (orphanage) at Halle, where he 
engaged in spiritual work and in composing hymns and sacred 
songs, until his death on the 15th of June 1774. Bogatzky's 
chief works are Giildenes Schatzkdstlein der Kinder Gottes (17 18), 
which has reached more than sixty editions; and Ubung der 
Goltseligkeit in allerlei geistlichen Liedern (1750). 

See Bogatzky's autobiography — Lebenslauf von ihm selbst ge- 
schrieben (Halle, 1801 ; new ed., Berlin, 1872); and Ledderhose, 
Das Leben Bogatzky's (Heidelberg, 1846) ; also Kelly, C. H. von 
Bogatzky's Life and Work (London, 1889). 

BOGHAZ KEUI, a small village in Asia Minor, north-west of 
Yuzgat in the Angora vilayet, remarkable for the ruins and 
rock-sculptures in its vicinity. The ruins are those of a ruling 
city of the oriental type which flourished in the pre-Greek 
period; and they are generally identified with Pteria (q.v.), 
a place taken by Croesus after he had crossed the Halys 
(Herodotus i. 76). 

BOGIE, a northern English dialect word of unknown origin, 
applied to a kind of low truck or " trolly." In railway engineer- 
ing it is applied to an under-truck, most frequently with four 
wheels, which is often provided at one end of a locomotive 
or both ends of a carriage. It is pivoted or swivelled on the 
main frames, so that it can turn relatively to the body of the 
vehicle or engine, and thus it enables the wheels readily to follow 
the curves of the line. It has no connexion with the series of 
words, such as " bogey " or " bogy," " bogle," " boggle," 
" bogart " (in Shakespeare "bug," "bugs and goblins"), 
which are probably connected with the Welsh bwg, a spectre; 
hence the verb to " boggle," properly applied to a horse which 
shies at supposed spectres, and so meaning to hesitate, bungle. 

BOGNOR, a seaside resort in the Chichester parliamentary 
division of Sussex, England, 66 m. S.S.W. from London by the 
London, Brighton & South Coast railway. Pop. of urban 
district (1901) 6180. Besides the parish church there is a 
Roman Catholic priory and church. The town possesses a pier 
and promenade, a theatre, assembly rooms, and numerous 
convalescent homes, including an establishment belonging to 
the Merchant Taylors' Company. The church of the mother 
parish of South Bersted is Norman and Early English, and 
retains a fresco of the 16th century. 

BOGO, a town of the province of Cebu, island of Cebu, Philip- 
pine Islands, on Bogo Bay at the mouth of the Bulac river, in 
the north-east part of the island. Pop. (1903) 14,915. The 



BOGODUKHOV— BOGOMILS 



i ii 



climate is hot but healthy. The surrounding country is fertile, 
producing sugar, Indian corn, and maguay in abundance; rice, 
cacao and fruits are also produced. Hats, baskets, cloths and 
rope are woven and are exported to a limited extent; small 
quantities of copra are also exported. The fisheries are of 
considerable local importance. The language is Cebu-Visayan. 

BOGODUKHOV, a town of Russia, in the government of 
Kharkov, 45 m. by rail N.W. of the city of that name, in 49 58' 
N. lat. and 36° 9' E. long., was formerly fortified. Pop. (i860) 
10,522; (1897) 11,928. There seems to have been a settlement 
on this site as early as 1571. In 1709, at the time of the Russo- 
Swedish War, Bogodukhov was taken by Menshikov and the em- 
peror Alexius. It contains a cathedral, built in 1793. Boots, caps 
and furred gowns are manufactured, and gardening and tanning 
are carried on. The trade is principally in grain, cattle and fish. 
BOGOMILS, the name of an ancient religious community 
which had its origin in Bulgaria. It is difficult to ascertain 
whether the name was taken from the reputed founder of that 
sect, a certain pope Bogumil or Bogomil, or whether he assumed 
that name after it had been given to the whole sect. The word 
is a direct translation into Slavonic of Massaliani, the Syrian 
name of the sect corresponding to the Greek Euchites. The 
Bogomils are identified with the Massaliani in Slavonic docu- 
ments of the 13th century. They are also known as Pftvlikeni, 
i.e. Paulicians. It is a complicated task to determine the true 
character and the tenets of any ancient sect, considering that 
almost all the information that has reached us has come from 
the opponents. The heretical literature has to a great extent 
either perished or been completely changed; but much has also 
survived in a modified written form or through oral tradition. 
Concerning the Bogomils something can be gathered from the 
information collected by Euthymius Zygadenus in the 12th 
century, and from the polemic Against the Heretics written in 
Slavonic by St Kozma during the 10th century. The old Slavonic 
lists of forbidden books of the 15th and 16th centuries also give 
us a clue to the discovery of this heretical literature and of the 
means the Bogomils employed to carry on their propaganda. 
Much may also be learnt from the doctrines of the numerous 
heretical sects which arose in Russia after the nth century. 

The Bogomils were without doubt the connecting link between 
the so-called heretical sects of the East and those of the West. 
They were, moreover, the most active agents in disseminating 
such teachings in Russia and among all the nations of Europe. 
They may have found in some places a soil already prepared by 
more ancient tenets which had been preserved in spite of the 
persecution of the official Church, and handed down from the 
period of primitive Christianity. In the 12th and 13th centuries 
the Bogomils were already known in the West as "Bulgari." 
In 1207 the Bulgarornm heresis is mentioned. In 1223 the 
Albigenses are declared to be the local Bougres, and at the same 
period mention is made of the " Pope of the Albigenses who resided 
within the confines of Bulgaria." The Cathars and Patarenes, 
the Waldenses, the Anabaptists, and in Russia the Strigolniki, 
Molokani and Dukhobortsi, have all at different times been either 
identified with the Bogomils or closely connected with them. 

Doctrine. — From the imperfect and conflicting data which are 
alone available one positive result can be gathered, viz. that 
the Bogomils were both Adoptionists and Manichaeans. They had 
accepted the teaching of Paul of Samosata, though at a later 
period the name of Paul was believed to be that of the Apostle; 
and they were not quite free from the Dualistic principle of 
the Gnostics, at a later period too much identified with the 
teaching of Mani. They rejected the pneumatic Christianity 
of the orthodox churches and did not accept the docetic teaching 
of some of the other sects. Taking as our starting-point the 
teaching of the heretical sects in Russia, notably those of the 
14th century, which are a direct continuation of the doctrines 
held by the Bogomils, we find that they denied the divine birth 
of Christ, the personal coexistence of the Son with the Father 
and Holy Ghost, and the validity of sacraments and ceremonies. 
The miracles performed by Jesus were interpreted in a spiritual 
sense, not as real material occurrences; the Church was the in- 



terior spiritual church in which all held equal share. Baptism 
was only to be practised on grown men and women. The 
Bogomils repudiated infant baptism, and considered the bap- 
tismal rite to be of a spiritual character neither by water nor by 
oil but by self-abnegation, prayers and chanting of hymns. Carp 
Strigolnik, who in the 14th century preached this doctrine in 
Novgorod, explained that St Paul had taught that simple- 
minded men should instruct one another; therefore they elected 
their " teachers " from among themselves to be their spiritual 
guides, and had no special priests. Prayers were to be said in 
private houses, not in separate buildings such as churches. 
Ordination was conferred by the congregation and not by any 
specially appointed minister. The congregation were the 
" elect," and each member could obtain the perfection of Christ 
and become a Christ or " Chlist." Marriage was not a sacra- 
ment. The Bogomils refused to fast on Mondays and Fridays. 
They rejected monachism. They declared Christ to be the Son 
of God only through grace like other prophets, and that the 
bread and wine of the eucharist were not transformed into 
flesh and blood; that the last judgment would be executed 
by God and not by Jesus; that the images and the cross were 
idols and the worship of saints and relics idolatry. 

These Paulician doctrines have survived in the great Russian 
sects, and can be traced back to the teachings and practice of the 
Bogomils. But in addition to these doctrines of an adoptionist 
origin, they held the Manichaean dualistic conception of the 
origin of the world. This has been partly preserved in some" of 
their literary remains, and has taken deep root in the beliefs and 
traditions of the Bulgarians and other nations with whom they 
had come into close contact. The chief literature of all the 
heretical sects throughout the ages has been that of apocryphal 
Biblical narratives, and the popes Jeremiah or Bogumil are 
directly mentioned as authors of such forbidden books " which 
no orthodox dare read." Though these writings are mostly the 
same in origin as are known from the older lists of apocryphal 
books, they underwent in this case a certain modification at the 
hands of their Bogomil editors, so as to be used for the propaga- 
tion of their own specific doctrines. In its most simple and 
attractive form — one at the same time invested with the authority 
of the reputed holy author — their account of the creation of the 
world and of man; the origin of sin and redemption, the history 
of the Cross, and the disputes between body and soul, right and 
wrong, heaven and hell, were embodied either in " Historiated 
Bibles" (Paleya 1 ) or in special dialogues held between Christ 
and his disciples, or between renowned Fathers of the Church 
who expounded these views in a simple manner adapted to the 
understanding of the people (Lucidaria). The Bogomils taught 
that God had two sons, the elder Satanail and the younger 
Michael. The elder son rebelled against the father and became 
the evil spirit. After his fall he created the lower heavens and 
the earth and tried in vain to create man; in the end he had to 
appeal to God for the Spirit. After creation Adam was allowed 
to till the ground on condition that he sold himself and his 
posterity to the owner of the earth. Then Michael was sent in 
the form of a man; he became identified with Jesus, and was 
"elected" by God after the baptism in the Jordan. When the 
Holy Ghost (Michael) appeared in the shape of the dove, Jesus 
received power to break the covenant in the form of a clay 
tablet (hierograpkon) held by Satanail from Adam. He had now 
become the angel Michael in a human form; as such he van- 
quished Satanail, and deprived him of the termination -il = God, 
in which his power resided. Satanail was thus transformed into 
Satan. Through his machinations the crucifixion took place, 
and Satan was the originator of the whole Orthodox community 
with its churches, vestments, ceremonies, sacraments and fasts, 
with its monks and priests. This world being the work of Satan, 
the perfect must eschew any and every excess of its pleasure. 
But the Bogomils did not go as far as to recommend asceticism. 
They held the " Lord's Prayer " in high respect as the most 

1 These betray their Gnostic (Marcianite) spirit by the anti- 
Jewish tone of the oldest MSS, extant, though this prejudice tends 
to decrease in later MSS. 



120 



BOGORODSK— BOGOTA 



potent weapon against Satan, and had a number of conjurations 
against " evil spirits." Each community had its own twelve 
" apostles," and women could be raised to the rank of " elect." 
The Bogomils wore garments like mendicant friars and were 
known as keen missionaries,. travelling far and wide to propagate 
their doctrines. Healing the sick and conjuring the evil spirit, 
they traversed different countries and spread their apocryphal 
literature along with some of the books of the Old Testament, 
deeply influencing the religious spirit of the nations, and preparing 
them for the Reformation. They sowed the seeds of a rich 
religious popular literature in the East as well as in the West. 
The Historiated Bible, the Letter from Heaven, the Wanderings 
through Heaven and Hell, the numerous Adam and Cross 
legends, the religious poems of the " Kaleki perehozhie " and 
other similar productions owe their dissemination to a large 
extent to the activity of the Bogomils of Bulgaria, and their 
successors in other lands. 

History. — The Bogomil propaganda follows the mountain 
chains of central Europe, starting from the Balkans and con- 
tinuing along the Carpathian Mountains, the Alps and the 
Pyrenees, with ramifications north and south (Germany, England 
and Spain). In the middle of the 8th century the emperor Con- 
stantine Copronymus settled a number of Armenian Paulicians 
in Thracia. These were noted heretics and were persecuted by 
the Greek Church with fire and sword. The empress Theodora 
killed, drowned or hanged no fewer than 100,000. In the 10th 
century the emperor John Zimisces, himself of Armenian origin, 
transplanted no less than 200,000 Armenian Paulicians to Europe 
and settled them in the neighbourhood of Philippopolis, which 
henceforth became the centre of a far-reaching propaganda. 
Settled along the Balkans as a kind of bulwark against the 
invading Bulgars, the Armenians on the contrary soon frater- 
nized with the newcomers, whom they converted to their own 
views; even a prince of the Bulgarians adopted their teaching. 
According to Slavonic documents the founder of this sect was a 
certain priest Bogumil, who " imbibed the Manichaean teaching 
and flourished at the time of the Bulgarian emperor Peter " 
(927-968). According to another source the founder was called 
Jeremiah (or there was another priest associated with him by the 
name of Jeremiah). The Slavonic sources are unanimous on the 
point that his teaching was Manichaean. A Synodikon from the 
year 12 10 adds the names of his pupils or " apostles," Mihail, 
Todur, Dobri, Stefan, Vasilie and Peter, all thoroughly Slavonic 
names. Zealous missionaries carried their doctrines far and wide. 
In 1004, scarcely 15 years after the introduction of Christianity 
into Russia, we hear of a priest Adrian teaching the same 
doctrines as the Bogomils. He was imprisoned by Leontie, 
bishop of Kiev. In n 25 the Church in the south of Russia had 
to combat another heresiarch named Dmitri. The Church in 
Bulgaria also tried to extirpate Bogomilism. The popes in 
Rome whilst leading the Crusade against the Albigenses did not 
forget their counterpart in the Balkans and recommended the 
annihilation of the heretics. 

The Bogomils spread westwards, and settled first in Servia; 
but at the end of the 12th century Stephen Nemanya, king of 
Servia, persecuted them and expelled them from the country. 
Large numbers took refuge in Bosnia, where they were known 
under the name of Patarenes (q.v.) or Patareni. From Bosnia 
their influence extended into Italy (Piedmont) . The Hungarians 
undertook many crusades against the heretics in Bosnia, but 
towards the close of the 1 5th century the conquest of that country 
by the Turks put an end to their persecution. It is alleged that 
a large number of the Bosnian Paterenes, and especially the 
nobles, embraced Islam (see Bosnia and Herzegovina: History). 
Few or no remnants of Bogomilism have survived in Bosnia. 
The Ritual in Slavonic written by the Bosnian Radoslavov, 
and published in vol. xv. of the Starine of the South Slavonic 
Academy at Agram, shows great resemblance to the Cathar 
ritual published by Cunitz, 1853. See F. Racki, " Bogomili i 
Paternai" in Rod, vols, vii., viii. and x. (Agram, 1870); 
Dollinger, Beitrage zur Ketzergeschichte d. Mittelalters, 2 vols. 
(Munich, 1890). 



Under Turkish rule the Bogomils lived unmolested as Pavlikeni 
in their ancient stronghold near Philippopolis, and farther 
northward. In 1650 the Roman Catholic Church gathered them 
into its fold. No less than fourteen villages near Nicopolis 
embraced Catholicism, and a colony of Pavlikeni in the village 
of Cioplea near Bucharest followed the example of their brethren 
across the Danube. 

Bibliography.— Euthymius Zygadenus, Narratio de Bogomilis, 
ed. . Gieseler (Gottingen, 1842); J. C. Wolf, Historic, Bogomilorum 
(Wittenberg, 1712); " Slovo svyatago Kozmyi na eretiki," in 
Kukuljevic Sakcinski, Arkiv zapovyestnicu jugoslavensku, vol iv 
pp. 69-97 (Agram, 1859); C. J. Jirecek, Geschichte d. Bulgaren, pp' 
155. 174-175 (Prague, 1876); Korolev, " Dogmatichesko-to uchenie 
na Bogomil-tie, in Periodichesko spisanie, vols. vii. -viii. pp. 75-106 
(Braila, 1873); A. Lombard, Pauliciens, Bulgares et Bons-hommes 
(Geneva, 1879); Episcopul Melchisedek, Lipovenismul, pp. 265 son 
(Bucharest, 1871); B. P. Hasdeu, Cuvenie den batrani, vol. ii pp 247 
sqq. (Bucharest, 1879); F. C. Conybeare, The Key of Truth, pp. 73 
sqq. and specially pp. 138 sqq. (Oxford, 1898); M. Gaster, Greeko- 
blavonic Literature, pp. 17 sqq. (London, 1887); O. Dahnhardt, 
Natursagen, vol. 1. pp. 38 sqq. (Leipzig and Berlin, 1907). (M. G.) 

BOGORODSK, a town of central Russia, in the government of 
Moscow, and 38 m. by rail E.N.E. of the city of Moscow, on the 
Klyazma. It has woollen, cotton and silk mills, chemical 
factories and dye-works, and is famous for its gold brocade. 
Pop. (1897) 11,210. 

BOGOS (Bilens), a pastoral race of mixed Hamitic descent, 
occupying the highlands immediately north of Abyssinia, now 
part of the Italian colony of Eritrea. They were formerly a 
self-governing community, though subject to Abyssinia. The 
community is divided into two classes, the Shumaglieh or 
" elders " and TigrS or " clients." The latter are serfs of the 
former, who, however, cannot sell them. The Tigre goes with the 
land, and his master must protect him. In blood-money he is 
worth another Tigre or ninety-three cows, while an elder's life is 
valued at one hundred and fifty-eight cattle or one of his own 
caste. The eldest son of a Shumaglieh inherits his father's 
two-edged sword, white cows, lands and slaves, but the house 
goes to the youngest son. Female chastity is much valued, but 
women have no rights, inherit nothing, and are classed with the 
hyaena, the most despised animal throughout Abyssinia. The 
Bogo husband never sees the face or pronounces the name of his 
mother-in-law, while it is a crime for a wife to utter her husband's 
or father-in-law's name. 

BOGOTA, or Santa Fe de Bogota, the capital of the republic 
of Colombia, and of the interior department of Cundinamarca, in 
4° 6' N. lat. and 78° 30' W. long. Pop. about 125,000. The city 
is on the eastern margin of a large elevated plateau 8563 ft. above 
sea-level. The plateau may be described as a great bench or shelf 
on the western slope of the oriental Cordilleras, about 70 m. long 
and 30 m. wide, with a low rim on its western margin and backed 
by a high ridge on the east. The plain forming the plateau is 
well watered with numerous small lakes and streams. • These 
several small streams, one of which, the San Francisco, passes 
through the city, unite near the south-western extremity of the 
plateau and form the Rio Funza, or Bogota, which finally plunges 
over the edge at Tequendama in a beautiful, perpendicular fall of 
about 475 ft. The city is built upon a sloping plain at the base of 
two high mountains La Gaudalupe and Monserrate, upon whose 
crests stand two imposing churches. From a broad avenue on 
the upper side downward to the west slope the streets, through 
which run streams of cool, fresh water from the mountains above. 
The north and south streets cross these at right angles, and the 
blocks thus formed are like great terraces. A number of hand- 
somely-laid -out plazas, or squares, ornamented with gardens 
and statuary, have been preserved; on these face the principal 
public buildings and churches. In Plaza Bolivar is a statue of 
Bolivar by Pietro Tenerani (1789-1869), a pupil of Canova, 
and in Plaza Santander is one of General Francisco de Paula 
Santander (1792-1840). Facing on Plaza de la Constitucion 
are the capitol and cathedral. The streets are narrow and 
straight, but as a rule they are clean and well paved. 
Owing to the prevalence of earthquakes, private houses ars 
usually of one storey only, and are built of sun-dried bricks, 



BOGRA— BOHEMIA 



121 



white-washed. But few of the public buildings are imposing in 
appearance, though good taste in style and decoration are often 
shown. 

The city occupies an area of about_2-|Xi2 m - It has street 
cars, electric light and telephones. Short lines of railway con- 
nect it with Facatativa (24 m.) on the road to Honda, and 
with Zipaquira, where extensive salt mines are worked. A line 
of railway was also under construction in 1906 to Jirardot, at the 
head of navigation on the upper Magdalena. Bogota is an 
archiepiscopal see, founded in 1561, and is one of the strongholds 
of medieval clericalism in South America. It has a cathedral, 
rebuilt in 1814, and some 30 other churches, together with many 
old conventual buildings now used for secular purposes, their 
religious communities ha.ving been dissolved by Mosquera and 
their revenues devoted in great measure to education. The 
capitol, which is occupied by the executive and legislative 
departments, is an elegant and spacious building, erected since 
1875. The interest which Bogota has always taken in education, 
and because of which she has been called the " Athens of South 
America," is shown in the number and character of her institu- 
tions of learning — a university, three endowed colleges, a school 
of chemistry and mineralogy, a national academy, a military 
school, a public library with some 50,000 volumes, a national 
observatory, a natural history museum and a botanic garden. 
The city also possesses a well-equipped mint, little used in recent 
years. The plain surrounding the city is very fertile, and pastures 
cattle and produces cereals, vegetables and fruit in abundance. 
It was the centre of Chibcha civilization before the Spanish 
conquest and sustained a large population. The climate is mild 
and temperate, the average annual temperature being about 58° 
and the rainfall about 43J in. The geographical location of the 
city is unfavourable to any great development in commerce and 
manufactures beyond local needs. 

Bogota was founded in 1 538 by Gonzalo Jimenez de Quesada 
and was named Santa Fe de Bogota after his birthplace Santa Fe, 
and after the southern capital of the Chibchas, Bacata (or Funza). 
It was made the capital of the viceroyalty of Nueva Granada, 
and soon became one of the centres of Spanish colonial power 
and civilization on the South American continent. In 1811 its 
citizens revolted against Spanish rule and set up a government 
of their own, but in i8r6 the city was occupied by Pablo Morillo 
(1777-1838), the Spanish general, who subjected it to a ruthless 
military government until 1810, when Bolivar's victory at 
Boyaca compelled its evacuation. On the creation of the 
republic of Colombia, Bogota became its capital, and when 
that republic was dissolved into its three constituent parts 
it remained the capital of Nueva Granada. It has been the 
scene of many important events in the chequered history of 
Colombia. (A. J. L.) 

BOGRA, or Bagtjra, a town and district of British India, in 
the Rajshahi division of eastern Bengal and Assam. The town 
is situated on the right bank of the river Karatoya. Pop. (1901) 
7094. The District of Bogra, which was first formed in 1821, 
lies west of the main channel of the Brahmaputra. It contains 
an area of 1359 sq.m. Inigoi the population (on a reduced area) 
was 854,533, showing an increase of 11% in the decade. The 
district stretches out in a level plain, intersected by numerous 
streams and dotted with patches of jungle. The Karatoya river 
flows from north to south, dividing it into two portions, possessing 
very distinct characteristics. The eastern tract consists of rich 
alluvial soil, well watered, and subject to fertilizing inundations, 
yielding heavy crops of coaise rice, oil-seeds and jute. The 
western portion of the district is high-lying and produces the- 
finer qualities of rice. The principal rivers are formed by the 
different channels of the Brahmaputra, which river here bears 
the local names of the Konai, the Daokoba and the Jamuna, 
the last forming a portion of the eastern boundary of the district. 
Its bed is studded with alluvial islands. The Brahmaputra and 
its channels, together with three minor streams, the Bangali, 
Karatoya and Atrai, afford admirable facilities for commerce, 
and render every part of the district accessible to native cargo 
boats of large burden. The rivers swarm with fish. The former 



production of indigo is extinct, and the industry of silk-spinning 
is decaying. There is no town with as many as 1 0,000 inhabitants, 
trade being conducted at riverside marts. Nor are there any 
metalled roads. Several lines of railway (the Eastern Bengal, 
&c), however, serve the district. 

BOGUE, DAVID (1750-1825), British nonconformist divine, 
was born in the parish of Coldingham, Berwickshire. After a 
course of study in Edinburgh, he was licensed to preach by the 
Church of Scotland, but made his way to London (1721), where 
he taught in schools at Edmonton, Hampstead and Camberwell. 
He then settled as minister of the Congregational church at 
Gosport in Hampshire (1777), and to his pastoral duties added 
the charge of an institution for preparing men for the ministry. 
It was the age of the new-born missionary enterprise, and Bogue's 
academy was in a very large measure the seed from which the 
London Missionary Society took its growth. Bogue himself 
would have gone to India in 1796 but for the opposition of the 
East India Company. He also had much to do with founding 
the British and Foreign Bible Society and the Religious Tract 
Society, and in conjunction with James Bennet, minister at 
Romsey, wrote a well-known History of Dissenters (3 vols., 1809). 
Another of his writings was an Essay on the Divine Authority of 
the New Testament. He died at Brighton on the 25th of October 
1825. 

BOGUS (of uncertain origin, possibly connected with the 
Fr. bagasse, sugar-cane refuse), a slang word, originally used in 
America of the apparatus employed in counterfeiting coins, and 
now generally of any sham or spurious transaction. 

BOHEA (a word derived from the Wu-i hills in the Fuhkien 
province of China, b being substituted for IF or V), a kind of 
black tea (q.v.), or, in the 18th and early 19th centuries, tea 
generally, as in Pope's line, " So past her time 'twixt reading 
and bohea." Later the name " bohea " has been applied to an 
inferior quality of tea grown late in the season. 

BOHEMIA 1 (Ger. Bohmen, Czech Cechy, Lat. Bohemia), a 
kingdom and crownland of Austria, bounded N.E. by Prussian 
Silesia, S.E. by Moravia and Lower Austria, S. by Upper Austria, 
S.W. by Bavaria and N.W. by Saxony. It has an area of 20,060 
sq. m., or about two-thirds the size of Scotland, and forms the 
principal province of the Austrian empire. Situated in the 
geographical centre of the European continent, at about equal 
distance from all the European seas, enclosed by high moun- 
tains, and nevertheless easily accessible through Moravia from 
the Danubian plain and opened by the valley of the Elbe to the 
German plain, Bohemia was bound to play a leading part in the 
cultural development of Europe. It became early the scene of 
important historical events, the avenue and junction of the 
migration of peoples; and it forms the borderland between the 
German and Slavonic worlds. 

Geography. — Bohemia has the form of an irregular rhomb, of 
which the northernmost place, Buchberg, just above Hainspach, 
is at the same time the farthest north in the whole Austro- 
Hungarian monarchy. From an orographic point of view, 
Bohemia constitutes amongst the Austrian provinces a separate 
massif, bordered on three sides by mountain ranges: on the 
S.W. by the Bohmerwald or Bohemian Forest; on the N.W. 
by the Erzgebirge or Ore Mountains; and on the N.E. by the 
Riesengebirge or Giant Mountains and other ranges of the 
Sudetes. The Bohmerwald, which, like its parallel range, the 

1 As a guide to the English-speaking reader, the following notes 
on the pronunciation of Bohemian names are appended. The Czech 
(Cech) alphabet is the same as the English, with the omission of the 
letters q, w and x. Certain letters, however, vary in pronunciation, 
and are distinguished by diacritical marks, a device orginated by 
John Huss. The vowels a, e, i, (y), o, u, are pronounced as in 
Italian; but e = Eng. ye in " yet," and u = Eng. 00. 

The consonants, b, d, f, k, 1, m, n, p, r, v, z, are as in English; 
g = Eng.g in " gone "; s = £ng. initial s. But ii = Span. n (in canon); 
f = rsh; s = sh; z = zh (i.e. the French j); k before d=jj; v before 
k, p, s, t = f. Of the other consonants c = Eng. ts; c = ch; ch = 
Germ, ch; j =Eng. y, but is not pronounced before d, m, s. Accents 
on vowels lengthen them; on d and t they are softening marks. 
H is always pronounced in Czech. At the end of words and before 
k and t it = Germ, ch; in other places, as in bahno (morass) its 
pronunciation is somewhat softer. 



122 



BOHEMIA 



[GEOGRAPHY 



Sudetes, has a general direction from S.E. to N.W., is divided 
by the pass of Neumarkinto two parts. The northern part (Czech 
Cesky Les) attains in the massif of Czerkov an altitude of 3300 ft., 
but the southern part (Czech Sumava) is at the same time the 
highest and the most picturesque part of the range, including 
on the Bohemian side the Osser (4053 ft.) and the Plockenstein 
(4513 ft.), although the highest peak, the Arber (4872), is in 
Bavaria. The beauty of this range of mountains consists in its 
pure crystalline torrents, in the numerous blue lakes of its valleys, 
and above all in the magnificent forests of oak and pine with 
which its sides are covered. The pass of Neumark, called also 
the pass of Neugedein, has always been the principal approach 
to Bohemia from Germany. It stretches towards the east, above 
the small town of Taus (Czech Domazlice, once called TuhoH, 
i.e. the Fortress), and is the place where some of the bloodiest 
battles in the history of Bohemia were fought. Here in the first 
half of the 7th century Samo repulsed the invading hordes of 
the Avars, which threatened the independence of the newly- 
settled Slavonic inhabitants; here also Wratislas II. defeated 
the German emperor Henry III. in a two-days' battle (August 
22 and 23, 1040). It was in the same place that the Hussites 
gained in 143 1 one of their greatest victories against a German 
army of crusaders, and another similar German army was van- 
quished here by George of Podebrad. 

The Erzgebirge (Czech Rudo Horl), which form the north-west 
frontier, have an average altitude of 2600 ft., and as their 
highest point, the Keilberg (4080 ft.). The numerous mining 
villages, the great number of cultivated areas and the easy 
passes, traversed by good roads, give those mountains in many 
places the aspect of a hilly undulating plain. Several of the 
villages are built very near the summit of the mountains, and 
one of them, Gottesgab (pop. about 1500 ), lies at an altitude of 
334S ft., the highest place in Bohemia and central Germany. 
To the west the Erzgebirge combine through the Elstergebirge 
with the Fichtelgebirge, which in their turn are united with the 
Bohmerwald through the plateau of Waldsassen. To the east 
the Erzgebirge are separated from the Elbsandsteingebirge by 
the Nollendorf pass, traversed by the ancient military route to 
Saxony; it was the route followed by Napoleon I. after the 
battle of Dresden (1813). To the south stretches the " Ther- 
mopylae of Bohemia," the scene of the battle of Kulm and 
Arbesau. A little farther to the east the Elbe escapes into 
Saxony at the lowest point in Bohemia (alt. 367 ft.). The north- 
east frontier is formed by the Sudetes, which comprise the 
Lausitzergebirge (2500 ft.), the Isergebirge (with the highest 
peak, the Tafelfichte, 3683 ft.), the Jeschkengebirge (3322 ft.), 
and the Riesengebirge. The Riesengebirge (Czech Kroknose) 
are, after the Alps, among the highest mountains of central 
Europe, and attain in the Schneekoppe an altitude of 5264 ft. 
The last groups of the Sudetes in Bohemia are the Heuscheuerge- 
birge (2532 ft.) and the AdI'ergebirge (3664 ft.). The fourth side 
of the rhomb is formed by the so-called Bohemian-Moravian 
Hills, a plateau or broad series of low hills, composed of primitive 
rocks, and attaining in some places an altitude of 2500 ft. 

The interior of Bohemia has sometimes been compared to a 
deep basin; but for the most part it is an undulating plateau, 
over 1000 ft. high, formed by a succession of terraces, which 
gradually slope down from south to north. Its lowest-lying 
points are not in the middle but in the north, in the valley of the 
Elbe, and the country can be divided into two parts by a line 
passing through Hohenmauth-Prague-Komotau. The part 
lying to the south of this line can be designated as highland, and 
only the part north of it as lowland. The mountain-ranges of 
the interior of Bohemia are the Brdywald (2798 ft.) in the middle; 
the Tepler Gebirge (2657 ft.), the Karsbader Gebirge (3057 ft.) 
and the Kaiserwald (3238 ft.), in the north-west part; while the 
northern corner is occupied by the Mittelgebirge (2739 ft.), a 
volcanic massif, stretching on both sides of the Elbe. 

Bohemia belongs to the watershed of the Elbe, which rises 
within the territory and receives on the right the Iser and the 
Polzen, and on the left the Adler; the Eger with its affluent the 
Tepl; the Biela and the Moldau. But the principal river of 



Bohemia, from every point of view, is the Moldau (Czech 
Vltava), not the Elbe. A glance at the hydrographic structure 
of Bohemia, which is of such a striking regularity, shows us that 
the Moldau is the main stem, while the Elbe and the other rivers 
are only lateral branches; moreover, the Elbe below Melnik, 
the point of its confluence with the Moldau, follows the general 
direction of the Moldau. Besides, the Moldau is the principal 
commercial artery of the country, being navigable below Budweis, 
while the Upper-Elbe is not navigable; its basin (11,890 sq. m.) 
is twice as great as that of the Elbe, and its width and depth 
are also greater. It has a length of 270 m., 47 m. longer than 
the Upper-Elbe, but it runs through a deep and narrow valley, 
in which there is neither road nor railway, extending from above 
Budweis to about 15 m. south of Prague. The Moldau receives 
on the right the Luzniza and the Sazawa and on the left the 
Wottawa and the Beraun. The Beraun is formed by the union 
of the Mies with the Radbusa, Angel and Uslawa, and is the 
third most important river of the country. There are only a few 
lakes, which are mostly found at high altitudes. 

Climate. — Bohemia has a continental, generally healthy 
climate, which varies much in different parts of the country. 
It is mildest in the centre, where, e.g. at Prague, the mean annual 
temperature is 48-5° F. The rainfall varies also according to the 
districts, the rainy season being the summer. Thus the mean 
annual rainfall in the interior of Bohemia is 18 in., in the Riesen- 
gebirge 40 in., while in the Bohmerwald it reaches 60 to 70 in. 

Agriculture. — Favoured with a suitable climate and inhabited 
by a thriving rural population, Bohemia is very highly developed 
in the matter of agriculture. Over 50% of the whole area is 
under cultivation and the soil is in many parts very fertile, the 
best-known regions being the " Golden Road " round Konig- 
gratz, the " Paradise " round Teplitz, and the " Garden of 
Bohemia " round Leitmeritz. The principal products are oats, 
rye, barley and wheat, but since the competition of Hungarian 
wheat large tracts of land have been converted to the cultivation 
of beetroot. The potato crop, which forms the staple food of the 
people, is great; the Saaz district is celebrated for hops, and the 
flax is also of a good quality. Fruit, especially plums, is very 
abundant and constitutes a great article of export. The forests 
cover 29-01% of the total area; meadows, 10-05, pastures 5-05, 
and gardens 1-35%. Cattle-rearing is not so well developed as 
agriculture, but great flocks of geese are reared, especially in 
the south, and bee-cultivation constitutes another important 
industry. Pisciculture has been for centuries successfully 
pursued by the Bohemian peasants, and the attempts recently 
made for the rearing of silkworms have met with fair success. 

Minerals. — Except salt, which is entirely absent, almost 
every useful metal and mineral is to be found. First in import- 
ance, both in quantity and in value, come lignite and coal. 
Some of the richest lignite fields in Europe are found in the 
north-east corner of Bohemia round Briix, Dux, Falkenau, 
Ossegg and Teplitz. Coal is mined round Kladno, Buschtehrad, 
Pilsen, Schlan, Rakonitz, Niirschan and Radnitz, the last- 
named place containing the oldest coal mines of Bohemia (17th 
century). Iron ores are found at Krusnahora and Nucic, and 
the principal foundries are round Kladno and Konigshof. 
Owing to the improvements in refining, Bohemia has become 
an important centre of the iron industry. Silver is extracted 
at Pribram and Joachimsthal, but the silver mines near Kutten- 
berg, famous in the middle ages, are now abandoned. Lead is 
extracted at Pribram, tin at Graupen in the Erzgebirge, the only 
place in Austria where this metal is found. Antimony is extracted 
at Milleschau near Tabor; uranium and radium near Joachims- 
thal; graphite near Krumau and Budweis; porcelain-earth near 
Carlsbad. Other minerals found in various places of Bohemia 
are copper, sulphur, cobalt, alum, nickel, arsenic and various 
sorts of precious stone, like the Bohemian garnet (pyrope), 
and building stone. A large amount of peat is collected, 
especially in the south-west of Bohemia, as well as a great 
quantity of asphalt. 

Bohemia possesses over two hundred mineral springs, but 
only a few are used for medicinal purposes. Among them are 



HISTORY] 



BOHEMIA 



123 



some of the most celebrated mineral springs in the world, such 
as Carlsbad, Marienbad, Franzensbad, Teplitz-Schonau and 
Bilin. Other springs of importance are Piillna, Sedlitz and 
Seidschitz near Brux; Giesshiibl near Carlsbad; Liebwerda, 
Konigswart, Sangerberg, Neudorf, Tetschen, Johannisbad, 
situated at the foot of the Schneekoppe, &c. 

Manufactures and Commerce. — From an industrial point of 
view, Bohemia takes the first rank amongst the Austrian pro- 
vinces, and at the same time is one of the greatest manufacturing 
centres of Europe. Rich as the country is in coal and iron, and 
in water supplies which can be transformed into motive power, 
the inhabitants were not slow to utilize these advantages, so 
that the industry of Bohemia made enormous strides during the 
last half of the 19th century. The glass industry was introduced 
from Venice in the 13th century and soon attained a vast im- 
portance; the factories are in the neighbourhood of the moun- 
tains, where minerals, and especially silica and fuel, are plentiful. 
The finest product, the crystal-glass, is made round Haida and 
Steinschonau. The very extensive porcelain industry is concen- 
trated in and around Carlsbad. The textile industry stands in 
the front rank and is mostly concentrated in the north-east 
corner of Bohemia, round Reichenberg, and in the valley of the 
Lower Elbe.- The cloth manufacture is located at Reichenberg; 
Rumburg and Trautenau are the centre of the linen industry; 
woollen yarns are made at Aussig and Asch. Lace, which is 
pursued as a home-industry in the Erzgebirge region, has its 
principal centre at Weipert, while Strakonitz has the speciality 
of the manufacture of red fezes (Turkish caps). The metallurgic 
industries, favoured by the abundance of coal and iron, are 
concentrated round the mines. Industrial and agricultural 
machinery are manufactured at Reichenberg, Pilsen and Prague, 
and at the last-named place is also to be found a great establish- 
ment for the production of railway rolling-stock. Sugar refining 
is another industry, which, although of recent date, has had a 
very great development, and the breweries produce a beer 
which is appreciated all over the world. Other important 
branches of industry are:— the manufacture of chemicals at 
Prague and Aussig; pencils at Budweis; musical instruments 
at Graslitz and Schonbach; paper, leather, dyeing and calico- 
printing. Hand-in-hand with the industrial activity of the 
country goes its commercial development, which is stimulated 
by an extensive railway system, good roads and navigable 
rivers. The centre of the railway system, which had in 1898 
a length of some 3500 m., or 30% of the total length of the 
Austrian railways, is Prague; and through the Elbe Bohemia 
has easy access to the sea for its export trade. 

Population and Administration. — Bohemia had in 1900 a 
population of 6,318,280, which corresponds to 315 inhabitants 
per square mile. As regards numbers, it occupies the second place 
amongst the Austrian provinces, coming after Galicia, and as 
regards density of population it stands third, Silesia and Lower 
Austria, which contains Vienna, standing higher. In 1800 the 
population was a little over 3,000,000. According to nationality, 
about 35% are Germans and 65% Czechs. The Czechs occupy 
the middle of the country, as well as its south and south-east 
region, while the Germans are concentrated near its borders, 
especially in the north and west, and are also found all over 
the country in the large towns. Besides, there are numerous 
German-speaking enclaves situated in purely Czech districts; 
on the other hand, the Czechs have shown a tendency to invade 
the purely German mining and manufacturing districts. Not- 
withstanding its rich natural resources and its great industrial 
development, Bohemia sends out a steady flow of emigrants, 
who either settle in the other provinces of the monarchy, in 
Germany and in Russia, or cross the Atlantic to America. To 
the Roman Catholic Church belong 96 % of the total population; 
Bohemia is divided into the archbishopric of Prague, and the 
three bishoprics of Budweis, Koniggratz and Leitmeritz. 

Education is well advanced, and Bohemia has the lowest 
proportion of illiterates amongst the Austrian provinces. At 
the head of the educational establishments stand the two 
universities at Prague, one German and the other Czech. 



Bohemia sends 130 deputies to the Reichsrat at Vienna; the 
local diet, to which belong ex officio the archbishop, the three 
bishops, and the two rectors of the universities, consists of 
242 members. For administrative purposes Bohemia is divided 
into ninety-four districts and two autonomous municipalities, 
Prague (pop. 204,478), the capital, and Reichenberg (34,204). 
Other important towns are Pilsen (68,292), Budweis (39,360), 
Aussig (37, 2 SS), Schonau (24,110), Eger (23,665), Warnsdorf 
(21,150), Brux (21,525), Gablonz (21,086), Asch (18,675), Kladno 
(18,600), Pardubitz (17,029), Saaz (16,168), Komotau (15,925), 
Kolin (15,025), Kuttenberg (14,799), Trautenau (14,777), 
Carlsbad (14,640), Pribram (13,576), Jungbunzlau (13,479), 
Leitmeritz (13,075), Chrudim (13,017), Dux (11,921), B.oden- 
bach (10,782), Tabor (10,692), Bohmisch-Leipa (10,674), Rum- 
burg (10,382), Weipert (10,037). 

See F. Umlauft, Die Lander Osterreich- Vngarns in Wort und Bild, 
(15 vols., Vienna, 1881-1889), vol. vii. ; Mikowec, Altertiimer und 
Denkwiirdigkeiten Bbhmen's (2 vols., Prague, 1859-1865) ; F. Rivnac, 
Reisehandbuchfur das Konigreich Bohmen (Prague, 1882), very useful 
for its numerous and detailed historical notes. (O. Br,) 

History 

The country derives its name from the Boii, a Celtic tribe 
which in the earliest historical period inhabited part of the land. 
According to very ancient traditions accepted by the modern 
historians of Bohemia, the Boii, whose capital was called 
Boiohemum, were weakened by continual warfare with neigh- 
bouring tribes, and finally subdued by the Teutonic tribe of the 
Marcomanni (about 12 B.C.). The Marcomanni were afterwards 
expelled by other Teutonic tribes, and eventually Bohemia was 
conquered by Slavic tribes, of whom the Cechs (see Czech) 
were the most important. The date of the arrival of the Cechs 
in Bohemia is very uncertain, and the scanty references to the 
country in classical and Byzantine writers are rather 
misleading than otherwise. Recent archaeological c'ojgvest. 
research has proved the existence of Slavic inhabitants 
in Bohemia as far back as the beginning of the Christian era. 
The Cechs appear to have become the masters of the country 
in the 5th century. The first of their rulers mentioned in 
history is Samo, who is stated to have defeated the Avars, a 
Turanian tribe which had for a time obtained the overlordship 
over Bohemia. Samo also defeated the Franks in a great battle 
that took place at Wogatisburg (630), probably near the site 
of the present town of Eger. After the death of Samo the his- 
tory of Bohemia again becomes absolutely obscure for about 130 
years. The next events that are recorded by the oldest chroniclers, 
such as Cosmas, refer to the foundation of a Bohemian prin- 
cipality by Krok (or Crocus) and his daughter Libussa. The 
latter is said to have married Pfemysl, a peasant who was found 
ploughing his field — a legend that is common in most Slavic 
countries. Beginning with this semi-mythic ruler, the ancient 
chroniclers have constructed a continuous list of Pfemyslide 
princes. Neither the deeds attributed to these princes nor the 
dates of their reigns can be considered as historical. 

From the time of the introduction of Chris tianity into Bohemia 
the history of the country becomes less obscure. The first 
attempts to introduce Christianity undoubtedly came 
from Germany. They met with little success, as vanity. 
innate distrust of the Germans naturally rendered the 
Bohemians unfavourable to a creed which reached them from 
the realm of their western neighbours. Matters were different 
when Christianity approached them from Moravia, where its 
doctrine had been taught by Cyrillus and Methodius — Greek 
monks from Thessalonica. About the year 873 the Bohemian 
prince Bofivoj was baptized by Methodius, and the Bohemians 
now rapidly adopted the Christian faith. Of the 
rulers of Bohemia the most famous at this period was / a /" CeS " 
Wenceslas, surnamed the Holy, who in 935 was 
murdered by his brother Boleslav, and who was afterwards 
canonized by the Church of Rome. As Wenceslas had been an 
ally of Germany, his murder resulted in a war with that country, 
in which, as far as we can judge by the scanty records of the time. 



124 



BOHEMIA 



[HISTORY 



Boleslav. 



Boleslav, the brother and successor of Wenceslas, was on the 
whole successful. During the reigns of Boleslav and his son, 

Boleslav II., Bohemia extended its frontiers in several 

directions. Boleslav II. indeed established his rule 
not only over Bohemia and Moravia, but also over a large part 
of Silesia, and over that part of Poland which is now the Austrian 
province of Galicia. Like most Slavic states at this and even 
a later period, the great Bohemian empire of Boleslav II. did not 
endure long. Boleslav III., son of Boleslav II., lost all his 
foreign possessions to Boleslav the Great, king of Poland. 
During his reign Bohemia was involved in constant civil war, 
caused by the dissensions between Boleslav III. and his brothers 
Jaromir and Ulrick. Though the prince succeeded in expelling 
his brothers from the country, his cruelty induced the Bohemians 
to dethrone him and to choose as their ruler the Polish prince 
viadtvoi Vladivoj, brother of Boleslav the Great, and son of the 

Bohemian princess Dubravka (Dobrawa). Vladivoj 
attempted to strengthen his hold over Bohemia by securing the 
aid of Germany. He consented not only to continue to pay the 
tribute which the Germans had already obtained from several 
previous rulers of Bohemia, but also to become a vassal of 
the German empire and to receive the German title of duke. 
This state continued when after the death of Vladivoj - the 
Pfemyslide dynasty wasrestored. The Pfemyslide prince Bfetislav 
Bfetislav I !• ( I0 37 _IO SS) restored the former power of Bohemia, 

and again added Moravia, Silesia and a considerable 
part of Poland to the Bohemian dominions. To obviate the 
incessant struggles which had endangered the land at every 
vacancy of the throne, Bfetislav, with the consent of the nobles, 
decreed that the oldest member of the house of Pfemysl should 
be the ruler of Bohemia. Bfetislav was therefore succeeded 
first by his eldest son Spitihnev, and then by his second son 
Vratislav. 

In 1088 Vratislav obtained the title of king from the emperor 
Henry IV., whom he had assisted in the struggle with the papal 

see which is known as the contest about investitures. 
becomes Though the title of king was only conferred on Vratislav 
"king." personally, the German king, Conrad III., conferred 

on the Bohemian prince Sobeslav (1125-1140) the 

title of hereditary cupbearer of the Empire, thus granting a 

certain influence on the election of the emperors to Bohemia, 

which hitherto had only obligations towards the Empire but no 

part in its government. In n 56 the emperor Frederick I. 

Barbarossa ceded Upper Lusatia to the Bohemian prince 

Vladislav II., and conferred on him the title of king on condition 

of his taking part in Frederick's Italian campaigns. It was 

intended that that title should henceforth be hereditary, but 

it again fell into abeyance during the struggles between the 

Pfemyslide princes which followed the abdication of Vladislav 

in 1 1 73. 

The consequences of these constant internal struggles were 

twofold; the German influence became stronger, and the 

pow T er of the sovereign declined, as the nobility on whose support 

the competitors for the crown were obliged to rely constantly 

obtained new privileges. In 1197 Pfemysl Ottakar became 

undisputed ruler of Bohemia, and he was crowned as king in the 

following year. The royal title of the Bohemian sovereigns 

was continued uninterruptedly from that date. Wenceslas I. 

(1 230-1 253) succeeded his father as king of Bohemia without 

opposition. The last years of his reign were troubled by internal 

r.n 1 _n discord. Wenceslas's son, Pfemysl Ottakar II., who 
Ottakar 11. , ' . J ' . 

under the sovereignty of his father ruled Moravia, 
became for a time the chief leader of the malcontents. 
A reconciliation between son and father, however, took place 
before the latter's death. Pfemysl Ottakar II. was one of the 
greatest of Bohemia's kings. He had during the lifetime of his 
father obtained possession of the archduchies of Austria, and, 
about the time of his accession to the Bohemian throne, the 
nobility of Styria also recognized him as their ruler. These 
extensions of his dominions involved Pfemysl Ottakar II. in 
repeated wars with Hungary. In 1260 he decisively defeated 
Bela, king of Hungary, in the great battle of Kressenbrunn. 



After this victory Ottakar's power rose to its greatest height. 
He now obtained possession of Carinthia, Istria and parts of 
northern Italy. His possessions extended from the Giant 
Mountains in Bohemia to the Adriatic, and included almost all 
the parts of the present Habsburg empire west of the Leitha. 
His contemporaries called Ottakar " the man of gold " because 
of his great wealth, or " the man of iron " because of his mili- 
tary power. From political rather than racial causes Ottakar 
favoured the immigration of Germans into his dominions. He 
hoped to find in the German townsmen a counterpoise to the 
overwhelming power of the Bohemian nobility. In 1273 
Rudolph, count of Habsburg, was elected king of the Romans. 
It is very probable that the German crown had previously been 
offered to Ottakar, but that he had refused it. Several causes, 
among others his Slavic nationality, which was likely to render 
him obnoxious to the Germans, contributed to his decision. 
As Rudolph immediately claimed as vacant fiefs of the Empire 
most of the lands held by Ottakar, war was inevitable. Ottakar 
was deserted by many of his new subjects, and even by part of 
the Bohemian nobility. He was therefore unable to resist 
the German king, and was obliged to surrender to him all his 
lands except Bohemia and Moravia, and to recognize Rudolph 
as his overlord. New dissensions between the two sovereigns 
broke out almost immediately. In 1278 Ottakar invaded the 
Austrian duchies, now under the rule of Rudolph, but was 
defeated and killed at the battle of Durnkrut on the Marchfeld. 

Ottakar's son, Wenceslas II., was only seven years of age at 
the death of his father, and Otto of Brandenburg, a nephew of 
Ottakar, for a time governed Bohemia as guardian of 
the young sovereign. Otto's rule was very unpopular, las lL 
an insurrection broke out against him, and Bohemia 
was for a time in a state of complete anarchy. The country 
was at last pacified through the intervention of Rudolph of 
Habsburg, and at the age of twelve Wenceslas became nominal 
ruler of the country. All power was, however, in the hands of 
Zavis of Falkenstein, one of the great Bohemian nobles, who 
had married the king's mother, Kunegunda. The power of 
Zavis at last became invidious to the king, by whose order he 
was beheaded in 1290. Wenceslas, though only nineteen years 
of age, henceforth governed Bohemia himself, and his short 
reign was a period of great happiness for the country. Poland 
also accepted the rule of Wenceslas and the Hungarian crown 
was offered to him. Towards the end of his reign Wenceslas 
became involved in war with Albert, archduke of Austria, after- 
wards king of the Romans. While preparing to invade Austria 
Wenceslas died suddenly (1305). His son and successor, 
Wenceslas III., was then only sixteen years of age, and he only 
ruled over Bohemia for one year. While planning a warlike 
expedition against Poland, on which country the Bohemian 
sovereigns now again maintained their claim, he was murdered 
by unknown assassins (1306). With him ended the rule of the 
Pfemyslide dynasty over Bohemia. 

Albert, king of the Romans, declared that Bohemia was a 
vacant fief of the Empire, and, mainly by intimidation, induced 
the Bohemians to elect his son Rudolph as their sovereign; 
but Rudolph died after a reign of only one year. Though the 
Habsburg princes at this period already claimed a hereditary 
right to the Bohemian throne, the Bohemians determined to 
maintain their right of electing their sovereign, and they chose 
Henry, duke of Carinthia, who had married a daughter of King 
Wenceslas II. Henry soon became unpopular, as he was accused 
of unduly favouring the German settlers in Bohemia. It was 
decided to depose him, and the choice of the Bohemians now 
fell on John of Luxemburg, son of Henry, king of the 
Romans. The Luxemburg dynasty henceforth ruled Laxem- 
over Bohemia up to the time of its extinction at the burg 
death of Sigismund (1437). Though King John, by 
his marriage to the princess Elizabeth, a daughter of Wen- 
ceslas II., became more closely connected with Bohemia, he 
does not appear to have felt much interest in that country. 
Most of his life was spent in other lands, his campaigns ranging 
from Italy in the south to Lithuania in the north. It became 



HISTORY] 



BOHEMIA 



!25 



Wences- 
laslV. 



proverbial " that nothing could be done in the world without 
the help of God and of the king of Bohemia." The policy of 
John was founded on a close alliance with France, the country 
for which he felt most sympathy. Fighting as an ally of France 
he fell at the battle of Crecy (1346). 

He was succeeded as king of Bohemia by his son Charles, 
whom the German electors had previously elected as their 
sovereign at Rense (1346). Charles proved one of the 
Charles greatest rulers of Bohemia, where his memory is still 
revered. Prague was his favourite residence, and by 
the foundation of the noiit mesto (new town) he greatly enlarged 
the city, which now had three times its former extent, and soon 
also trebled its population. He also added greatly to the 
importance of the city by founding the famous university of 
Prague. Charles succeeded in re-establishing order in Bohemia. 
The country had been in a very disturbed state in consequence 
of feuds that were incessant during the reign of John, who 
had almost always been absent from Bohemia. Charles also 
attempted to codify the obscure and contradictory laws of 
Bohemia; but this attempt failed through the resistance of 
the powerful nobility of the country. During the reign of 
Charles, the first symptoms of that movement in favour of 
church reform that afterwards acquired a world-wide import- 
ance, appeared in Bohemia. As Charles has often been accused 
of undue subserviency to the Church of Rome, it should be men- 
tioned that he granted his protection to several priests who 
favoured the cause of church reform. In his foreign policy 
Charles differed from his father. ' The relations with France 
gradually became colder, and at the end of his reign Charles 
favoured an alliance with England; he died in 1378 at the 
age of sixty-two, prematurely exhausted by arduous work. 

Charles was succeeded by his son Wenceslas, who was then 
seventeen years of age. His reign marks the decline of the rule 
of the house of Luxemburg over Bohemia. He was 
a weak and incapable sovereign, but the very ex- 
aggerated accusations against him, which are found 
principally in the works of older historians, are mainly due to 
the fact that the king and to a larger extent his queen, Sophia, 
for a time furthered the cause of church reform, thus incurring 
the displeasure of Romanist writers. During the earlier part of 
the reign of Wenceslas a continual struggle took place between 
the king and the powerful Bohemian nobles, who indeed twice 
imprisoned their sovereign. Wenceslas also became involved 
in a dispute with the archbishop, which resulted in the death 
of the famous John of Nepomuk. 

The later part of the reign of Wenceslas is a record of incipient 
religious conflict. The hold of the Church of Rome on Bohemia 
had already been weakened during the reign of King 
Huss and QYL &r \ es by attacks on the immorality of the clergy, 
Hussites, which proceeded from pious priests such as Milic and 
Waldhauser. The church schism, during which the 
rival pontiffs assailed each other with all the wild threats and 
objurgations of medieval theological strife, necessarily alienated 
the Bohemians to a yet greater extent. Almost the whole 
Bohemian nation therefore espoused the cause of Huss (q.v.). 
Wenceslas on the occasion of these disputes displayed the 
weakness and irresolution that always characterized him, but 
Queen Sophia openly favoured the cause of Huss, who for some 
time was her confessor. Huss was tried before the council 
of Constance (q.v.), to which he had proceeded with a letter of 
safe conduct given by Wenceslas's brother Sigismund, king of 
the Romans. He was declared a heretic and burnt on the 6th 
of July 141 5. The inevitable and immediate result of this event 
was the outbreak of civil war in Bohemia, where Huss was 
greatly revered by the large majority of the population. The 
nobles of Bohemia and Moravia met at Prague on the 2nd of 
September 1415, and sent to the council the famed Protes- 
tatio Bohemorum, in which they strongly protested against the 
execution of Huss, " a good, just and catholic man who had for 
many years been favourably known in the Kingdom by his life, 
conduct and fame, and who had been convicted of no offence." 
They further declared that all who affirmed that heresy existed 



in Bohemia were " liars, vile traitors and calumniators of 
Bohemia and Moravia, the worst of all heretics, full of all evil, 
sons of the devil." They finally stated " that they would defend 
the law of our Lord Jesus Christ and its pious, humble and stead- 
fast preachers at the cost of their blood, scorning all fear and 
all human decrees that might be contrary to them." 1 This 
protest was a declaration of war against the Roman church, 
and marks the beginning of the Hussite wars. The council, 
indeed, summoned the nobles before its tribunal, but they 
refused to appear. A large number of the nobles and knights 
who had met at Prague formed a confederacy and declared 
that they consented to freedom of preaching the word of God 
on their estates, that they declined to recognize the authority 
of the council of Constance, but would obey the Bohemian 
bishops and a future pope lawfully elected. Meanwhile they 
declared the university of Prague the supreme authority in all 
matters of religion. The members of the confederacy attempted, 
though unsuccessfully, to induce King Wenceslas to become their 
leader. The Romanist nobles, who were not numerous, but 
some of whom owned vast estates, now also formed a confederacy, 
pledging themselves to support the pope and the council. After 
the closing of the council in 1418, Sigismund, who — Wenceslas 
being childless — was heir to the Bohemian throne, sent a letter 
to his brother, which was practically a manifesto addressed 
to the Bohemian people. He threatened with the severest 
penalties all who should continue to resist the authority of 
Rome. Wenceslas maintained the vacillating attitude that 
was characteristic of his whole reign, though Queen Sophia still 
extended her protection to the reformers. By doing this, indeed, 
she incurred the wrath of the Church to so great an extent that 
an act of accusation against her was drawn up at the council 
of Constance. Intimidated by his brother, Wenceslas now 
attempted to stem the current of religious enthusiasm. Im- 
mediately after the death of Huss many priests who refused 
to administer communion in the two kinds — now the principal 
tenet of the adherents of Huss — had been expelled from their 
parishes. Wenceslas decreed that they should be reinstated, 
and it was only after some hesitation that he even permitted 
that religious services according to the Utraquist doctrine should 
be held in three of the churches of Prague. Some of the more 
advanced reformers left Prague and formed the party known 
as the Taborites, from the town of Tabor which became their 
centre. Troubles soon broke out at Prague. When on the 
30th of July 1419, the Hussite priest, John of Zelivo, was leading 
a procession through the streets of Prague, stones were thrown 
at him and his followers from the town hall of the " new town." 
The Hussites, led by John Zizka (q.v.) , stormed the town-hall and 
threw the magistrates from its windows. On receiving the news 
of these riots King Wenceslas was immediately seized by an 
attack of apoplexy; a second fit on the 16th of August ended 
his life. 

The news of the death of the king caused renewed rioting in 
Prague and many other Bohemian cities, from which many 
Germans, mostly adherents of the Church of Rome, 
were expelled. Finally a temporary truce was con- nwn'd. 
eluded, and, early in the following year, Sigismund, 
who now claimed the Bohemian crown as successor of his brother, 
arrived at Kutna Hora (Kuttenberg). Pope Martin V. on the 
1st of March 1420 proclaimed a crusade against Bohemia, and 
crusaders from all parts of Europe joined Sigismund's army. 
" On the 30th day of June the Hungarian king, Sigismund, with 
a large army consisting of men of various countries, as well as of 
Bohemians, occupied the castle of Prague, determined to con- 
quer the city, which they considered a heretical community 
because they used the sacred chalice and accepted other evan- 
gelical truths." 2 But the attempt of the crusaders to conquer 
Prague failed, and after an attack by them on the Vitkov 
(now Zizkov) hill had been repulsed by the desperate bravery 
of the Taborites, led by Zizka, Sigismund determined to abandon 

1 Protestatio Bohemorum, frequently printed in English and 
German, as well as in the Latin original. 

2 Laurence of Bfezova's (contemporary) Kronika Husitskd. 



126 



BOHEMIA 



[HISTORY 



the siege of Prague. An attempt of Sigismund to relieve the 
besieged garrison of the Vysehrad fortress on the outskirts of 
Prague also failed, as he was again entirely defeated at the battle 
of the Vysehrad (November i, 1420). 

Royal authority now ceased in Bohemia. At a meeting of 
the diet at Caslav (June i, 1421) Sigismund was deposed. It 
was decided that a Polish prince should be chosen as sovereign, 
and that meanwhile a provisional government, composed of 
twenty men belonging to the various parties, should be estab- 
lished. In 1422 Sigismund again invaded Bohemia, but was 
decisively defeated by Zizka at Nemecky Brod (Deutschbrod). 
The Polish prince, Sigismund Korybutovic, now arrived in 
Bohemia, and was recognized as regent by the large majority 
of the inhabitants; but through the influence of the papal see 

he was recalled by the rulers of Poland after a stay 
war.°" S °f on ty a * ew montns - After his departure, civil 

war between the moderate Hussites (Calixtines or 
Utraquists) and the advanced Taborite party broke out for the 
first time, though there had previously been isolated disturbances 
between them. The return of Prince Korybutovic and the 
menace of a German invasion soon reunited the Bohemians, 
who gained a decisive victory over the Germans at Aussig in 
1426. Shortly afterwards Korybutovic, who had taken part 
in this great victory, incurred the dislike of the extreme Hussites, 
and was obliged to leave Bohemia. All hope of establishing an 
independent Slav dynasty in Bohemia thus came to an end. 
In 1427 several German princes undertook a new crusade against 
the Hussites. With the German and other invaders were 1000 
English arcners, bodyguard to Henry Beaufort, bishop of 
Winchester, who took part in the crusade as papal legate. 
The crusaders were seized by a sudden panic, both at Mies 
(Stfibro) and at Tachau, as soon as they approached the Hussites, 
and they fled hurriedly across the mountains into Bavaria. 
Though internal disturbances again broke out, the Bohemians 
after this success assumed the offensive, and repeatedly invaded 
Hungary and the German states. 

The impossibility of conquering Bohemia had now become 
obvious, and it was resolved that a council should meet at Basel 
(q.v.) to examine the demands of the Hussites. The Germans, 
however, influenced by Sigismund, determined to make a last 
attempt to subdue Bohemia by armed force. The Bohemians, 
as usual united in the moment of peril, defeated the Germans at 
Domazlice (Taus) on the 1st of August 1431, after a very short 
fight. In the course of the same year negotiations began at 
Basel, the Hussites being represented by a numerous embassy 
under the leadership of Prokop the Great. The negotiations 
proceeded very slowly, and in 1433 the Bohemians returned to 
their own country, accompanied, however, by envoys of the 
council. Dissensions had meanwhile again broken out in 
Bohemia, and they were now of a political rather than a religious 
nature. The more aristocratic Hussites raised an armed force 
which was known as " the army of the nobles." The Taborites 
also collected their men, who formed " the army of the towns." 
The two armies met at Lipan, near Kolin, on the 30th of May 
1434. The Taborites were defeated, and the two Prokops and 
most of their other leaders perished on the battlefield. The 
victory of the moderate party paved the way to a reconciliation 
with Sigismund and the Church of Rome. The Bohemians 

recognized Sigismund as their sovereign, but obtained 
"Com- considerable concessions with regard to religious 
pacts." matters. These concessions, which were formulated 

in the so-called Compacts, granted to the Bohemians the 
right of communion in both kinds, and of preaching the gospel 
freely, and also to a certain extent limited the power of the clergy 
to acquire worldly goods. 

After the Compacts had been formally recognized at Iglau in 
Moravia, Sigismund proceeded to Prague and was accepted as 
king. He died in the following year (1437) and was succeeded 
by his son-in-law, Albert of Austria, whom the estates chose as 
their king. Albert died after he had reigned over Bohemia less 
than two years. Though it was known that Albert's widow 
Elizabeth would shortly give birth to a child, the question as to 



the succession to the throne again arose; for it was only in 1627 
that the question whether the Bohemian crown was elective 
or hereditary was decided for ever. The nobles formed two 
parties, one of which, the national one, had George of 
Podebrad (q.v.) as its leader. Ulrich of Rosenberg p^^ r ad. 
was the leader of the Roman or Austrian division of 
the nobility. The two parties finally came to an agreement 
known as the " Letter of Peace " (list mirny). Those who signed 
it pledged themselves to recognise the Compacts, and to support 
as archbishop of Prague, John of Rokycan, who had been chosen 
by the estates in accordance with an agreement made simul- 
taneously with the Compacts, but whom the Church of Rome 
refused to recognize. On the other hand, the national party 
abandoned the candidature to the throne of Prince Casimir of 
Poland, thus paving the way to the eventual succession of 
Albert's heir. On the 22nd of February 1440 Queen Elizabeth 
gave birth to a son, who received the name of Ladislas. The 
Bohemians formally acknowledged him as their king, though 
only after their crown had been declined by Albert, duke of 
Bavaria. Ladislas remained in Austria under the guardianship 
of his uncle Frederick, duke of Styria, afterwards the emperor 
Frederick III., and Bohemia, still without regular government, 
continued to be the scene of constant conflicts between the rival 
parties of the nobility. In 1446 a general meeting of the estates 
of Bohemia together with those of Moravia, Silesia and Lusatia — 
and so-called " lands of the Bohemian crown " — took place. 
This meeting has exceptional importance for the constitutional 
history of Bohemia. It was* decreed that at the meeting of the 
estates their members should be divided into three bodies — 
known as curiae — representing the nobles, the knights and the 
towns. These curiae were to deliberate separately and only to 
meet for a final decision. An attempt made at this meeting to 
appoint a regent was unsuccessful. The negotiations with the 
papal see continued meanwhile, but led to no result, as the 
members of the Roman party used their influence at the papal 
court for the purpose of dissuading it from granting any con- 
cessions to their countrymen. Shortly after the termination of 
the diet of 1446 George of Podebrad therefore determined to 
appeal to the fortune of war. He assembled a considerable army 
at Kutna Hora and marched on Prague (1448). He occupied 
the town almost without resistance and assumed the regency 
over the kingdom. The diet in 1451 recognized his title, which 
was also sanctioned by the emperor Frederick III., guardian of 
the young king. Podebrad was none the less opposed, almost 
from the first, by the Romanists, who even concluded an alliance 
against him with their extreme opponents, Kolda of Zampach 
and the other remaining Taborites. In October 1453 Ladislas 
arrived in Bohemia and was crowned king at Prague; but he 
died somewhat suddenly on the 23rd of November 1457. George 
of PodSbrad has from the first frequently been accused of having 
poisoned him, but historical research has proved that this 
accusation is entirely unfounded. The Bohemian throne was 
now again vacant, for, when electing Ladislas the estates had 
reaffirmed the elective character of the monarchy. Though 
there were several foreign candidates, the estates unanimously 
elected George of Podebrad, who had now for some time admini- 
stered the country. Though the Romanist lords, whom Podebrad 
had for a time won over, also voted for him, the election was 
considered a great victory of the national party and was welcomed 
with enthusiasm by the citizens of Prague. 

During the earlier and more prosperous part of his reign the 
policy of King George was founded on a firm alliance with 
Matthias Corvinus, king of Hungary, through whose influence 
he was crowned by the Romanist bishop of Waitzen. The 
reign of King George, whose principal supporters were the men 
of the smaller nobility and of the towns, was at first very pros- 
perous. After a certain time, however, some of the Romanist 
nobles became hostile to the king, and, partly through their 
influence, he became involved in a protracted struggle with the 
papal see. It was in consequence of this struggle that some of 
George's far-reaching plans — he endeavoured for a time to obtain 
the supremacy over Germany — failed. After the negotiations 



HISTORY] 



BOHEMIA 



127 



with Rome had proved unsuccessful George assembled the 
estates at Prague in 1452 and declared that he would to his 
death remain true to the communion in both kinds, and that 
he was ready to risk his life and his crown in the defence of his 
faith. The Romanist party in Bohemia became yet more 
embittered against the king, and at a meeting at Zelena Hora 
(Griinberg) in 1465 many nobles of the Roman religion joined in 
a confederacy against him. In the following year Pope Paul II. 
granted his moral support to the confederates by pronouncing 
sentence of excommunication against George of Podebrad and by 
releasing all Bohemians from their oath of allegiance to him. It 
was also through papal influence that King Matthias of Hungary, 
deserting his former ally, supported the lords of the league of 
Selena Hora. Desultory warfare broke out between the two 
parties, in which George was at first successful; but fortune 
changed when the king of Hungary invaded Moravia and 
obtained possession of Briinn, the capital of the country. At a 
meeting of the Catholic nobles of- Bohemia and Moravia at 
Olmiitz in Moravia, Matthias was proclaimed king of Bohemia 
(May 3, 1469). In the following year George obtained some 
successes over his rival, but his death in 1471 for a time put a 
stop to the war. George of Podebrad, the only Hussite king of 
Bohemia, has always, with Charles IV., been the ruler of Bohemia 
whose memory has most endeared itself to his countrymen. 

George of Podebrad had undoubtedly during the more pros- 
perous part of his reign intended to found a national dynasty. 
In later years, however, hope of obtaining' aid from Poland in his 
struggle against King Matthias induced him to offer the succession 
to the Bohemian throne to Vladislav (Wladislaus, Ladislaus), 
son of Casimir, king of Poland. No formal agreement was made, 
and at the death of George many Bohemian nobles supported 
the claim of Matthias of Hungary, who had already been pro- 
claimed king of Bohemia. Protracted negotiations ensued, but 
they ended by the election of Prince Vladislav of 
^Poland. p ° land at Kutna Hora, the 27th of May 1471- This 
election was a victory of the national party, and 
may be considered as evidence of the strong anti-clerical 
feeling which then prevailed in Bohemia; for Matthias was an 
unconditional adherent of Rome, while the Polish envoys who 
represented Vladislav promised that he would maintain the 
Compacts. At the beginning of his reign the new king was 
involved in a struggle with Matthias of Hungary, who maintained 
his claim to the Bohemian throne. Prolonged desultory warfare 
continued up to 1478, when a treaty concluded at Olmiitz 
secured Bohemia to Vladislav; Matthias was to retain the 
so-called " lands of the Bohemian crown " — Moravia, Silesia 
and Lusatia — during his lifetime, and they were to be restored 
to Bohemia after his death. Though Vladislav was faithful to 
his promise of maintaining the Compacts, and did not attempt 
to prevent the Bohemians from receiving the communion in 
both kinds, yet his policy was on the whole a reactionary one, 
both as regards matters of state and the religious controversies. 
The king appointed as government officials at Prague men of 
that section of the Utraquist party that was nearest to Rome, 
while a severe persecution of the extreme Hussites known as the 
Bohemian Brethren took place (see Hussites). Serious riots 
took place at Prague, and the more advanced Hussites stormed 
the three town halls of the city. The nobles of the same faith 
also formed a league to guard themselves against the menaced 
reaction. A meeting of all the estates at Kutna Hora in 1485, 
however, for a time restored peace. Both parties agreed to 
respect the religious views of their opponents and to abstain from 
all violence, and the Compacts were again confirmed. 

As regards matters of state the reign of Vladislav is marked 
by a decrease of the royal prerogative, while the power of the 
nobility attained an unprecedented height, at the expense, not 
only of the royal power, but also of the rights of the townsmen 
and peasants. A decree of 1487 practically established serfdom 
in Bohemia, where it had hitherto been almost unknown. It is 
impossible to exaggerate the importance of this measure for the 
future of Bohemia. The rulers of the country were henceforth 
unable to rely on that numerous sturdy and independent 



peasantry of which the armies of 2izka and the Prokops had 
mainly consisted. Various enactments belonging to this reign 
also curtailed the rights of the Bohemian townsmen. A decree 
known as the " regulations of King Vladislav " codified these 
changes. It enumerated all the rights of the nobles and knights, 
but entirely ignored those of the towns. It was tacitly assumed 
that the townsmen had no inherent rights, but only such 
privileges as might be granted them by their sovereign with 
the consent of the nobles and knights. Civil discord was the 
inevitable consequence of these enactments. Several meeting? 
of the diet took place at which the towns were not represented. 
The latter in 1513 formed a confederacy to defend their rights, 
and chose Prince Bartholomew of Miinsterberg — a grandson of 
King George — as their leader. 

Vladislav was elected king of Hungary in 1490 and many of 
the events of his later life belong to the history of Hungary. He 
married in 1 502 Anna de Candale, who was connected 
with the royal family of France. He had two children 
by her, Anna, who afterwards married the archduke Ferdinand 
of Austria, and Louis. Vladislav died in Hungary in 1516. His 
successor was his son Louis, who had already been crowned as 
king of Bohemia at the age of three. According to the instruc- 
tions of Vladislav, Sigismund, king of Poland, and the emperor 
Maximilian I. were to act as guardians of the young king. The 
Bohemian estates recognized this decision, but they refused to 
allow the guardians any right of interference in the affairs of 
Bohemia. The great Bohemian nobles, and in particular the 
supreme burgrave, Zdenek Leo, lord of Rozmital, ruled the 
country almost without control. The beginning of the nominal 
reign of King Louis is marked by an event which had great 
importance for the constitutional development of Bohemia. At 
a meeting of the estates in 151 7 known as the diet of St Wenceslas 
— as the members first assembled on the 28th of September, the 
anniversary of that saint — they came to terms and settled the 
questions which had been the causes of discord. The citizens 
renounced certain privileges which they had hitherto claimed, 
while the two other estates recognized their municipal autonomy 
and tacitly sanctioned their presence at the meetings of the diet, 
to which they had already been informally readmitted since 1 508. 
At the first sitting of this diet, on the 24th of October, it was 
declared that the three estates had agreed henceforth " to live 
together in friendly intercourse, as became men belonging to the 
same country and race." In 1 52 2 Louis arrived in Bohemia from 
Hungary, of which country he had also been elected king. On his 
arrival at Prague he dismissed all the Bohemian state officials, 
including the powerful Leo of Rozmital. He appointed Charles 
of Miinsterberg, a cousin of Prince Bartholomew and also a ' 
grandson of King George, as regent of Bohemia during his 
absences, and John of Wartenberg as burgrave. The new 
officials appear to have supported the more advanced Hussite 
party, while Rozmital and the members of the town council of 
Prague who had acted in concert with him had been the allies of 
the Romanists and those Utraquists who were nearest to the 
Church of Rome. The new officials thus incurred the displeasure 
of King Louis, who was at that moment seeking the aid of the 
pope in his warfare with Turkey. The king therefore reinstated 
Leo of Rozmital in. his offices in 1525. Shortly afterwards 
Rozmital became involved in a feud with the lords of Rosenberg; 
the feud became a civil war, in which most of the nobles and 
cities of Bohemia took sides. Meanwhile Louis, who had 
returned to Hungary, opened his campaign against the Turks. 
He requested aid from his Bohemian subjects, and this was 
granted, by the Rosenberg faction, while Rozmital and his party 
purposely delayed sending any forces to Hungary. There were, 
therefore, but few Bohemian troops at the battle of Moha.cs 
(August 29, 1526) at which Louis was decisively defeated and 
perished. 

The death of Louis found Bohemia in a state of great disorder, 
almost of anarchy. The two last kings had mainly resided in 
Hungary, and in spite of the temporary agreement obtained at 
the diet of St Wenceslas, the Bohemians had not succeeded in 
establishing a strong indigenous government which might have 



128 



BOHEMIA 



[HISTORY 



taken the place of the absentee monarchs. Archduke Ferdinand 
of Austria — afterwards the emperor Ferdinand I. — laid claim to 
Origin of the Bohemian throne as husband of Anna, daughter 
the of King Vladislav. King Sigismund of Poland, 

Habsburg j- ne dukes Louis and William of Bavaria, several 
ynas y. q^^ German princes, as well as several Bohemian 
noblemen, of whom Leo of Rozmital was the most important, 
were also candidates. The diet resolved to entrust the election 
to twenty-four of their members, chosen in equal number from 
the three estates. These electors, on the 23rd of October (1526), 
Ferdinand cnose Ferdinand of Habsburg as their king. This date 

is memorable, as it marks the permanent accession 
of the Habsburg dynasty to the Bohemian throne, though 
the Austrian archdukes Rudolph and Albert had previously been 
rulers of Bohemia for short periods. Though Ferdinand fully 
shared that devotion to Rome which is traditional in the 
Habsburg dynasty, he showed great moderation in religious 
matters, particularly at the beginning of his reign. His principal 
object was to establish the hereditary right of his dynasty to the 
Bohemian throne, and this object he pursued with characteristic 
obstinacy. When a great fire broke out at Prague in 1541, which 
destroyed all the state documents, Ferdinand obtained the 
consent of the estates to the substitution of a charter stating 
that he had been recognized as king in consequence of the 
hereditary rights of his wife Anna, in the place of the former one, 
which had stated that he had become king by election. This 
caused great dissatisfaction and was one of the principal causes 
of the troubles that broke out shortly afterwards. Ferdinand 
had in 1531, mainly through the influence of his brother the 
emperor Charles V., been elected king of the Romans and heir to 
the Empire. He henceforth took a large part in the politics of 
Germany, particularly after he had in 1547 concluded a treaty of 
peace with Turkey, which assured the safety of the eastern 
frontiers of his dominions. Charles V. about the same time 
concluded his war with France, and the brothers determined to 
adopt a firmer policy towards the Protestants of Germany, whose 
power had recently greatly increased. The latter had, about the 
time of the recognition of Ferdinand as king of the Romans, and 
partly in consequence of that event, formed at Schmalkalden a 
league, of which John Frederick, elector of Saxony, and Philip, 
landgrave of Hesse, were the leaders. War broke out in Germany 
in the summer of 1 546, and Charles relied on the aid of his brother, 
while the German Protestants on the other hand appealed to 
their Bohemian co-religionists for aid. 

Since the beginning of the Reformation in Germany the views 
of the Bohemian reformers had undergone a considerable change. 

Some of the more advanced Utraquists differed but 
in the war little from the German Lutherans, while the Bohemian 
against Brethren, who at this moment greatly increased in 
German influence through the accession of several powerful 

nobles, strongly sympathized with the Protestants of 

Germany. Ferdinand's task of raising a Bohemian 
army in support of his brother was therefore a difficult 
one. He again employed his usual tortuous policy. He per- 
suaded the estates to vote a general levy of the forces of the 
country under the somewhat disingenuous pretext that Bohemia 
was menaced by the Turks; for at that period no armed force 
could be raised in Bohemia without the consent of the estates of 
the realm. Ferdinand fixed the town of Kaaden on the Saxon 
frontier as the spot where the troops were to meet, but on his 
arrival there he found that many cities and nobles — particularly 
those who belonged to the community of the Bohemian Brethren 
— had sent no men. Of the soldiers who arrived many were 
Protestants who sympathized with their German co-religionists. 
The Bohemian army refused to cross the Saxon frontier, and 
towards the end of the year 1 546 Ferdinand was obliged to disband 
his Bohemian forces. Early in the following year he again called 
on his Bohemian subjects to furnish an army in aid of his brother. 
Only a few of the Romanists and more retrograde Utraquists 
obeyed his order. The large majority of Bohemians, on the other 
hand, considered the moment opportune for recovering the 
ancient liberties of Bohemia, on which Ferdinand had encroached 



Protest- 
antism. 



in various ways by claiming hereditary right to the crown and by 
curtailing the old privileges of the land. The estates met at 
Prague in March 1547, without awaiting a royal summons- 
undoubtedly an unconstitutional proceeding. The assembly, 
in which the influence of the representatives of the town of Prague 
and of the knights and nobles who belonged to the Bohemian 
Brotherhood was predominant, had a very revolutionary char- 
acter. This became yet more marked when the news of the 
elector of Saxony's victory at Rochlitz reached Prague. The 
estates demanded the re-establishment of the elective character 
of the Bohemian kingdom, the recognition of religious liberty for 
all, and various enactments limiting the royal prerogative. It 
was decided to entrust the management of state affairs to a 
committee of twelve members chosen in equal number from the 
three estates. Of the members of the committee chosen by the 
knights and nobles four belonged to the Bohemian Brotherhood. 
The committee decided to equip an armed force, the command of 
which was conferred on Kaspar Pflug of Rabenstein (d. 1576). 
According to his instructions he was merely to march to the 
Saxon frontier, and there await further orders from the estates; 
there seems, however, little doubt that he was secretly instructed 
to afford aid to the German Protestants. Pflug marched to 
Joachimsthal on the frontier, but refused to enter Saxon territory 
without a special command of the estates. 

Meanwhile the great victory of the imperialists at Miihlberg 
had for a time crushed German Protestantism. The Bohemians 
were in a very difficult position. They had seriously offended 
their sovereign and yet afforded no aid to the German Pro- 
testants. The army of Pflug hastily dispersed, and the estates 
still assembled at Prague endeavoured to propitiate Ferdinand. 
They sent envoys to the camp of the king who, with his brother 
Charles, was then besieging Wittenberg. Ferdinand received 
the envoys better than they had perhaps expected. He indeed 
always maintained his plan of making Bohemia a hereditary 
kingdom under Habsburg rule, and of curtailing as far as possible 
its ancient constitution, but he did not wish to drive to despair 
a still warlike people. Ferdinand demanded that the Bohemians 
should renounce all alliances with the German Protestants, and 
declared that he would make his will known after his arrival 
in Prague. He arrived there on the 20th of July, with a large 
force of Spanish and Walloon mercenaries, and occupied the city 
almost without resistance. Ferdinand treated the nobles and 
knights with great forbearance, and contented himself with the 
confiscation of the estates of some of those who had been most 
compromised. On the other hand he dealt very severely with the 
towns — Prague in particular. He declared that their ancient 
privileges should be revised — a measure that practically signified 
a broad confiscation of lands that belonged to the municipalities. 
Ferdinand also forced the townsmen to accept the control of 
state officials who were to be called town-judges and in Prague 
town-captains. These royal representatives were given almost 
unlimited control over municipal affairs. The Bohemian 
Brethren were also severely persecuted, and their bishop Augusta 
was imprisoned for many years. 

Ferdinand's policy here was as able as it always was. The 
peasantry had ceased to be dangerous since the establishment of 
serfdom; the power of the cities was now thoroughly under- 
mined. Ferdinand had only to deal with the nobles and knights, 
and he hoped that the influence of his court, and yet more that 
of the Jesuits, whom he established in Bohemia about this time, 
would gradually render them amenable to the royal will. If 
we consider the customs of his time Ferdinand cannot be con- 
sidered as having acted with cruelty in the moment of his success. 
Only four of the principal leaders of the revolt — two knights, 
and two citizens of Prague — were sentenced to death. They 
were decapitated on the square outside the Hradcany palace 
where the estates met on that day (August 22). This diet 
therefore became known as the " Krvavy'snem " (bloody diet). 
In one of the last years of his life (1562) Ferdinand succeeded in 
obtaining the coronation of his eldest son Maximilian as king of 
Bohemia, thus ensuring to him the succession to the Bohemian 
throne. As Ferdinand I. acceded to the Hungarian throne at 



HISTORY] 



BOHEMIA 



129 



the same time as to that of Bohemia, and as he also became king 
of the Romans and after the death of Charles V. emperor, many 
events of his life do not belong to the history of Bohemia. He 
died in 1564. 

Maximilian succeeded his father as king of Bohemia without 
any opposition. Circumstances were greatly in his favour; he 

had in his youth mainly been educated by Protestant 
?,*'' a tutors, and for a time openly avowed strong sympathy 

for the party of church reform. This fact, which 
became known in Bohemia, secured for him the support of the 
Bohemian church reformers, while the Romanists and retrograde 
Utraquists were traditionally on the side of the house of Habs- 
burg. The reign of Maximilian did not fulfil the hopes that met 
it. Though he published new decrees against the Bohemian 
Brethren, he generally refused to sanction any measures against 
the Protestants, in spite of the advice of the Jesuits, who were 
gradually obtaining great influence in Bohemia. He did nothing, 
however, to satisfy the expectations of the partisans of church re- 
form, and indeed after a time began again to assist at the functions 
of the Roman church, from which he had long absented himself. 
Indifference, perhaps founded on religious scepticism, char- 
acterized the king during the many ecclesiastical disputes that 
played so large a part in his reign. In 1 567 Maximilian, who had 
also succeeded his father as king of Hungary and emperor, 
visited the Bohemians for the first time since his accession to the 
throne. Like most princes of the Habsburg dynasty, he was 
constantly confronted at this period by the difficulty of raising 
funds for warfare against the Turks. When he asked the 
Bohemians to grant him supplies for this purpose, they immedi- 
Abolttloa ately retorted by bringing forward their demands 
of the with regard to matters of religion. Their principal 
••Com- demand appears somewhat strange in the light of the 
pacts. " events of the past. The estates expressed the wish that 
the celebrated Compacts should cease to form part of the laws 
of the country. These enactments had indeed granted freedom 
of worship to the most moderate Utraquists — men who, except 
that they claimed the right to receive the communion in both 
kinds, hardly differed in their faith from the Roman church. 
On the other hand Ferdinand I. had used the Compacts as an 
instrument which justified him in oppressing the Bohemian 
Brethren, and the advanced Utraquists, whose teaching now 
differed but little from that of Luther. He had argued that all 
those who professed doctrines differing from the Church of Rome 
more widely than did the retrograde Utraquists, were outside 
the pale of religious toleration. Maximilian, indifferent as usual 
to matters of religious controversy, consented to the abolition 
of the Compacts, and these enactments, which had once been 
sacred to the Bohemian people, perished unregretted by all 
parties. The Romanists had always hated them, believing them 
not to be in accord with the general custom of the papal church, 
while the Lutherans and Bohemian Brethren considered their 
suppression a guarantee of their own liberty of worship. 

In 1575 Maximilian, who had long been absent from Bohemia, 
returned there, as the estates refused to grant subsidies to an 
absentee monarch. The sittings of the diet that met in 1 5 7 5 were 
very prolonged. The king maintained a vacillating attitude, 
influenced now by the threats of the Bohemians, now by the 
advice of the papal nuncio, who had followed him to Prague. 
The latter strongly represented to him how great would be the 
difficulties that he would encounter in his other dominions, 
should he make concessions to the Protestants of Bohemia. 
The principal demand of the Bohemians was that the " Con- 
fession of Augsburg " — a summary of Luther's teaching 
Bohemica. — should be recognized in Bohemia. They further 
renewed the demand, which they had already expressed 
at the diet of 1567, that the estates should have the right 
of appointing the members of the consistory — the ecclesi- 
astical body which ruled the Utraquist church; for since the 
death of John of Rokycan that church had had no archbishop. 
After long deliberations and the king's final refusal to recognize 
the confession of Augsburg, the majority of the diet, consisting 
of members of the Bohemian brotherhood and advanced Utra- 
iv. S 



quists, drew up a profession of faith that became known as the 
Confessio Bohemica. It was in most points identical with the 
Augsburg confession, but differed from it with regard to the 
doctrine of the sacrament of the Lord's Supper. Here the 
Bohemian profession agreed with the views of Calvin rather than 
with those of Luther. This is undoubtedly due to the influence 
of the Bohemian Brethren. The Confessio Bohemica was pre- 
sented to Maximilian, who verbally expressed his approval, but 
would not consent to this being made public, and also refused 
his consent to the inclusion of the Confessio among the charters 
of the kingdom. Maximilian rejected the demand of the 
Bohemian estates, that they and not the king should in future 
appoint the members of the consistory. He finally, however, 
consented to exempt the Lutherans and advanced Utraquists 
from the jurisdiction of the consistory, and allowed them to 
choose fifteen defenders — five of whom were to belong to each 
of the estates — who were to have supreme control over the 
Lutheran church. These defenders were to appoint for each 
district a superintendent (moderator), who was to maintain order 
and discipline among the clergy. As the Bohemian Brotherhood 
had never recognized the consistory, that body now lost whatever 
influence it had still possessed. It became, indeed, subservient 
to the Romanist archbishopric of Prague, which had been re- 
established by Ferdinand I. Its members henceforth were men 
who on almost all points agreed with Rome, and sometimes even 
men who had joined the Roman church, but continued by order 
of their superiors to remain members of the consistory, where 
it was thought that their influence might be useful to their new 
creed. 

The results of the diet of 1575 were on the whole favourable 
to the estates, and they seem to have taken this view, for almost 
immediately afterwards they recognized Maximilian's 
eldest son Rudolph as his successor and consented to his 
being crowned king of Bohemia. Maximilian died in the following 
year, and Rudolph succeeded him without any opposition. 
The events of the last years of the reign of Rudolph have the 
greatest importance for Bohemian history, but the earlier part 
of his reign requires little notice. As Rudolph had been educated 
in Spain it was at first thought that he would treat the Bohemian 
church reformers with great severity. The new sovereign, how- 
ever, showed with regard to the unceasing religious controversy 
the same apathy and indifference with which he also met matters 
of state. He had been from his early youth subject to fits of 
melancholia, and during several short periods was actually 
insane. Rudolph was a great patron of the arts, and he greatly 
contributed to the embellishment of Prague, which, as it was 
his favourite residence, became the centre of the vast Habsburg 
dominions. In 1600 the mental condition of Rudolph became so 
seriously impaired that the princes of the house of Habsburg 
thought ->it necessary to consider the future of the state, parti- 
cularly as Rudolph had no legitimate descendants. Matthias, 
the eldest of his brothers, came to Prague and pointed out to 
Rudolph the necessity of appointing a coadjutor, should he be 
incapacitated from fulfilling his royal duties, and also of making 
arrangements concerning the succession to the throne. These 
suggestions were indignantly repelled by Rudolph, whose anger 
was greatly increased by a letter of Pope Clement VIII. The 
pope in a forcible though formally courteous manner pointed 
out to him the evil results which his neglect of his royal duties 
would entail on his subjects, and called on him to appoint one 
of the Habsburg princes his successor both to the imperial 
crown and to the thrones of Bohemia, and Hungary. It is 
probable that the fear that the pope might make good the 
threats contained in this letter induced Rudolph, who had 
hitherto been indifferent to matters of religion, to become 
more subservient to the Roman church. The papal nuncio at 
Prague, in particular, appears for a time to have obtained great 
influence over the king. Under this influence, Rudolph in 
1602 issued a decree which renewed obsolete enactments against 
the Bohemian Brethren that had been published by King 
Vladislav in 1508. The royal decree was purposely worded 
in an obscure manner. It referred to the Compacts that had 

11 



13° 



BOHEMIA 



[HISTORY 



been abolished, and was liable to an interpretation excluding 
from tolerance all but the Romanists and the retrograde 
Utraquists. It appeared therefore as a menace to the Lutherans 
— and all the more advanced Utraquists had now embraced 
that creed — as well as to the Bohemian Brethren. The estates 
of Bohemia met at Prague in January 1603. The discussions 
were very stormy. Budovec of Budova, a nobleman belonging 
to the community of the Bohemian Brethren, became the leader 
of all those who were opposed to the Church of Rome. He 
vigorously attacked the royal decree, which he declared to be 
contrary to the promises made by King Maximilian. He, how- 
ever, advised the estates to vote the supplies that King Rudolph 
had demanded. Immediately after this vote had been passed, 
the diet was closed by order of the king. Though the royal 
power was at that period very weak in Bohemia, the open 
partisanship of the king encouraged the Romanist nobles, who 
were not numerous, but among whom were some owners of large 
estates, to attempt to re-establish the Roman creed on their 
territories. Some of these nobles committed great cruelties 
while attempting to obtain these forcible conversions. 

Strife again broke out between Rudolph and his treacherous 
younger brother Matthias, who used the religious and political 
controversies of the time for the purpose of supplanting his 
brother. The formal cause of the rupture between the two 
princes was Rudolph's refusal to sanction a treaty of peace with 
Turkey, which Matthias had concluded as his brother's repre- 
sentative in Hungary. The Hungarians accepted Matthias as 
their ruler, and when his forces entered Moravia the estates of 
that country had, by Charles, lord of Zerotin, also renounced 
the allegiance of Rudolph. Matthias then invaded Bohemia, 
and invited the estates of the kingdom to meet him at Caslav 
(Ceslau). In consequence of a sudden revolution of feeling for 
which it is difficult to account, the Bohemians declined the 
overtures of Matthias. The estates met at Prague in March 

1608, and, though again submitting their demands concerning 
ecclesiastical matters to Rudolph, authorized him to levy 
troops for the defence of Bohemia. The forces of Matthias had 
meanwhile entered Bohemia and had arrived at Liben, a small 
town near Prague now incorporated with that city. Here 
Matthias, probably disappointed by the refusal of the Bohemians 
to join his standard, came to an understanding with his brother 
(June 25, 1608). Rudolph formally ceded to Matthias the 
government of Hungary, Moravia, and Upper and Lower 
Austria, but retained his rights as king of Bohemia. 

Soon after the conclusion of this temporary settlement, the 

estates of Bohemia again brought their demands before their 

king. Rudolph had declined to discuss all religious 

1609. matters during the time that the troops of his brother 
Demand occupied part of Bohemia. The diet that met on the 
for . 20th of January 1609 is one of the most important 
liberty* m ^ e history °f Bohemia. Here, as so frequently 

in the 17 th century, the religious controversies were 
largely influenced by personal enmities. Rudolph never forgave 
the treachery of his brother, and was secretly negotiating (at 
the time when he again appeared as champion of Catholicism) 
with Christian of Anhalt, the leader of the German Protestants. 
This was known to the court of Spain, and the Bohemians also 
knew that the king could therefore rely on no aid from that 
quarter. They were therefore not intimidated when Rudolph, 
vacillating as ever, suddenly assumed a most truculent attitude. 
The estates had at their meeting in March of the previous 
year drawn up a document consisting of twenty-five so-called 
Articles, which formulated their demands with regard to matters 
of religion. The king now demanded that this document, 
which he considered illegal, should be delivered up to him for 
destruction. The " articles " expressed the wish that the 
Confessio Bohemica should be recognized as one of the funda- 
mental laws of the kingdom, and that complete religious liberty 
should be granted to all classes. They further demanded that 
the Protestants — as it now became customary to call jointly 
the Utraquists, Lutherans and Bohemian Brethren — and the 
Roman Catholics should have an equal right to hold all the 



offices of state, and that the power of the Jesuits to acquire land 
should be limited. They finally asked for redress of several 
grievances caused by the misrule of Rudolph. This document 
had remained in the hands of Budova, who refused to deliver 
it to the king. The estates then chose twelve of their number — 
among whom was Count Henry Matthias Thurn — who were to 
negotiate with the king and his councillors. Protracted dis- 
cussions ensued, and the king finally stated, on the 31st of March, 
that he could grant no concessions in matters of religion. On 
the following day the estates met under the leadership of Budova. 
They decided to arm for the defence of their rights, and when 
the king immediately afterwards dissolved the diet, it was 
resolved to meet again after a month, even without a royal 
summons. When they returned to Prague, Adam of Sternberg, 
the burgrave, again informed Budova that the king would grant 
no concessions in ecclesiastical matters. Bohemia appeared 
to be on the verge of a revolution. It is unnecessary to record 
the frequent and contradictory resolutions of the king, influenced 
now by the extreme Romanists, now by those of his councillors 
who favoured a peaceful solution. Finally — on the 9th of July 
1609 — Rudolph signed the famed " Letter of Majesty " which 
gave satisfaction to all the legitimate demands of the Bohemian 
Protestants. In the " Letter of Majesty " Rudolph recognized 
the Confessio Bohemica. He further granted to the Protestant 
estates the control over the university of Prague, and authorized 
them to elect the members of the Utraquist consistory. They 
were further empowered to elect " defenders " chosen in equal 
number from the estates of the nobles, knights and citizens, 
who were to superintend the execution of the enactments of 
the Letter of Majesty and generally to uphold the rights of the 
Protestants. On the same day the Romanist and the Protestant 
members of the diet also signed an agreement by which they 
guaranteed to each other full liberty of religious worship and 
declared that this liberty should be extended to all classes of 
the population. 

In 161 1 the peace of Bohemia was again disturbed by the 
invasion of the archduke Leopold of Austria, bishop of Passau, 

who probably acted in connivance with his cousin „ .... 
_. r - , /, T , , , , . ... Matthias. 

King Rudolph. Leopold succeeded in obtaining 

possession of part of the town of Prague, but his army was 
defeated by the troops which the Bohemian estates had hurriedly 
raised, and he was obliged to leave Bohemia. Matthias con- 
sidered his hereditary rights menaced by the raid of Leopold 
and again occupied Bohemia. Mainly at his instigation the 
estates now formally deposed Rudolph, who survived his de- 
thronement only a few months, and died on the 20th of January 
1612. Though Matthias had allied himself with the Bohemian 
Protestants during his prolonged struggle against his brother, 
he now adopted that policy favourable to the Church of Rome 
which is traditional of the Habsburg dynasty. His relations 
with the Bohemian Protestants, therefore, soon became strained. 
In 161 5 Matthias convoked a general diet, i.e. one that besides 
the Bohemian representatives included also the representatives 
of the " lands of the Bohemian crown." At the meeting of this 
diet the question of nationality, which through the constant 
religious controversies had receded to the background, again 
became predominant. Former enactments enforcing the use 
of the national language were reaffirmed, and it was decreed that 
Bohemian should be the "authorized " {i.e. official) language 
of the country. 

As Matthias was childless, the question as to the succession 
to the Bohemian throne again arose. The king wished to secure 
the succession to his cousin Ferdinand, duke of Styria. 
Ferdinand was known as a fanatical adherent of the Church of 
Rome and as a cruel persecutor of the Protestants of Styria. 
None the less the state officials of Bohemia, by not very scrupulous 
means, succeeded in persuading the estates to accept Ferdinand 
as heir to the throne and to consent to his coronation, which 
took place at Prague on the 17th of June 161 7. No doubt 
through the influence of Ferdinand, the policy of Matthias hence- 
forth assumed a yet more pronouncedly ultramontane character. 
The king's councillors, all adherents of the Church of Rome, 



HISTORY] 



BOHEMIA 



131 



openly expressed their hope that the Catholic Church would soon 
recover its ancient hold over Bohemia. On the other hand the 
Bohemian Protestants, led by Count Thurn, one of the few nobles 
who had refused to vote for the recognition of Ferdinand as heir 
to the throne, did not wish to defer what they considered an 
inevitable conflict. It appeared to them more advantageous to 
encounter the weak Matthias than his younger and more fanatical 
successor. A comparatively unimportant incident precipitated 
matters. In December 161 7, the archbishop of Prague and the 
abbot of Bfevnov (Braunau) ordered the suppression of the 
Protestant religious services in churches that had been built on 
their domains. This was a direct infringement of the agreement 
concluded by the Romanist and Utraquist estates on the day on 
which King Rudolph had signed the Letter of Majesty. The 
defenders took immediate action, by inviting all Protestant 
members of the diet to meet at Prague. They assembled there 
on 21st of May 1618, and decided to proceed in full armour to 
the Hradcany palace to bring their complaints to the knowledge 
of the councillors of Matthias. On the following day, Thurn, 
Wenceslas of Ruppa, Ulrich of Kinsky, and other members of 
the more advanced party held a secret meeting, at which it was 
decided to put to death the most influential of Matthias's 
councillors. On the 23rd the representatives of the Protestants 
of Bohemia proceeded to the Hradcany. Violent accusations 
were brought forward, particularly against Martinic and Slavata, 
the king's most trusted councillors, who were accused of having 
advised him to oppose the wishes of the Bohemians. Finally 
these two councillors, together with Fabricius, secretary of the 
royal council, were thrown from the windows of the Hradcany 
into the moat below— an event known in history as the De- 
fenestration of Prague. Both Martinic and Slavata were but 
little injured, and succeeded in escaping from Prague. The 
Bohemians immediately established a provisional government 
consisting of thirty " directors," ten of whom were chosen by 
each of the estates. They also proceeded to raise an armed 
force, the command of which was given to Count Thurn. 
Hostilities with Austria began in July, when an imperial force 
entered Bohemia. The troops of Matthias were, however, soon 
repulsed by the Bohemians, and in November Thurn's army 
entered Austria, but was soon obliged to retire to Bohemia 
because of the lateness of the season. 

In the following March the Bohemian crown became vacant 
by the death of Matthias. On the 31st of July the Bohemian 
War estates pronounced the formal deposition of Ferdinand, 

with the and on the 26th of August they elected as their king 
emperor Frederick, elector palatine. The new king and his 
""" ' queen, Elizabeth of England, arrived in Bohemia in 
October, and were crowned somewhat later at St Vitus's 
cathedral in Prague. Warfare with Austria continued during 
this year — 16 19. Thurn occupied Moravia, which now threw 
in its lot with Bohemia, and he even advanced on Vienna, but 
was soon obliged to retreat. In the following year events took 
a fatal turn for Bohemia. The powerful duke Maximilian of 
Bavaria joined his forces to those of Ferdinand, who had become 
Matthias's successor as emperor, and who was determined to 
reconquer Bohemia. Ferdinand also received aid from Spain, 
Poland and several Italian states. Even the Lutheran elector of 
Saxony espoused his cause. A large imperialist army, under 
the command of the duke of Bavaria, Tilly and Bouquoi, 
entered Bohemia in September 1620. After several skirmishes, 
in all of which the Bohemians were defeated, the imperial forces 
arrived at the outskirts of Prague on the evening of the 7th 
of November. On the following morning they attacked the 
Bohemian army, which occupied a slightly fortified position 
on the plateau known as the " Bila Hora " (White Hill). The 
Bohemians were defeated after a struggle of only a few hours, 
and on the evening of battle the imperialists already occupied 
the port of Prague, situated on the left bank of the Vltava 
(Moldau). King Frederick, who had lost all courage, hurriedly 
left Prague on the following morning. 

Bohemia itself, as well as the lands of the Bohemian crown, 
now submitted to Ferdinand almost without resistance. The 



battle of the White Hill marks an epoch in the history of Bohemia. 
The execution of the principal leaders of the national move- 
ment (June 21, 162 1) was followed by a system submis- 
of wholesale confiscation of the lands of all who sioaof 
had in any way participated in the national move- Bofiem '«- 
ment. Almost the entire ancient nobility of Bohemia was 
driven into exile, and adventurers from all countries, mostly 
men who had served in the imperial army, shared the spoils. 
Gradually all those who refused to recognize the creed of the 
Roman church were expelled from Bohemia, and by the use of 
terrible cruelty Catholicism was entirely re-established in the 
country. In 1627 Ferdinand published a decree, which formally 
suppressed the ancient free constitution of Bohemia, though a 
semblance of representative government was left to the country. 
The new constitution proclaimed the heredity of the Bohemian 
crown in the house of Habsburg. It added a new " estate," 
that of the clergy, to the three already existing. This estate, 
which was to take precedence of all the others, consisted of the 
Roman archbishop of Prague and of all the ecclesiastics who were 
endowed with landed estates. The diet was deprived of all 
legislative power, which was exclusively vested in the sovereign. 
At its meetings the diet was to discuss such matters only as were 
laid before it by the representatives of the king. The estates 
continued to have the right of voting taxes, but they were 
specially forbidden to attach any conditions to the grants of 
money which they made to their sovereign. It was finally decreed 
that the German language should have equal right with the 
Bohemian one in all the government offices and law-courts of 
the kingdom. This had indeed become a necessity, since, in 
consequence of the vast confiscations, the greatest part of the 
land was in the hands of foreigners to whom the national 
language was unknown. Though these enactments still left 
some autonomy to Bohemia, the country gradually lost all 
individuality. Its history from this moment to the beginning 
of the 19th century is but a part of thai history of Austria 
(q.v.). 

Bohemia was the theatre of hostilities during a large part of 
the Thirty Years' War, which had begun in its capital. In 163 1 
the Saxons for a time occupied a large part of Bohemia, Bohemia 
and even attempted to re-establish Protestantism, under 
During the later period of the Thirty Years' War Austrian 
Bohemia was frequently pillaged by Swedish troops, <tomtna- 
and the taking of part of Prague by the Swedish general 
Konigsmark in 1648 was the last event of the great war. The 
attempts of the Swedish envoys to obtain a certain amount of 
toleration for the Bohemian Protestants proved fruitless, as the 
imperial representatives were inflexible on this point. At the 
beginning of the 18th century the possibility of the extinction of 
the male line of the house of Habsburg arose. The estates of 
Bohemia, at a meeting that took place at Prague on the 16th of 
October 1720, sanctioned the female succession to the Bohemian 
throne and recognized the so-called Pragmatic Sanction which 
proclaimed the indivisibility of the Habsburg realm. The 
archduchess Maria Theresa, in whose favour these enactments 
were made^none the less met with great opposition on the death 
of her father the emperor Charles VI. Charles, elector of Bavaria, 
raised claims to the Bohemian throne and invaded the country 
with a large army of Bavarian, French and Saxon troops. He 
occupied Prague, and a large part of the nobles and knights of 
Bohemia took the oath of allegiance to him (December 19, 
1 741) . The fortune of war, however, changed shortly afterwards. 
Maria Theresa recovered Bohemia and the other lands that had 
been under the rule of the house of Habsburg. During the reign of 
Maria Theresa, and to a greater extent during that of her son 
Joseph II., many changes in the internal administration of the 
Habsburg realm took place which all tended to limit yet further 
the autonomy of Bohemia. A decree of 1749 abolished the 
separate law-courts that still existed in Bohemia, and a few years 
later an Austro-Bohemian chancellor was appointed who was to 
have the control of the administration of Bohemia, as well as of 
the German domains of the house of Habsburg. The power of 
the royal officials who constituted the executive government of 



132 



BOHEMIA 



[HISTORY 



Bohemia was greatly curtailed, and though the chief repre- 
sentative of the sovereign in Prague continued to bear the ancient 
title of supreme burgrave, he was instructed to conform in all 
matters to the orders of the central government of Vienna. Yet 
more extreme measures tending to centralization were introduced 
by the emperor Joseph, who refused to be crowned at Prague as 
king of Bohemia. The powers of the Bohemian diet and of the 
royal officials at Prague were yet further limited, and the German 
language was introduced into all the upper schools of Bohemia. 
Some of the reforms introduced by Joseph were, incidentally and 
contrary to the wishes of their originator, favourable to the 
Bohemian nationality. Thus the greater liberty which he granted 
to the press enabled the Bohemians to publish a newspaper in 
the national language. After the death of Joseph in 1790 the 
Bohemian estates, whose meetings had been suspended during 
his reign, again assembled, but they at first made but scanty 
attempts to reassert their former rights. During the long 
Napoleonic wars, in which the house of Habsburg was almost 
continuously engaged, Bohemia continued in its previous leth- 
argic state. In 1804 a merely formal change in the constitu- 
tional position of Bohemia took place when Francis I. assumed 
the hereditary title of emperor of Austria. It was stated in an 
imperial decree that the new title of the sovereign should in no 
way prejudice the ancient rights of Bohemia and that the 
sovereigns would continue to be crowned as kings of Bohemia. 

After the re-establishment of European peace in 1815 the long- 
suppressed national aspirations of Bohemia began to revive. 
Revival of The national movement, however, at first only found 
national expression in the revival of Bohemian literature. 
aspira- The arbitrary and absolutist government of Prince 

Metternich rendered all political action impossible in 
the lands ruled by the house of Habsburg. In spite of this 
pressure the estates of Bohemia began in 1845 t0 assume an 
attitude of opposition to the government of Vienna. They 
affirmed their right of voting the taxes of the country — a right 
that was due to them according to the constitution of 1627. To 
obtain the support of the wider classes of the population, they 
determined in 1847 to propose at their session of the following 
year that the towns should have a more extensive representation 
at the diet, that the control of the estates over the finances of the 
country should be made more stringent, and that the Bohemian 
language should be introduced into all the higher schools of the 
country. The revolutionary outbreak of 1848 prevented this 
meeting of the estates. When the news of the February revolu- 
tion in Paris reached Prague the excitement there was very great. 
On the nth of March a vast public meeting voted a petition to 
the government of Vienna which demanded that the Bohemian 
language should enjoy equal rights with the German in all the 
government offices of the country, that a general diet comprising 
all the Bohemian lands, but elected on an extensive suffrage, 
should be convoked, and that numerous liberal reforms should 
be introduced. The deputation which presented these demands 
in Vienna received a somewhat equivocal answer. In reply, 
however, to a second deputation, the emperor Ferdinand declared 
on the 8th of April that equality of rights would be secured to 
both nationalities in Bohemia, that the question of the reunion of 
Moravia and Silesia to Bohemia should be left to a general 

meeting of representatives of all parts of Austria, and 
in 1848. t ^ la * ; a new meeting of the estates of Bohemia, which 

would include representatives of the principal towns, 
would shortly be convoked. This assembly, which was to have 
had full powers to create a new constitution, and which would 
have established complete autonomy, never met, though the 
election of its members took place on the 17th of May. In 
consequence of the general national movement which is so 
characteristic of the year 1848, it was decided to hold at Prague 
a " Slavic congress " to which Slavs of all parts of the Austrian 
empire, as well as those belonging to other countries, were 
invited. The deliberations were interrupted by the serious riots 
that broke out in the streets of Prague on the 12th of June. 
They were suppressed after prolonged fighting and considerable 
bloodshed. The Austrian commander, Prince Windischgratz, 



bombarded the city, which finally capitulated unconditionally. 
The nationalist and liberal movement in Bohemia was thus 
suddenly checked, though the Bohemians took part in the 
Austrian constituent assembly that met at Vienna, and after- 
wards at Kromefiz (Kremsier). 

By the end of the year 1849 all constitutional government had 
ceased in Bohemia, as in all parts of the Habsburg empire. The 
reaction that now ensued was felt more severely than in any 
other part of the monarchy; for not only were all attempts to 
obtain self-government and liberty ruthlessly suppressed, but 
a determined attempt was made to exterminate the national 
language. The German language was again exclusively used in 
all schools and government offices, all Bohemian newspapers 
were suppressed, and even the society of the Bohemian museum — ■ 
a society composed of Bohemian noblemen and scholars — was for 
a time only allowed to hold its meetings under the supervision of 
the police. 

The events of the Italian campaign of 1859 rendered the 
continuation of absolutism in the Austrian empire impossible. 
It was attempted to establish a constitutional system Austrian 
which, while maintaining to a certain extent the unity constitu- 
of the empire, should yet recognize the ancient consti- tionai\ 
tutional rights of some of the countries united under cba "g<:s. 
the rule of the house of Habsburg. A decree published on the 
20th of October i860 established diets with limited powers. 
The composition of these parliamentary assemblies was to a 
certain extent modelled on that of the ancient diets of Bohemia 
and other parts of the empire. This decree was favourably 
received in Bohemia, but the hopes which it raised in the country 
fell when a new imperial decree appeared on the 26th of February 
1 86 1 . This established a central parliament at Vienna with very 
extensive powers, and introduced an electoral system which was 
grossly partial to the Germans. The Bohemians indeed consented 
to send their representatives to Vienna, but they left the parlia- 
ment in 1863, stating that the assembly had encroached on the 
power which constitutionally belonged to the diet of Prague. 
Two years later the central parliament of Vienna was suspended, 
and in the following year— 1866 — the Austro-Prussian war caused 
a complete change in the constitutional position of Bohemia. 
The congress of Vienna in 1815 had declared that that country 
should form part of the newly formed Germanic Confederation; 
this was done without consulting the estates of the country, as 
had been customary even after the battle of the White Hill on 
the occasion of serious constitutional changes. The treaty with 
Prussia, signed at Prague on the 23rd of August 1866, excluded 
from Germany all lands ruled by the house of Habsburg. As a 
natural consequence German influence declined in the Austrian 
empire, and in Bohemia in particular. While Hungary now 
obtained complete independence, the new constitution of 1867, 
which applied only to the German and Slavic parts of the 
Habsburg empire, maintained the system of centralization and 
attempted to maintain the waning German influence. The 
Bohemians energetically opposed this new constitution and 
refused to send representatives to Vienna. 

In 1871 it appeared probable for a moment that the wishes 
of the Bohemians, who desired that their ancient constitution 
should be re-established in a modernized form, would „ 

' iccncwco 

be realized. The new Austrian prime minister, Count struggles 
Karl Hohenwart, took office with the firm intention of 0/ 
accomplishing an agreement between Bohemia and Bohemian 
the other parts of the Habsburg empire. Prolonged ffj," ' 
negotiations ensued, and an attempt was made to 
establish a constitutional system which, while satisfying the 
claims of the Bohemians, would yet have firmly connected them 
with the other lands ruled by the house of Habsburg. An 
imperial message addressed to the diet of Prague (September 14, 
1871) stated that the sovereign " in consideration of the former 
constitutional position of Bohemia and remembering the power 
and glory which its crown had given to his ancestors, and the 
constant fidelity of its population, gladly recognized the rights 
of the kingdom of Bohemia, and was willing to confirm this 
assurance by taking the coronation oath." Various influence^ 



LITERATURE] 



BOHEMIA 



133 



caused the failure of this attempt to reconcile Bohemia with 
Austria. In 1872 a government with a pronounced German 
tendency took office in Vienna, and the Bohemians for a time 
again refused to attend the parliamentary assemblies of Vienna 
and Prague. In 1879 Count Eduard Taaffe became Austrian 
prime minister, and he succeeded in persuading the represen- 
tatives of Bohemia to take part in the deliberations of the 
parliament of Vienna. They did so, after stating that they took 
this step without prejudice to their view that Bohemia with 
Moravia and Silesia constituted a separate state under the rule 
of the same sovereign as Austria and Hungary. The govern- 
ment of Count Taaffe, in recognition of this concession by the 
Bohemians, consented to remove some of the grossest anomalies 
connected with the electoral system of Bohemia, which had 
hitherto been grossly partial to the German minority of the 
population. The government of Count Taaffe also consented 
to the foundation of a Bohemian university at Prague, which 
greatly contributed to the intellectual development of the 
country. On the fall of the government of Count Taaffe, Prince 
Alfred Windischgratz became prime minister. The policy of his 
short-lived government was hostile to Bohemia and he was 
soon replaced by Count Badeni. 

Badeni again attempted to conciliate Bohemia. He did not 
indeed consider it feasible to reopen the question of its autonomy, 

but he endeavoured to remedy some of the most 
xuage"' serious grievances of the country. In the beginning 
question, of 1897 Count Badeni issued a decree which stated 

that after a certain date all government officials who 
wished to be employed in Bohemia would have to prove a certain 
knowledge of the Bohemian as well as of the German language. 
This decree met with violent opposition on the part of the 
German inhabitants of Austria, and caused the fall of Count 
Badeni's cabinet at the end of the year 1897. After a brief 
interval he was succeeded by Count Thun and then by Count 
Clary, whose government repealed the decrees that had to a 
certain extent granted equal rights to the Bohemian language. 
In consequence troubles broke out in Prague, and were severely 
repressed by the Austrian authorities. During the subsequent 
ministries of Korber and Gautsch the Bohemians continued 
to oppose the central government of Vienna, and to assert their 
national rights. 

See generally Count Liitzow, Bohemia, a Historical Sketch (London, 
1896). The valuable collection of historical documents entitled 
Fontes Rerum Bohemicarum, published at Prague in the latter part 
of the 19th century, has superseded earlier ones such as Freherus 
(Marquard Freher), Rerum Bohemicarum Antiqui Scriptores. Simi- 
larly, the earlier historical works of Pubitschka, Pelzl and De Florgy 
are superseded by Frantisek Palacky's Geschichte von Bohmen 
(Prague, 1844-1867), which, however, ends with the year 1526. 
Rezek, Gindely and others have dealt with the history of Bohemia 
posterior to the year 1526. Professor Adolf Bachmann published 
(vol. i. in 1899, vol. ii. 1905) a Geschichte Bohmens up to 1526, which 
has a strongly marked German tendency. Of French works Pro- 
fessor Ernest Denis's Jean Hus, et la guerre des Hussites (Paris, 1878), 
Fin de I'independance boheme (2 vols., 1890), and La Boheme depuis 
la Montague Blanche (2 vols., 1903), give a continuous account of 
Bohemian history from the beginning of the 15th century. (L.) 

Literature 
The earliest records of the Bohemian or Cech language are 
very ancient, though the so-called MSS. of Zelena Hora (Griine- 
berg) and Kralodvur (Koniginhof) are almost certainly forgeries 
of the early part of the 19th century. The earliest genuine 
documents of the Bohemian language comprise several hymns 
and legends; of the latter the legend of St Catherine and that 
of St Dorothy have the greatest value. Several ancient epic 
fragments have also been preserved, such as the Alexandreis 
and Tandarias a Floribella. These and other early Bohemian 
writings have been printed since the revival of Bohemian 
literature in the 19th century. Of considerable historical value 
is the rhymed chronicle generally though wrongly known as the 
chronicle of Dalimil. The author, who probably lived during 
the reign of King John (1310-1346), records the events of 
Bohemian history from the earliest period to the reign of King 
Henry of Carinthia, the immediate predecessor of John. A 



strong feeling of racial antipathy to the Germans pervades the 
chronicle. 

It is undoubtedly to be attributed to the high intellectual 
level which Bohemia attained in the 14th century that at that 
period we already find writers on religious and philo- 
sophical subjects who used the national language, literature. 
Of these the most important is Thomas of Stitny (c. 
1331-1401). Of his works, which contain many ideas similar 
to those of his contemporary 8 Wycliffe, those entitled O 
obecnych vecech Krestanskych (on general Christian matters) and 
Besedni reel (in a rough translation " learned entertainments ") 
have most value. Stitny and some of his contemporaries 
whose Bohemian writings have perished are known as the 
forerunners of Huss. Huss, like many of his contemporaries 
in Bohemia, wrote both in Bohemian and in Latin. Of 
the Bohemian writings of Huss, who contributed greatly to the 
development of his native language, the most important is his 
Vyklad viry, desatera Boziho prikazani, a patere (exposition of the 
creed, the ten commandments and the Lord's Prayer) written 
in 141 2. Of his numerous other Bohemian works we may 
mention the Postilla (collection of sermons), the treatises O 
poznani cesty prave k spaseni (the true road to salvation) and 
svatokupectvi (on simony), and a large collection of letters; 
those written in prison are very touching. 

The years that followed the death of Huss formed in Bohemia 
a period of incessant theological strife. The anti-Roman or 
Hussite movement was largely a democratic one, and it is there- 
fore natural that the national language rather than Latin should 
have been used in the writings that belong to this period. Un- 
fortunately in consequence of the systematic destruction of all 
Bohemian writings which took place through the agency of the 
Jesuits, after the battle of the White Hill (1620), a large part 
of this controversial literature has perished. Thus the writings 
of the members of the extreme Hussite party, the so-called 
Taborites, have been entirely destroyed. Of the writings of the 
more moderate Hussites, known as the Calixtines or Utraquists, 
some have been preserved. Such are the books entitled Of 
the Great Torment of the Holy Church and the Lives of the Priests of 
Tabor, written in a sense violently hostile to that community. 
A Bohemian work by Archbishop John of Rokycan has also 
been preserved; it is entitled Postilla and is similar though 
inferior to the work of Huss that bears the same name. 

A quite independent religious writer who belongs to the period 
of the Hussite wars is Peter Cheldcky (born in the last years of 
the 14th century, died 1460), who may be called the Tolstoy of 
the 15th. His dominant ideas were horror of bloodshed and the 
determination to accept unresistingly all, even unjust, decrees of 
the worldly authorities. Though a strenuous enemy of the Church 
of Rome, Chelcicky joined none of the Hussite parties. His 
masterpiece is the Sit viry (the net of faith). Among his other 
works his Postilla and polemical writings in the form of letters 
to Archbishop John of Rokycan and Bishop Nicolas of Pelhf imov 
deserve mention. 

The Hussite period is rather poor in historical works written 
in the language of the country. We should, however, mention 
some chroniclers who were contemporaries and sometimes 
eye-witnesses of the events of the Hussite wars. Their writings 
have been collected and published by Frantisek Palacky under 
the title of Stare ceske letopisy. 

In the 1 6th century when Bohemia was in a state of com- 
parative tranquillity, the native literature was largely developed. 
Besides the writers of the community of the Bohemian Brethren, 
we meet at this period with three historians of merit. Of these 
far the best-known is Wenceslas Hajek of Libocan. The year 
of his birth is uncertain, but we read of him as a priest in 1524; 
he died in 1553- His great work Kronika ceska was dedicated 
to the emperor Ferdinand I., king of Bohemia, and appeared 
under the auspices of government officials. It has therefore a 
strong dynastic and Romanist tendency, and its circulation was 
permitted even at the time when most Bohemian books were 
prohibited and many totally destroyed. Hajek's book was 
translated into several languages and frequently quoted. We 



134 



BOHEMIA 



[LITERATURE 



find such second-hand quotations even in the works of many 
writers who had probably never heard of Hajek. His book is, 
however, inaccurate and grossly partial. Very little known on 
the other hand are the works of Bartos, surnamed " pisaf " 
(the writer), as he was for many years employed as secretary by 
the city of Prague, and those of Sixt of Ottersdorf. The work 
of Bartos (or Bartholomew) entitled the Chronicle of Prague has 
great historical value. He describes the troubles that befell 
Prague and Bohemia generally during the reign of the weak 
and absentee sovereign King Louis. The year of the birth of 
Bartos is uncertain, but it is known that he died in 1 539. The 
somewhat later work of Sixt of Ottersdorf (1 500-1 583) deals with 
a short but very important episode in the history of Bohemia. 
It is entitled Memorials of the Troubled Years 1546 and 1547- 
The book describes the unsuccessful rising of the Bohemians 
against Ferdinand I. of Austria. Sixt took a considerable part 
in this movement, a fact that greatly enhances the value of his 
book. 

Though the life of Chelcicky, who has already been mentioned, 
was an isolated one, he is undoubtedly the indirect founder of 
the community of the " Bohemian Brethren," who greatly 
influenced Bohemian literature. Almost all their historical and 
theological works were written in the national language, which 
through their influence became far more refined and polished. 
Before referring to some of the writings of members of the 
community we should mention the famed translation of the 
Scriptures known as the Bible of Kralice. It was the joint work 
of several divines of the brotherhood, and was first printed at 
Kralice in Moravia in 1593. Brother Gregory, surnamed the 
patriarch of the brotherhood, has left a large number of writings 
dealing mainly with theological matters. Most important are 
the Letters to Archbishop Rokycan and the book On good and evil 
priests. After the death of Brother Gregory in 1480 discord 
broke out in the community, and it resulted in very great literary 
activity. Brothers Lucas, Blahoslav and Jaffet, as well as 
Augusta, a bishop of the community, have left us numerous 
controversial works. Very interesting is the account of the 
captivity of Bishop Augusta, written by his companion the young 
priest Jan Bilek. We have evidence that numerous historical 
works written by members of the brotherhood existed, but 
most of them perished in the 17th century when nearly all 
anti-Roman books written in Bohemia were destroyed. Thus 
only fragments of Blahoslav's History of the Unity {i.e. the 
brotherhood) have been preserved. One of the historians of 
the brotherhood, Wenceslas Bfezan, wrote a History of the 
House of Rosenberg, of which only the biographies of William and 
Peter of Rosenberg have been preserved. The greatest writer 
of the brotherhood is John Amos Komensky or Comenius (1592- 
1670). Of his many works written in his native language the 
most important is his Labyrinth of the World, an allegorical tale 
which is perhaps the most famous work written in Bohemian. 1 
Many of the numerous devotional and educational writings of 
Comenius, — his works number 142, — are also written in his 
native tongue. 

The year 1620, which witnessed the downfall of Bohemian 
independence, also marks the beginning of a period of decline 
of the national tongue, which indeed later, in the 18th century, 
was almost extinct as a written language. Yet we must notice 
besides Comenius two other writers, both historians, whose 
works belong to a date later than 1620. Of these one was an 
adherent of the nationalist, the other of the imperialist party. 
Paul Skala ze Zhofe (1582-c. 1640) was an official in the service 
of the " winter king " Frederick of the Palatinate. He for a 
time followed his sovereign into exile, and spent the last years of 
his life at Freiberg in Saxony. It was at this period of his life, 
after his political activity had ceased, that he wrote his historical 
works. His first work was a short book which is a mere series 
of chronological tables. Somewhat later he undertook a vast 
work entitled Histoire cirkevni (history of the church). In spite 
of its title the book, which consists of ten enormous MS. volumes, 

1 This work has been translated into English by Count Liitzow 
for the " Temple Classics." 



deals as much with political as with ecclesiastical matters. The 
most valuable part, that dealing with events of 1602 to 1623, of 
which Skala writes as a contemporary and often as an eye-witness, 
has been edited and published by Prof. Tieftrunk. A contem- 
porary and a political opponent of Skala was William Count 
Slavata (1572-1652). He was a faithful servant of the house of 
Habsburg, and one of the government officials who were thrown 
from the windows of the Hradcany palace in 1618, at the begin- 
ning of the Bohemian uprising. In 1637 Slavata published his 
Pamety (memoirs) which deal exclusively with the events of the 
years 1618 and 1619, in which he had played so great a part. 
During the leisure of the last years of his long life Slavata com- 
posed a vast work entitled HistoricM Spisovani (historical 
works). It consists of fourteen large MS. volumes, two of which 
contain the previously-written memoirs. These two volumes 
have recently been edited and published by Dr Jos. Jirecek. 

After the deaths of Skala, Slavata and Comenius, no works 
of any importance were written in the Bohemian 'language for 
a considerable period, and the new Austrian govern- 
ment endeavoured in every way to discourage the century 
use of that language. A change took place when the revival. 
romantic movement started at the beginning of the 
19th century. The early revival of the Bohemian language was 
very modest, and at first almost exclusively translations from 
foreign languages were published. The first writer who again 
drew attention to the then almost forgotten Bohemian language 
was Joseph Dobrovsky (1753-1829). His works, which include 
a grammar of the Bohemian language and a history of Bohemian 
literature, were mostly written in German or Latin, and his only 
Bohemian works are some essays which he contributed to the 
early numbers of the Casopis Musea Krdlovstvi CeskSho (Journal 
of the Bohemian Museum) and a collection of letters. 

It is, however, to four men belonging to a time somewhat 
subsequent to that of Dobrovsky' that the revival of the language 
and literature of Bohemia is mainly due. They are Jungmann, 
Kolar, Safafik and Palacky. Joseph Jungmann (1773-1847) 
published early in life numerous Bohemian translations of 
German and English writers. His most important works are his 
Dejepes literatury ceska (history of Bohemian literature), and 
his monumental German and Bohemian dictionary, which largely 
contributed to the development of the Bohemian language. 
John Kolar (1 793-1852) was the greatest poet of the Bohemian 
revival, and it is only in quite recent days that Bohemian poetry 
has risen to a higher level. Kolar's principal poem is the Slavy 
dcera (daughter of Slavia), a personification of the Slavic race. 
Its principal importance at the present time consists rather in 
the part it played in the revival of Bohemian literature than in 
its artistic value. Kolar's other works are mostly philological 
studies. Paul Joseph Safafik (1795-1861) was a very fruitful 
writer. .His Starozitnosti Slovanske (Slavic antiquities), an 
attempt to record the then almost unknown history and literature 
of the early Slavs, has still considerable value. Francis Palacky 
(1798-1876) is undoubtedly the greatest of Bohemian historians. 
Among his many works his history of Bohemia from the earliest 
period to the year 1526 is the most important. 

Other Bohemian writers whose work belongs mainly to the 
earlier part of the 19th century are the poets Francis Ladislav 
Celakovsky', author of the Ruze stolistova (the hundred-leaved 
rose), Erben, Macha, Tyl, to mention but a few of the most 
famous writers. The talented writer Karel Havlicek, the 
founder of Bohemian journalism, deserves special notice. 

During the latter part of the 19th century, and particularly 
after the foundation of the national university in 1882, Bohemian 
literature has developed to an extent that few perhaps foresaw. 
Of older writers Bozena Nemcova, whose Babicka has been 
translated into many languages, and Benes Tfebizky, author 
of many historical novels, should be named. John Neruda 
(1834-1891) was a very fruitful and talented writer both of 
poetry and of prose. Perhaps the most valuable of his many 
works is his philosophical epic entitled Kosmicke basne (cosmic 
poems). Julius Zeyer (1841-1901) also wrote much both in 
prose and in verse. His epic poem entitled Vylehrad, which 



BOHEMUND 



135 



celebrates the ancient glory of the acropolis of Prague, has great 
value, and of his many novels Jan Maria Plojhar has had the 
greatest success. Of later Bohemian poets the best are Adolf 
Heyduk, Svatopluk Cech and Jaroslav Vrchlicky (b. 1853). 
Of Svatopluk Cech's many poems, which are all inspired by 
national enthusiasm, Vaclav z Michalovic, Lesetinsky Kovar 
(the smith of Lesetin) and Basne otroka (the songs of a slave) 
are the most notable. While Vrchlicky (pseudonym of Emil 
Frida) has no less strong patriotic feelings, he has been more 
catholic in the choice of the subjects of his many works, both in 
poetry and in prose. Of his many collections of lyric poems 
Rok najihu (a year in the south), Poute k Eldoradu (pilgrimages 
to Eldorado) and Sonety Samotare (sonnets of a recluse) have 
particular value. Vrchlicky is also a very brilliant dramatist. 
Bohemian novelists have become very numerous. Mention 
should be made of Alois Jirasek, also a distinguished dramatic 
author; Jacob Arbes, whose Romanetta have great merit; and 
Vaclav Hladik, whose Evzen Voldan is a very striking representa- 
tion of the life of modern Prague. Like so many Bohemian 
authors, Hladik also is a copious dramatic author. 

Bohemia has been very fruitful in historic writers. Wenceslas 
Tomek (1818-1905) left many historical works, of which his 
Dljepis mi&sta Prahy (history of the town of Prague) is the 
most important. Jaroslav Goll (b. 1846) is the author of many 
historical works, especially on the community of the Bohemian 
Brethren. Professor Joseph Kalousek has written much on the 
early history of Bohemia, and is also the author of a very valuable 
study of the ancient constitution (Statni pravo) of Bohemia. 
Dr Anton Rezek is the author of important historical studies, 
many of which appeared in the Journal of the Bohemian Museum 
and in the Cesky Casopis Historicity' (Bohemian Historical 
Review), which he founded in 1805 jointly with Professor Jaroslav 
Goll. More recently Dr Vaclav Flajshans has published some 
excellent studies on the life and writings of John Huss, and 
Professors Pic and Niederle have published learned archaeo- 
logical studies on the earliest period of. Bohemian history. 

See Count Liitzow, A History of Bohemian Literature (London, 
3899); W. R. Morfill, Slavonic Literature (1883); A. N. Pypin and 
V. D. Spasovic, History of Slavonic Literature (written in Russian, 
translated into German by Trangott Pech, Gesch. der slav. Literaturen, 
2 vols. , Leipzig, 1 880-1 884) . There are modern histories of Bohemian 
literature written in the national language by Dr Karel Tieftrunk, 
Dr Vaclav Flajshans and Mr Jaroslav Vlaek. (L.) 

BOHEMUND, the name of a series of princes of Antioch, 
afterwards counts of Tripoli. Their connexion is shown in the 
following table: — 

Robert Guiscard = (1) Alberida: (2) Sicelgaeta. 

Bohemund I. = Constance, daughter of Philip I. of France. 

Bohemund II. = Alice, daughter of Baldwin II. of Jerusalem. 

(1) Raymund = Constance =- (2) Raynald of Chatillon. 

Bohemund III. = (2) Orguilleuse. 

Bohemund IV. = (i)Plaisance. 

I (2)Melisinda, daughter of Amalric II. 

Bohemund V. = (i)Alice, widow of Hugh of Cyprus. 

= (2)Luciana, daughter of count of Segni 



Henry I. : 
of Cyprus 



Hugh II. 

Bohemund I. (c. a.d. 1058-nn), prince of Otranto and 
afterwards of Antioch, whose first name was Marc, was the 
eldest son of Robert Guiscard, dux Apidiae et Calabriae, by an 
early marriage contracted before 1059. He served under his 
father in the great attack on the East Roman empire (1080- 
1085), and commanded the Normans during Guiscard's absence 
(1082-1084), penetrating into Thessaly as far as Larissa, but 
being repulsed by Alexius Comnenus. This early hostility to 
Alexius had a great influence in determining the course of his 



future career, and thereby helped to determine the history of 
the First Crusade, of which Bohemund may be regarded as the 
leader. On the death of Guiscard in 1085, his younger son 
Roger, born " in the purple " of a Lombard princess Sicelgaeta, 
succeeded to the duchy of Apulia and Calabria, and a war arose 
between Bohemund (whom his father had destined for the 
throne of Constantinople) and Duke Roger. The war was finally 
composed by the mediation of Urban II. and the award of 
Otranto and other possessions to Bohemund. In 1096 Bohemund, 
along with his uncle the great count of Sicily, was attacking 
Amalfi, which had revolted against Duke Roger, when bands of 
crusaders began to pass, on their way through Italy to Constanti- 
nople. The zeal of the crusader came upon Bohemund: it is 
possible, too, that he saw in the First Crusade a chance of 
realizing his father's policy (which was also an old Norse instinct) 
of the Drang nach Osten, and hoped from the first to carve for 
himself an eastern principality. He gathered a fine Norman 
army (perhaps the finest division in the crusading host), at the 
head of which he crossed the Adriatic, and penetrated to Con- 
stantinople along the route he had tried to follow in 1082- 
1084. He was careful to observe a "correct " attitude towards 
Alexius, and when he arrived at Constantinople in April 1097 he 
did homage to the emperor. He may have negotiated with 
Alexius about a principality at Antioch; if he did so, he 
had little encouragement. From Constantinople to Antioch 
Bohemund was the real leader of the First Crusade; and it says 
much for his leading that the First Crusade succeeded in crossing 
Asia Minor, which the Crusades of 1101, 1147 and 1189 failed to 
accomplish. A politique, Bohemund was resolved to engineer 
the enthusiasm of the crusaders to his own ends; and when his 
nephew Tancred left the main army at Heraclea, and attempted 
to establish a footing in Cilicia, the movement may have been 
already intended as a preparation for Bohemund's eastern 
principality. Bohemund was the first to get into position 
before Antioch (October 1097), and he took a great part in the 
siege, beating off the Mahommedan attempts at relief from the 
east, and connecting the besiegers on the west with the port 
of St Simeon and the Italian ships which lay there. The capture 
of Antioch was due to his connexion with Firuz, one of the 
commanders in the city; but he would not bring matters to an 
issue until the possession of the city was assured him (May 1098), 
under the terror of the approach of Kerbogha with a great army 
of relief, and with a reservation in favour of Alexius, if Alexius 
should fulfil his promise to aid the crusaders. But Bohemund 
was not secure in the possession of Antioch, even after its 

surrender and the defeat of Ker- 
bogha; he had to make good his 
claims against Raymund of Tou- 
louse, who championed the rights of 
Alexius. He obtained full possession 
in January 1099, and stayed in the 
neighbourhood of Antioch to secure 
his position,while the other crusaders 
moved southward to the capture of 
Jerusalem. He came to Jerusalem 
at Christmas 1099, and had Dago- 
bert of Pisa elected as patriarch, 
perhaps in order to check the growth 
of a strong Lothaiingian power in 
the city. It might seem in 1100 
sister of Leo III. that Bohemund was destined to 

r> l ' j°i f T^ rmenla ; found a great principalityin Antioch, 
Bohemund Vll.-o.s.p. ^.^ would F dwarf Jerusalem; he 

had a fine territory, a good strategical position and a strong 
army. But he had to face two great forces — the East Roman 
empire, which claimed the whole of his territories and was 
supported in its claim by Raymund of Toulouse, and the strong 
Mahommedan principalities in the north-east of Syria. Against 
these two forces he failed. In 1 100 he was captured by Danish- 
mend of Sivas, and he languished in prison till 1103. Tancred 
took his place; but meanwhile Raymund established himself 
with the aid of Alexius in Tripoli, and was able to check the 



I 1 

= Plaisance Bohemund VI. = Sibylla, 



i3'6 



BOHMER 



expansion of Antioch to the south. Ransomed in 1103 by the 
generosity of an Armenian prince, Bohemund made it his first 
object to attack the neighbouring Mahommedan powers in 
order to gain supplies. But in heading an attack on Harran, 
in 1 104, he was severely defeated at Balich, near Rakka on the 
Euphrates. The defeat was decisive; it made impossible the 
great eastern principality which Bohemund had contemplated. 
It was followed by a Greek attack on Cilicia; and despairing of 
his own resources, Bohemund returned to Europe for reinforce- 
ments in order to defend his position. His attractive personality 
won him the hand of Constance, the daughter of the French king, 
Philip I., and he collected a large army. Dazzled by his success, 
he resolved to use his army not to defend Antioch against the 
Greeks, but to attack Alexius. He did so; but Alexius, aided 
by the Venetians, proved too strong, and Bohemund had to 
submit to a humiliating peace (11 08), by which he became the 
vassal of Alexius, consented to receive his pay, with the title of 
Sebastos, and promised to cede disputed territories and to admit 
a Greek patriarch into Antioch. ' Henceforth Bohemund was a 
broken man. He died without returning to the East, and was 
buried at Canossa in Apulia, in mi. ' 

Literature. — The anonymous Gesta Francorum (edited by H. 
Hagenmeyer) is written by one of Bohemund's followers; and the 
Alexiad of Anna Comnena is a primary authority for the whole of 
his life. His career is discussed by B. von Kugler, Bohemund und 
Tancred (Tubingen, 1862); while L. von Heinemann, Geschichte der 
Normannen in Sicilien und Vnteritalien (Leipzig, 1894), and R. 
Rohricht, Geschichte des ersten Kreuzzuges (Innsbruck, 1901), and 
Geschichte des Konigreichs Jerusalem (Innsbruck, 1898), may also be 
consulted for his history. 

Bohemund II. (1108-1131), son of the great Bohemund by his 
marriage with Constance of France, was born in 1108, the year of 
his father's defeat at Durazzo. In n 26 he came from Apulia to 
Antioch (which, since the fall of Roger, the successor of Tancred, 
in 1119, had been under the regency of Baldwin II.); and in 1127 
he married Alice, the younger daughter of Baldwin. After some 
trouble with Joscelin of Edessa, and after joining with Baldwin II. 
in an attack on Damascus (1127), he was defeated and slain on 
his northern frontier by a Mahommedan army from Aleppo 
(1131). He hadshown that he had his father's courage: if time 
had sufficed, he might have shown that he had the other qualities 
of the first Bohemund. 

Bohemund III. was the son of Constance, daughter of 
Bohemund II., by her first husband, Raymund of Antioch. He 
succeeded his mother in the principality of Antioch in 1163, and 
first appears prominently in n 64, as regent of the kingdom of 
Jerusalem during the expedition of Amalric I. to Egypt. During 
the absence of Amalric, he was defeated and captured by 
Nureddin (August n 64) at Harenc, to the east of Antioch. He 
was at once ransomed by his brother-in-law, the emperor Manuel, 
and went to Constantinople, whence he returned with a Greek 
patriarch. In 1180 he deserted his second wife, the princess 
Orguilleuse, for a certain Sibylla, and he was in consequence 
excommunicated. By Orguilleuse he had had two sons, Ray- 
mund and Bohemund (the future Bohemund IV.) , whose relations 
and actions determined the rest of his life. Raymund married 
Alice, a daughter of the Armenian prince Rhupen (Rupin) , brother 
of Leo of Armenia, and died in 1197, leaving behind him a son, 
Raymund Rhupen. Bohemund, the younger brother of Ray- 
mund, had succeeded the last count of Tripoli in the possession 
of that county, 1187; and the problem which occupied the last 
years of Bohemund III. was to determine whether his grandson, 
Raymund Rhupen, or his younger son, Bohemund, should succeed 
him in Antioch. Leo of Armenia was naturally the champion of 
his great-nephew, Raymund Rhupen; indeed he had already 
claimed Antioch in his own right, before the marriage of his niece 
to Raymund, in 1194, when he had captured Bohemund III. at 
Gastin, and attempted without success to force him to cede 
Antioch. 1 Bohemund the younger, however, prosecuted his 
claim with vigour, and even evicted his father from Antioch 
about 1 199: but he was ousted by Leo (now king of Armenia by 

1 During the captivity of Bohemund III. the patriarch of Antioch 
helped to found a commune, which persisted, with its mayor and 
jurats, during the 13th century. 



the grace of the emperor, Henry VI.), and Bohemund III. died 
in possession of his principality (1201). 

Bohemund IV., younger son of Bohemund III. by his second 
wife Orguilleuse, became count of Tripoli in 1187, and succeeded 
his father in the principality of Antioch, to the exclusion of 
Raymund Rhupen, in 1201. But the dispute lasted for many 
years (Leo of Armenia continuing to champion the cause of his 
great-nephew), and long occupied the attention of Innocent III. 
Bohemund IV. enjoyed the support of the Templars (who, like 
the Knights of St John, had estates in Tripoli) and of the Greek 
inhabitants of Antioch, to whom he granted their own patriarch 
in 1207, while Leo appealed (1210-1211) both to Innocent III. 
and the empei or Otto IV., and was supported by the Hospitallers. 
In 1 2 16 Leo captured Antioch, and established Raymund Rhupen 
as its prince; but he lost it again in less than four years, and it 
was once more in the possession of Bohemund IV. when Leo died 
in 1220. Raymund Rhupen died in 1221; and after the event 
Bohemund reigned in Antioch and Tripoli till his death, proving 
himself a determined enemy of the Hospitallers, and thereby 
incurring excommunication in 1230. He first joined, and then 
deserted, the emperor Frederick II., during the crusade of 
1228-29; and he was excluded from the operation of the 
treaty of 1229. When he died in 1233, ne had just concluded 
peace with the Hospitallers, and Gregory IX. had released him 
from the excommunication of 1230. 

Bohemund V., son of Bohemund IV. by his wife Plaisance 
(daughter of Hugh of Gibelet) , succeeded his father in 1 233. He 
was prince of Antioch and count of Tripoli, like his father; and 
like him he enjoyed the alliance of the Templars and experienced 
the hostility of Armenia, which was not appeased till 1251, when 
the mediation of St Louis, and the marriage of the future 
Bohemund VI. to the sister of the Armenian king, finally brought 
peace. By his first marriage in 1225 with Alice, the widow of 
Hugh I. of Cyprus, Bohemund V. connected the history of 
Antioch for a time with that of Cyprus. He died in 1251. He 
had resided chiefly at Tripoli, and under him Antioch was left to 
be governed by its bailiff and commune. 

Bohemund VI. was the son of Bohemund V. by Luciana, a 
daughter of the count of Segni, nephew of Innocent III. Born 
in 1237, Bohemund VI. succeeded his father in 1251, and was 
knighted by St Louis in 1252. His sister Plaisance had married 
in 1250 Henry I. of Cyprus, the son of Hugh I.; and the Cypriot 
connexion of Antioch, originally formed by the marriage of Bohe- 
mund V. and Alice, the widow of Hugh I., was thus maintained. 
In 1252 Bohemund VI. established himself in Antioch, leaving 
Tripoli to itself, and in 1257 he procured the recognition of his 
nephew, Hugh II., the son of Henry I. by Plaisance, as king of 
Jerusalem. He allied himself to the Mongols against the ad- 
vance of the Egyptian sultan; but in 1268 he lost Antioch to 
Bibars, and when he died in 1275 he was only count of Tripoli. 

Bohemund VII. , son of Bohemund VI. by Sibylla, sister 
of Leo III. of Armenia, succeeded to the county of Tripoli in 
1275, with his mother as regent. In his short and troubled reign 
he had trouble with the Templars who were established in 
Tripoli; and in the very year of his death (1287) he lost Laodicea 
to the sultan of Egypt. He died without issue; and as, within 
two years of his death, Tripoli was captured, the county of 
Tripoli may be said to have become extinct with him. 

Literature. — The history of the Bohemunds is the history of 
the principality of Antioch, and, after Bohemund IV., of the county 
of Tripoli also. For Antioch, we possess its Assises (Venice, 1876) ; 
and two articles on its history have appeared in the Revue de I'Orient 
Latin (Paris, 1893, fol.), both by E. Rey (" Resume chronologique 
de l'histoire des princes d'Antioche," vol. iv., and " Les dignitaires 
de la principaute d'Antioche," vol. viii.). R. Rohricht, Geschichte 
des Konigreichs Jerusalem (Innsbruck, 1898), gives practically all 
that is known about the history of Antioch and Tripoli. (E. Br.) 

BOHMER, JOHANN FRIEDRICH (1795-1863), German 
historian, son of Karl Ludwig Bohmer (d. 1817), was born at 
Frankfort-on-Main on the 22nd of April 1795. Educated at 
the universities of Heidelberg and Gottingen, he showed an 
interest in art and visited Italy; but returning to Frankfort 
he turned his attention to the study of history, and became 



BOHN— BOHUN 



!37 



secretary of the Gesellschaft fur alter e deutsche Geschichtskunde. 
He was also archivist and then librarian of the city of Frankfort. 
Bohmer had a great dislike of Prussia and the Protestant faith, 
and a corresponding affection for Austria and the Roman 
Catholic Church, to which, however, he did not belong. His 
critical sense was, perhaps, somewhat warped; but his researches 
are of great value to students. He died unmarried, at Frankfort, 
on the 22nd of October 1863. Bohmer's historical work was 
chiefly concerned with collecting and tabulating charters and 
other imperial documents of the middle ages. First appeared 
an abstract, the Regesta chronologico-diplomatica regum atque 
imperatorum Romanorum 911—1313 (Frankfort, 1831), which was 
followed by the Regesta chronologico-diplomatica Karolorum. 
Die Urkunden sdmtlicher Karolinger in kurzen A usziigen (Frank- 
fort, 1833), and a series of Regesta imperii. For the period 
1314-1347 (Frankfort, 1839) the Regesta was followed by three, 
and for the period 1 246-1313 (Frankfort, 1844) by two supple- 
mentary volumes. The remaining period of the Regesta, as edited 
by Bohmer, is 1198-1254 (Stuttgart, 1849). These collections 
contain introductions and explanatory passages by the author. 
Very valuable also is the Fontes rerum Germanicarum (Stuttgart, 
1843-1868), a collection of original authorities for German history 
during the 13th and 14th centuries. The fourth and last volume 
of this work was edited by A. Huber after the author's death. 
Other collections edited by Bohmer are: Die Reichsgesetze 
900-1400 (Frankfort, 1832); Wittelsbachische Regesten von der 
Erwerbung des Herzogtums Bayern bis zu 1340 (Stuttgart, 1854); 
and Codex diplomaticus Moeno-Francofurtanus. Urkundenbuch 
der Reichsstadt Frankfurt (Frankfort, 1836; new edition by F. 
Law, 1901). Other volumes and editions of the Regesta imperii, 
edited by J. Ficker, E. Muhlbacher, E. Winkelmann and others, 
are largely based on Bohmer's work. Bohmer left a great amount 
of unpublished material, and after his death two other works 
were published from his papers: Acta imperii selecta, edited by 
J. Ficker (Innsbruck, 1870); and Regesta archiepiscoporum 
Magunlinensium, edited by C. Will (Innsbruck, 1877-1886). 

See J. Janssen, /. F. Bohmers Leben, Briefe und kleinere Schriften 
(Freiburg, 1868). 

BOHN, HENRY GEORGE (1796-1884), British publisher, 
son of a German bookbinder settled in England, was born in 
London on the 4th of January 1796. In 183 1 he started as a 
dealer in rare books and " remainders." In 1841 he issued his 
" Guinea " Catalogue of books, a monumental work containing 
23,208 items. Bohn was noted for his book auction sales: one 
held in 1848 lasted four days, the catalogue comprising twenty 
folio pages. Printed on this catalogue was the information: 
" Dinner at 2 o'clock, dessert at 4, tea at 5, and supper at 10." 
The name of Bohn is principally remembered by the important 
Libraries which he inaugurated: these were begun in 1846 and 
comprised editions of standard works and translations, dealing 
with history, science, classics, theology and archaeology, con- 
sisting in all of 766 volumes. One of Bohn's most useful and 
laborious undertakings was his revision (6 vols. 1864) of The 
Bibliographer's Manual of English Literature (1834) of W. T. 
Lowndes. The plan includes bibliographical and critical notices, 
particulars of prices, &c, and a considerable addition to the 
original work. It had been one of Bohn's ambitions to found 
a great publishing house, but, finding that his sons had no taste 
for the trade, he sold the Libraries in 1864 to Messrs. Bell and 
Daldy, afterwards G. Bell & Sons. Bohn was a man of wide 
culture and many interests. He himself made considerable 
contributions to his Libraries: he collected pictures, china and 
ivories, and was a famous rose-grower. He died at Twickenham 
on the 22nd of August 1884. 

BOHTLINGK, OTTO VON (1815-1004) German Sanskrit 
scholar, was born on the 30th of May (nth of June O.S.) 1815 
at St Petersburg. Having studied( 1833-183 5) Oriental languages, 
particularly Arabic, Persian and Sanskrit, at the university of 
St Petersburg, he continued his studies in Germany, first in 
Berlin and then (1839-1842) in Bonn. Returning to St Peters- 
burg in 1842, he was attached to the Royal Academy of Sciences, 
and was elected an ordinary member of that society in 1855. 



In t86o he was made " Russian state councillor," and later 
" privy councillor " with a title of nobility. In 1868 he settled 
at Jena, and in 1885 removed to Leipzig, where he resided until 
his death there on the 1st of April 1904. Bohtlingk was one of 
the most distinguished scholars of the 19th century, and his 
works are of pre-eminent value in the field of Indian and com- 
parative philology. His first great work was an edition of 
Panini's Acht Bucher grammatischer Regeln (Bonn, 1839-1840), 
which was in reality a criticism of Franz Bopp's philological 
methods. This book Bohtlingk again took up forty-seven years 
later, when he republished it with a complete translation under 
the title Paninis Grammatik mil Uberselzung (Leipzig, 1887). The 
earlier edition was followed by Vopadevas Grammatik (St Peters- 
burg, 1847) ; Uber die Sprache der Jakuten (St Petersburg, 1851) ; 
Indische Sprilche (2nd ed. in 3 parts, St Petersburg, 1870-1873, to 
which an index was published by Blau, Leipzig, 1 893) ; a critical ex- 
amination and translation of Chhandogya-upanishad (St Peters- 
burg, 1889) and a translation of Brihadaranyaka-upanishad (St 
Petersburg, 1889). In addition to these he published several 
smaller treatises, notably one on the Sanskrit accents, Uber den 
Accent im Sanskrit (1843). But his magnum opus is his great 
Sanskrit dictionary, Sanskrit-W orterbuch (7 vols., St Petersburg, 
1853-1875; newed. 7 vols., St Petersburg, 1879-1889), which with 
the assistance of his two friends, Rudolf Roth (1821-1895) an d 
Albrecht Weber (b. 1825), was completed in twenty- three years. 
BOHUN, the name of a family which plays an important part in 
English history during the 13th and 14th centuries; it was taken 
from a village situated in the Cotentin between Coutances and 
the estuary of the Vire. The Bohuns came into England at, or 
shortly after, the Norman Conquest; but their early history 
there is obscure. The founder of their greatness was Humphrey 
III., who in the latter years of Henry I., makes his appearance 
as a dapifer, or steward, in the royal household. He married 
the daughter of Milo of Gloucester, and played an ambiguous 
part in Stephen's reign, siding at first with the king and after- 
wards with the empress. Humphrey III. lived until 1187, but 
his history is uneventful. He remained loyal to Henry II. 
through all changes, and fought in n 73 at Farnham against 
the rebels of East Anglia. Outliving his eldest son, Humphrey 
IV., he was succeeded in the family estates by his grandson 
Henry. Flenry was connected with the royal house of Scotland 
through his mother Margaret, a sister of William the Lion; 
an alliance which no doubt assisted him to obtain the earldom 
of Hereford from John (1199). The lands of the family lay 
chiefly on the Welsh Marches, and from this date the Bohuns 
take a foremost place among the Marcher barons. Henry de 
Bohun figures with the earls of Clare and Gloucester among the 
twenty-five barons who were elected by their fellows to enforce 
the terms of the Great Charter. In the subsequent civil war he 
fought on the side of Louis, and was captured at the battle of 
Lincoln (12 17). He took the cross in the same year and died 
on his pilgrimage (June 1, 1220). Humphrey V., his son and 
heir, returned to the path of loyalty, and was permitted, some 
time before 1239, to inherit the earldom of Essex from his 
maternal uncle, William de Mandeville. But in 1258 this 
Humphrey fell away, like his father, from the royal to the 
baronial cause. He served as a nominee of the opposition on the 
committee of twenty-four which was appointed, in the Oxford 
parliament of that year, to reform the administration. It was 
only the alliance of Montfort with Llewelyn of North Wales that 
brought the earl of Hereford back to his allegiance. Humphrey 
V. headed the first secession of the Welsh Marchers from the 
party of the opposition (1263), and was amongst the captives 
whom the Montfortians took at Lewes. The earl's son and name- 
sake was on the victorious side, and shared in the defeat of 
Evesham, which he did not long survive. Humphrey V. was, 
therefore, naturally selected as one of the twelve arbitrators 
to draw up the ban of Kenil worth (1266), by which the dis- 
inherited rebels were allowed to make their peace. Dying in 
1275, he was succeeded by his grandson Humphrey VII. This 
Bohun lives in history as one of the recalcitrant barons of the year 
1297, who extorted from Edward I. the Confirmatio Cartarum. 



i 3 8 



BOIARDO— BOIE 



The motives of the earl's defiance were not altogether disin- 
terested. He had suffered twice from the chicanery of Edward's 
lawyers; in 1284 when a dispute between himself and the royal 
favourite, John Giffard, was decided in the latter's favour; 
and again in 1292 when he was punished with temporary im- 
prisonment and sequestration for a technical, and apparently 
unwitting, contempt of the king's court. In company, therefore, 
with the earl of Norfolk he refused to render foreign service in 
Gascony, on the plea that they were only bound to serve with the 
king, who was himself bound for Flanders. Their attitude 
brought to a head the general discontent which Edward had 
excited by his arbitrary taxation; and Edward was obliged 
to make a surrender on all the subjects of complaint. At 
Falkirk (1298) Humphrey VII. redeemed his character for 
loyalty. His son, Humphrey VIII., who succeeded him in the 
same year, was allowed to marry one of the king's daughters, 
Eleanor, the widowed countess of Holland (1302). This close 
connexion with the royal house did not prevent him, as it did 
not prevent Earl Thomas of Lancaster, from joining the opposi- 
tion to the feeble Edward II. In 1310 Humphrey VIII. figured 
among the Lords Ordainers; though, with more patriotism 
than some of his fellow-commissioners, he afterwards followed 
the king to Bannockburn. He was taken captive in the battle, 
but exchanged for the wife of Robert Bruce. Subsequently he 
returned to the cause of his order, and fell on the side of Earl 
Thomas at the field of Boroughbridge (1322). With him, as with 
his father, the politics of the Marches had been the main con- 
sideration; his final change of side was due to jealousy of 
the younger Despenser, whose lordship of Glamorgan was too 
great for the comfort, of the Bohuns in Brecon. With the death 
of Humphrey VIII. the fortunes of the family enter on a more 
peaceful stage. Earl John (d. 1335) was inconspicuous; 
Humphrey IX. (d. 1361) merely distinguished himself as a 
captain in the Breton campaigns of the Hundred Years' War, 
winning the victories of Morlaix (1342) and La Roche Derrien 
(1347). His nephew and heir, Humphrey X., who inherited 
the earldom of Northampton from his father, was territorially 
the most important representative of the Bohuns. But the male 
line was extinguished by his death (1373)- The three earldoms 
and the broad lands of the Bohuns were divided between two 
co-heiresses. Both married members of the royal house. The 
elder, Eleanor, was given in 1374 to Thomas of Woodstock, 
seventh son of Edward III.; the younger, Mary, to Henry, 
earl of Derby, son of John of Gaunt and afterwards Henry IV., 
in 1380 or 1381. From these two marriages sprang the houses 
of Lancaster and Stafford. 

See J. E. Doyle's Official Baronage of England (1886), the Complete 
Peerage of G. E. C(okayne), (1867-1898) ; T. F. Tout's " Wales and 
the March during the Barons' War," in Owens College Historical 
Essays, pp. 87-136 (1902); J. E. Morris' Welsh Wars of King 
Edward I., chs. vi., viii. (1901). (H. W. C. D.) 

BOIARDO, MATTEO MARIA, Count (1434-1494), Italian 
poet, who came of a noble and illustrious house established at 
Ferrara, but originally from Reggio, was born at Scandiano, 
one of the.seignorial estates of his family, near Reggio di Modena, 
about the year 1434, according to Tiraboschi, or 1420 according 
to Mazzuchelli. At an early age he entered the university of 
Ferrara, where he acquired a good knowledge of Greek and 
Latin, and even of the Oriental languages, and was in due time 
admitted doctor in philosophy and in law. At the court of 
Ferrara, where he enjoyed the favour of Duke Borso d'Este and 
his successor Hercules, he was entrusted with several honourable 
employments, and in particular was named governor of Reggio, 
an appointment which he held in the year 1478. Three years 
afterwards he was elected captain of Modena, and reappointed 
governor of the town and citadel of Reggio, where he died in the 
year 1494, though in what month is uncertain. 

Almost all Boiardo's works, and especially his great poem 
of the Orlando Inamorato, were composed for the amusement 
of Duke Hercules and his court, though not written within its 
precincts. His practice, it is said, was to retire to Scandiano or 
some other of his estates, and there to devote himself to com- 
position; and Castelvetro, Vallisnieri, Mazzuchelli and Tira- 



boschi all unite in stating that he took care to insert in the 
descriptions of his poem those of the agreeable environs of his 
chateau, and that the greater part of the names of his heroes, as 
Mandricardo, Gradasse, Sacripant, Agramant and others, were 
merely the names of some of his peasants, which, from their 
uncouthness, appeared to him proper to be given to Saracen 
warriors. Be this as it may, the Orlando Inamorato deserves 
to be considered as one of the most important poems in Italian 
literature, since it forms the first example of the romantic epic 
worthy to serve as a model, and, as such, undoubtedly produced 
Ariosto's Orlando Furioso. Gravina and Mazzuchell have said, 
and succeeding writers have repeated on their authority, that 
Boiardo proposed to himself as his model the Iliad of Homer; 
that Paris is besieged like the city of Troy; that Angelica holds 
the place of Helen; and that, in short, the one poem is a sort of 
reflex image of the other. In point of fact, however, the subject- 
matter of the poem is derived from the Fabulous Chronicle of the 
pseudo-Turpin; though, with the exception of the names of 
Charlemagne, Roland, Oliver, and some other principal warriors, 
who necessarily figure as important characters in the various 
scenes, there is little resemblance between the detailed plot of the 
one and that of the other. The poem, which Boiardo did not 
live to finish, was printed at Scandiano the year after his death, 
under the superintendence of his son Count Camillo. The title 
of the book is without date; but a Latin letter from Antonia 
Caraffa di Reggio, prefixed to the poem, is dated the kalends of 
June 1495. A second edition, also without date, but which 
must have been printed before the year 1500, appeared at 
Venice; and the poem was twice reprinted there during the 
first twenty years of the 16th century. These editions are the 
more curious and valuable since they contain nothing but the 
text of the author, which is comprised in three books, divided 
into cantos, the third book being incomplete. But Niccolo 
degli Agostini, an indifferent poet, had the courage to continue 
the work commenced by Boiardo, adding to it three books, 
which were printed at Venice in 1526-1531, in 4to; and since 
that time no edition of the Orlando has been printed without 
the continuation of Agostini, wretched as it unquestionably is. 
Boiardo's poem suffers from the incurable defect of a laboured 
and heavy style. His story is skilfully constructed, the characters 
are well drawn and sustained throughout; many of the incidents 
show a power and fertility of imagination not inferior to that of 
Ariosto, but the perfect workmanship indispensable for a great 
work of art is wanting. The poem in its original shape was not 
popular, and has been completely superseded by the Rifacimento 
of Francesco Berni (q.v.). 

The other works of Boiardo are — (1) II Timone, a comedy, 
Scandiano, 1500, 4to; (2) Sonnetti e Canzoni, Reggio, 1499, 
4to; (3) Carmen Bucolicon, Reggio, 1500, 4to; (4) Cinque 
Capitoli in terza rima, Venice, 1523 or 1533; (5) Apulejo dell' 
Asino d'Oro, Venice, 1516, 1518; (6) Asino d'Oro de Luciano 
tradotto in volgare, Venice, 1523, 8vo; (7) Erodoto Alicarnasseo 
istorico, tradotto di Greco in Lingua Italiana, Venice, 1533 and 
1538, 8vo; (8) Rerum Italicarum Scriptores. 

See Panizzi's Boiardo (9 vols., 1830-1831). 

BOIE, HEINRICH CHRISTIAN (1 744-1806), German author, 
was born at Meldorf in the then Danish province of Schleswig- 
Holstein on the 19th of July 1744. After studying law at Jena, 
he went in 1769 to GSttingen, where he became one of the 
leading spirits in the Gottingen " Dichterbund " or " Hain." 
Boie's poetical talent was not great, but his thorough knowledge 
of literature, his excellent taste and sound judgment, made him 
an ideal person to awake the poetical genius of others. Together 
with F. W. Gotter (q.v.) he founded in 1770 the Gottingen 
Musenalmanach, which he directed and edited until 1775, when, 
in conjunction with C. W. von DohrA (1751-1820), he brought 
out Das deulsche Museum, which became one of the best literary 
periodicals of the day. In 1776 Boie became secretary to the 
commander-in-chief at Hanover, and in 1781 was appointed 
administrator of the province of Suderditmarschen in Holstein. 
He died at Meldorf on the 3rd of March 1806. 

See K. Weinhold, Heinrich Christian Boie (Halle, 1868). 



BOIELDIEU— BOII 



J39 



BOIELDIEU, FRANCOIS ADRIEN (1775-1834), French 
composer of comic opera, was born at Rouen on the 15th of 
December 1775. He received his first musical education from 
M. Broche, the cathedral organist, who appears to have treated 
him very harshly. He began composing songs and chamber 
music at a very early age — his first opera, La Fille coupable 
(the libretto by his father), and his second opera, Rosalie et 
Myrza, being produced on the stage of Rouen in 1795- Not 
satisfied with his local success he went to Paris in 1795. His 
scores were submitted to Cherubim, Mehul and others, but met 
with little approbation. Grand opera was the order of the day. 
Boieldieu had to fall back on his talent as a pianoforte-player for 
a livelihood. Success came at last from an unexpected source. 
P. J. Garat, a fashionable singer of the period, admired Boieldieu's 
touch on the piano, and made him his accompanist. In the 
drawing-rooms of the Directoire Garat sang the charming songs 
and ballads with which the young composer supplied him. 
Thus Boieldieu's reputation gradually extended to wider circles. 
In 1796 Les Deux lettres was produced, and in 1797 La Famille 
Suisse appeared for the first time on a Paris stage, and was well 
received. Several other operas followed in rapid succession, of 
which only Le Calife de Bagdad (1800) has escaped oblivion. 
After the enormous success of this work, Boieldieu felt the want 
of a thorough musical training and took lessons from Cherubini, 
the influence of that great master being clearly discernible in 
the higher artistic finish of his pupil's later compositions. In 
1802 Boieldieu, to escape the domestic troubles caused by his 
marriage with Clotilde Aug. Mafleuroy, a celebrated ballet- 
dancer of the Paris opera, took flight and went to Russia, where 
he was received with open arms by the emperor Alexander. 
During his prolonged stay at St Petersburg he composed a 
number of operas. He also set to music the choruses of Racine's 
Alhalie, one of his few attempts at the tragic style of dramatic 
writing. In 181 1 he returned to his own country, where the 
following year witnessed the production of one of his finest works, 
Jean de Paris, in which he depicted with much felicity the 
charming coquetry of the queen of Navarre, the chivalrous verve 
of the king, the officious pedantry of the seneschal, and the 
amorous tenderness of the page. He succeeded Mehul as 
professor of composition at the Conservatoire in 18 17. Le 
Chapeau rouge was produced with great success in 1818. 
Boieldieu's second and greatest masterpiece was his Dame 
blanche (1825). The libretto, written by Scribe, was partly 
suggested by Walter Scott's Monastery, and several original 
Scottish tunes cleverly introduced by the composer add to the 
melodious charm and local colour of the work. Ori the death 
of his wife in 1825, Boieldieu married a singer. His own death 
was due to a violent attack of pulmonary disease. He vainly 
tried to escape the rapid progress of the illness by travel in Italy 
and the south of France, but returned to Paris only to die on 
the 8th of October 1834. 

Lives of Boieldieu have been written by Pougin (Paris, 1875), 
J. A. Refeuvaille (Rouen, 1836), Hequet (Paris, 1864), Emile Duval 
(Geneva, 1883). See also Adolphe Charles Adam, Demiers souvenirs 
d'un musicien. 

BOIGNE, BENOiT DE, Count (1751-1830), the first of the 
French military adventurers in India, was born at Chambery 
in Savoy on the 8th of March 17 51, being the son of a fur 
merchant. He joined the Irish Brigade in France in 1768, and 
subsequently he entered the Russian service and was captured 
by the Turks. Hearing of the wealth of India, he made his way 
to that country, and after serving for a short time in the East 
India Company, he resigned and joined Mahadji Sindhia in 
1784 for the purpose of training his troops in the European 
methods of war. In the battles of Lalsot and Chaksana Boigne 
and his two battalions proved their worth by holding the field 
when the rest of the Mahratta army was defeated by the Rajputs. 
In the battle of Agra (1788) he restored the Mahratta fortunes, 
and made Mahadji Sindhia undisputed master of Hindostan. 
This success led to his being given the command of a brigade 
of ten battalions of infantry, with which he won the victories 
of Patan and Merta in 1 790. In consequence Boigne was allowed 



to raise two further brigades of disciplined infantry, and made 

commander-in-chief of Sindhia's army. In the battle of Lakhairi 

(1793) he defeated Holkar's army. On the death of Mahadji 

Sindhia in 1794, Boigne could have made himself master of 

Hindostan had he wished it, but he remained loyal to Daulat 

Rao Sindhia. In 1795 his health began to fail, and he resigned 

his command, and in the following year returned to Europe 

with a fortune of £400,000. He lived in retirement during 

the lifetime of Napoleon, but was greatly honoured by Louis 

XVIII. He died on the 21st of June 1830. 

See H. Compton, European Military Adventurers of Hindustan 
(1892). 

BOII (perhaps = " the terrible ") , a Celtic people, whose original 
home was Gallia Transalpina. They were known to the Romans, 
at least by name, in the time of Plautus, as is shown by the 
contemptuous reference in the Captivi (888). At an early date 
they split up into two main groups, one of which made its way 
into Italy, the other into Germany. Some, however, appear 
to have stayed behind, since, during the Second Punic War, 
Magalus, a Boian prince, offered to show Hannibal the way into 
Italy after he had crossed the Pyrenees (Livy xxi. 29). The 
first group of immigrants is said to have crossed the Pennine Alps 
(Great St Bernard) into the valley of the Po. Finding the 
district already occupied, they proceeded over the river, drove 
out the Etruscans and Umbrians, and established themselves 
as far as the Apennines in the modern Romagna. According 
to Cato (in Pliny, Nat. Hist. iii. 116) they comprised as many 
as 112 different tribes, and from the remains discovered in the 
tombs at Hallstatt, La Tene and other places, they appear to 
have been fairly civilized. Several wars took place between them 
and the Romans. In 283 they were defeated, together with 
the Etruscans, at the Vadimonian lake; in 224, after the battle 
of Telamon in Etruria, they were forced to submit. But they still 
cherished a hatred of the Romans, and during the Second Punic 
War (218), irritated by the foundation of the Roman colonies 
of Cremona and Placentia, they rendered valuable assistance to 
Hannibal. They continued the struggle against Rome from 
201 to 191, when they were finally subdued by P. Cornelius Scipio 
Nasica, and deprived of nearly half their territory. According 
to Strabo (v. p. 213) the Boii were driven back across the Alps 
and settled on the land of their kinsmen, the Taurisci, on the 
Danube, adjoining Vindelicia and Raetia. Most authorities, 
however, assume that there had been a settlement of the Boii 
on the Danube from very early times, in part of the modern 
Bohemia (anc. Boiohemum, " land of the Boii "). About 60 B.C. 
some of the Boii migrated to Noricum and Pannonia, when 
3?, 000 of them joined the expedition of the Helvetians into 
Gaul, and shared their defeat near Bibracte (58). They were 
subsequently allowed by Caesar to settle in the territory of the 
Aedui between the Loire and the Allier. Their chief town was 
Gorgobina (site uncertain) . Those who remained on the Danube 
were exterminated by the Dacian king, Boerebista, and the 
district they had occupied was afterwards called the " desert' of 
the Boii " (Strabo vii. p. 292). In a.d. 69 a Boian named 
Mariccus stirred up a fanatical revolt, but was soon defeated 
and put to death. Some remnants of the Boii are mentioned 
as dwelling near Bordeaux; but Mommsen inclines to the opinion 
that the three groups (in Bordeaux, Bohemia and the Po 
districts) were not really scattered branches of one and the same 
stock, but that they are instances of a mere similarity of name. 

The Boii, as we know them, belonged almost certainly to the 
Early Iron age. They probably used long iron swords for dealing 
cutting blows, and from the size of the handles they must have 
been a race of large men (cf. Polybius ii. 30). For their ethno- 
logical affinities and especially their possible connexion with 
the Homeric Achaeans see W. Ridgeway's Early Age of Greece 
(vol. i., 1901). 

See L. Contzen, Die Wanderungen der Ke'ten (Leipzig, 1861); 
A. Desjardins, GSograpkie historique de la Gaule romaine, ii. (1876- 
!893); T. R. Holmes, Caesar's Conquest of Gaul (1899), pp. 426-428; 
T. Mommsen, Hist, of Rome, ii. (Eng. trans. 5 vols., 1894), p. 373 
note; M. Ihm in Pauly-Wissowa's , Realencyclopddie, iii. pt. I (1897); 
A. Holder, Alt-celtischer Sprachschatz. 



140 



BOIL— BOILEAU-DESPREAUX 



BOIL, in medicine, a progressive local inflammation of the 
skin, taking the form of a hard suppurating tumour, with a core 
of dead tissue, resulting from infection by a microbe, Staphy- 
lococcus pyogenes, and commonly occurring in young persons 
whose blood is disordered, or as a complication in certain diseases. 
Treatment proceeds on the lines of bringing the mischief out, 
assisting the evacuation of the boil by the lancet, and clearing 
the system. In the English Bible, and also in popular medical 
terminology, "boil" is used of various forms of ulcerous affection. 
The boils which were one of the plagues in Egypt were apparently 
the bubonic plague. The terms Aleppo boil (or button), Delhi 
boil, Oriental boil, Biskra button, &c, have been given to a 
tropical epidemic, characterized by ulcers on the face, due to 
a diplococcus parasite. 

BOILEAU-DESPREAUX, NICOLAS (1636-1711), French 
poet and critic, was born on the 1st of November 1636 in the 
rue de Jerusalem, Paris. The same Despreaux was derived 
from a small property at Crosne near Villeneuve Saint-Georges. 
He was the fifteenth child of Gilles Boileau, a clerk in the parle- 
ment. Two of his brothers attained some distinction: Gilles 
Boileau (1631-1669), the author of a translation of Epictetus; 
and Jacques Boileau, who became a canon of the Sainte-Chapelle, 
and made valuable contributions to church history. His mother 
died when he was two years old; and Nicolas Boileau, who had 
a delicate constitution, seems to have suffered something from 
want of care. Sainte-Beuve puts down his somewhat hard and 
unsympathetic outlook quite as much to the uninspiring circum- 
stances of these days as to the general character of his time. 
He cannot be said to have been early disenchanted, for he never 
seems to have had any illusions; he grew up with a single passion, 
" the hatred of stupid books." He was educated at the College 
de Beauvais, and was then sent to study theology at the Sor- 
bonne. He exchanged theology for law, however, and was called 
to the bar on the 4th of December 1656. From the profession 
of law, after a short trial, he recoiled in disgust, complaining 
bitterly of the amount of chicanery which passed under the name 
of law and justice. His father died in 1657, leaving him a small 
fortune, and thenceforward he devoted himself to letters. 

Such of his early poems as have been preserved hardly contain 
the promise of what he ultimately became. The first piece in 
which his peculiar powers were displayed was the first satire 
(1660), in imitation of the third satire of Juvenal; it embodied 
the farewell of a poet to the city of Paris. This was quickly 
followed by eight others, and the number was at a later period 
increased to twelve. A twofold interest attaches to the satires. 
In the first place the author skilfully parodies and attacks 
writers who at the time were placed in the very first rank, such 
as Jean Chapelain, the abbe Charles Cotin, Philippe Quinault 
and Georges de Scudery; he openly raised the standard of 
revolt against the older poets. But in the second place he showed 
both by precept and practice what were the poetical capabilities 
of the French language. Prose in the hands of such writers as 
Descartes and Pascal had proved itself a flexible and powerful 
instrument of expression, with a distinct mechanism and form. 
But except with Malherbe, there had been no attempt to fashion 
French versification according to rule or method. In Boileau 
for the first time appeared terseness and vigour of expression, 
with perfect regularity of verse structure. His admiration for 
Moliere found expression in the stanzas addressed to him (1663), 
and in the second satire (1664). In 1664 he composed his prose 
Dialogue des heros de roman, a satire on the elaborate romances 
of the time, which may be said to have once for all abolished 
the lucubrations of La Calprenede, Mile de Scudery and their 
fellows. Though fairly widely read in manuscript, the book 
was not published till 17 13, out of regard, it is said, for Mile 
de Scudery. To these early days belong the reunions at the 
Mouton Blanc and the Pomme du Pin, where Boileau, Moliere, 
Racine, Chapelle and Antoine Furetiere met to discuss literary 
questions. To Moliere and Racine he proved a constant friend, 
and supported their interests on many occasions. 

In 1666, prompted by the publication of two unauthorized 
editions, he published Satires du Sieur D. . . ., containing 



seven satires and the Discours au roi. From 1669 onwards 
appeared his -epistles, graver in tone than the satires, maturer 
in thought, more exquisite and polished in style. The Epttres 
gained for him the favour of Louis XIV., who desired his presence 
at court. The king asked him which he thought his best verses. 
Whereupon Boileau diplomatically selected as his " least bad " 
some still unprinted lines in honour of the grand monarch and 
proceeded to recite them. He received forthwith a pension of 
2000 livres. In 1674 his two masterpieces, V Art pottique and 
Le Lutrin, were published with some earlier works as the CEuvres 
diverses du sieur D. . . . The first, in imitation of the Ars 
Poetica of Horace, lays down the code for all future French 
verse, and may be said to fill in French literature a parallel place 
to that held by its prototype in Latin. On English literature 
the maxims of Boileau, through the translation revised by 
Dryden, and through the magnificent imitation of them in 
Pope's Essay on Criticism, have exercised no slight influence. 
Boileau does not merely lay down rules for the language of poetry, 
but analyses carefully the various kinds of verse composition, 
and enunciates the principles peculiar to each. Of the four books 
of L'Art pottique, the first and last consist of general precepts, 
inculcating mainly the great rule of bon sens; the second treats 
of the pastoral, the elegy, the ode, the epigram and satire; and 
the third of tragic and epic poetry. Though the rules laid down 
are of value, their tendency is rather to hamper and render too 
mechanical the efforts of poetry. Boileau himself, a great, 
though 'by no means infallible critic in verse, cannot be considered 
a great poet. He rendered the utmost service in destroying the 
exaggerated reputations of the mediocrities of his time, but 
his judgment was sometimes at fault. The Lutrin, a mock 
heroic poem, of which four cantos appeared in 1674, furnished 
Alexander Pope with a model for the Rape of the Lock, but the 
English poem is superior in richness of imagination and subtlety 
of invention. The fifth and sixth cantos, afterwards added by 
Boileau, rather detract from the beauty of the poem; the last 
canto in particular is quite unworthy of his genius. In 1674 
appeared also his translation of Longinus On the Sublime, to 
which were added in 1693 certain critical reflections, chiefly 
directed against the theory of the superiorit)' of the moderns 
over the ancients as advanced by Charles Perrault. 

Boileau was made historiographer to the king in 1677. From 
this time the amount of his production diminished. To this 
period of his life belong the satire, Sur les femmes, the ode, Sur 
la prise de Namur, the epistles, A mes vers and Sur V amour de 
Dieu, and the satire Sur I'homme. The satires had raised up a 
crowd of enemies against Boileau. The 10th satire, on women, 
provoked an Apologie des femmes from Charles Perrault. 
Antoine Arnauld in the year of his death wrote a letter in defence 
of Boileau, but when at the desire of his friends he submitted 
his reply to Bossuet, the bishop pronounced all satire to be in- 
compatible with the spirit of Christianity, and the 10th satire 
to be subversive of morality. The friends of Arnauld had 
declared that it was inconsistent with the dignity of a church- 
man to write on any subject so trivial as poetry. The epistle, 
Sur V amour de Dieu, was a triumphant vindication on the part 
of Boileau of the dignity of his art. It was not until the 15th 
of April 1684 that he was admitted to the Academy, and then 
only by the king's wish. In 1687 he retired to a country-house 
he had bought at Auteuil, which Racine, because of the numerous 
guests, calls his hotellerie d' Auteuil. In 1705 he sold his house 
and returned to Paris, where he lived with his confessor in the 
cloisters of Notre Dame. In the 12th satire, Sur V equivoque, 
he attacked the Jesuits in verses which Sainte-Beuve called a 
recapitulation of the Lettres provinciales of Pascal. This was 
written about 1705. He then gave his attention to the arrange- 
ment of a complete and definitive edition of his works. But 
the Jesuit fathers obtained from Louis XIV. the withdrawal of 
the privilege already granted for the publication, and demanded 
the suppression of the 12th satire. These annoyances are said 
to have hastened his death, which took place on the 13th of 
March 1711. 

Boileau was a man of warm and kindly feelings, honest, 



BOILER 



141 



outspoken and benevolent. Many anecdotes are told of his 
frankness of speech at court, and of his generous actions. He 
holds a well-defined place in French literature, as the first who 
reduced its versification to rule, and taught the value of workman- 
ship for its own sake. His influence on English literature, through 
Pope and his contemporaries, was not less strong, though less 
durable. After much undue depreciation Boileau's critical work 
has been rehabilitated by recent writers, perhaps to the extent 
of some exaggeration in the other direction. It has been shown 
that in spite of undue harshness in individual cases most of his 
criticisms have been substantially adopted by his successors. 

Numerous editions of Boileau's works were published during his 
lifetime. The last of these, CEuvres diver ses (1701), known as the 
" favourite " edition of the poet, was reprinted with variants and 
notes by Alphonse Pauly (2 vols., 1894). The critical text of his 
works was established by Berriat Saint-Prix, CEuvres de Boileau 
(4 vols., 1830-1837), who made use of some 350 editions. This text, 
edited with notes by Paul Cheron, with the Boloeana of 1740, and 
an essay by Sainte-Beuve, was reprinted by Gamier freres (i860). 

See also Sainte-Beuve, Causeries du lundi, vol. vi. ; F. Brunetiere, 
" L'Esthetique de Boileau" {Revue des Deux Mondes, June 1889), 
and an exhaustive article by the same critic in La Grande encyclopedie ; 
G. Lanson, Boileau (1892), in the series of Grands ecrivains francais. 

BOILER, a vessel in which water or other liquid is heated to 
the boiling point; specifically, the apparatus by which steam is 
produced from water, as one step in the process whereby the 
potential energy of coal or other fuel is converted into mechanical 
work by means of the steam-engine. Boilers of the latter kind 
must all possess certain essential features, whilst of other qualities 
that are desirable some may not be altogether compatible with 
the special conditions under which the boilers are to be worked. 
Amongst the essentials are a receptacle capable of containing 
the water and the steam produced by its evaporation, and strong 
enough continuously to withstand with safety the highest pressure 
of steam for which the boiler is intended. Another essential is a 
furnace for burning the fuel, and a further one is the provision of 
a sufficiency of heating surface for the transmission of the heat 
produced by the combustion of the fuel to the water which is 
required to be evaporated. Desirable qualities are that the 
arrangements of the furnaces should be such that a reasonably 
perfect combustion of the fuel should be possible, and that the 
heating surfaces should be capable of transmitting a large 
proportion of the heat produced to the water so as to obtain a 
high evaporative efficiency. Further, the design generally should 
be compact, not too heavy or costly, and such that the cleaning 
necessary to maintain the evaporative efficiency can be easily 
effected. It should also be such that the cost of upkeep will be 
small, and that only an average amount of skill and attention 
will be required under working conditions. It is for providing 
these qualities in different degrees according to the special 
requirements of various circumstances that the very different 
designs of the various types of boilers have been evolved. 

Classes of Boilers. — Boilers generally may be divided into two 
distinct classes, one comprising those which are generally called 
" tank " boilers, containing relatively large quantities of water, 
and the other those which are generally called " water-tube " 
boilers, in which the water is mainly contained in numerous 
comparatively small tubes. There are, however, some types of 
boiler which combine to some extent the properties of both these 
classes. Each class has its representatives amongst both land 
and marine boilers. In " tank " boilers the outer shell is wholly 
or partially cylindrical, this form being one in which the necessary 
strength can be obtained without the use of a large number of 
stays. The boilers are generally internally fired, the furnace 
plates being surrounded with water and forming the most efficient 
portion of the heating surfaces. On leaving the furnace the 
products of combustion are led into a chamber and thence 
through flues or through numerous small tubes which serve to 
transmit some of the heat of combustion to the water contained 
in the boiler. In " water-tube " boilers the fire is usually placed 
under a collection of tubes containing water and forming the 
major portion of the heating surface of the boiler. Both the 
fire and the tubes are enclosed in an outer casing of brickwork 
or other fire-resisting substance. In some forms of water-tube 






Fig. 



1. — Adamson 
Joint. 



boiler the fire is entirely surrounded by water-tubes and the 
casing is in no part exposed to the direct action of the fire. In 
" tank " boilers generally no difficulty is experienced in keeping 
all the heating surfaces in close contact with water, but in 
" water-tube " boilers special provision has to be made in the 
design for maintaining the circulation of water through the 
tubes. (For " flash " boilers see Motor Vehicles, and for 
domestic hot-water boilers Heating.) 

Tank Boilers. — Of large stationary boilers the forms most 
commonly used are those known as the " Lancashire " boiler, and 
its modification the " Galloway " boiler. These boilers 
are made from 26 to 30 ft. long, with diameters from 6| to Lanca- 

8 ft., and have two cylindrical furnace flues which in the shire. 
"Lancashire " boiler extend for its whole length (see fig. 3). The work- 
ing pressure is about 60 lb per sq. in. in the older boilers, from 
100 lb to 120 lb per sq. in. in those supplying steam to com- 
pound engines, and from 150 to 170 ft where triple expansion 
engines are used. In some cases they have been constructed for a 
pressure of 200 lb per sq. in. The furnace flues are usually 
made in sections from 3 to 3I ft. long. Each section consists of one 
plate bent into a cylindrical form, the longitudinal joint being 
welded, and is flanged at both ends, the 
various pieces being joined together by an 
" Adamson " joint (fig. 1). It will be seen 
that these joints do not expose either rivets 
or double thickness of plate to the action of 
the fire; they further serve as stiffening 
rings to prevent collapse of the flue. In 
most of these boilers the heating surface is 
increased by fitting in the furnace flues a 
number of " Galloway " tubes. These are 
conical tubes, made with a flange at each end, by means of which 
they are connected to the furnace plate. They are so proportioned 
that the diameter of the large end of the tube is slightly greater 
than that of the flange of the small end; this enables them to be 
readily removed and replaced if necessary. These tubes not only 
add to the heating surface, but they stiffen the flue, promote circula- 
tion of the water in the boiler, and by mixing up the flue gases 
improve the evaporative efficiency. 

In the " Galloway " boiler the two furnaces extend only for about 

9 or 10 ft. into the boiler, and lead into a large chamber or flue in 
which a number of " Galloway " tubes are fitted, and which extends 
from the furnace end to the end of the boiler. A cross section of this 
flue showing the distribution of the Galloway tubes is shown in 
fig. 2. When boilers less than about 6J ft. in diameter are needed, 
a somewhat similar type to the Lancashire boiler is used containing 
only one furnace. This is called a " Cornish " boiler. 

In all three types of boiler the brickwork is constructed to form 
one central flue passing along the bottom of the boiler and two side 
flues extending up the 
side nearly to the water- 
level. A cross section 
of the brickwork is 
shown in fig. 2. The 
usual arrangement is for 
the flue gases to be 
divided as they leave 
the internal flue; one- 
half returns along each 
side flue to the front of 
the boiler, and the whole 
then passes downwards 
into the central flue, 
travelling under the 
bottom of the boiler 
until the gases again 
reach the back end, 
where they pass into 
the chimney. In a few 
cases the arrangement 
is reversed, the gases 
first passing along the 
bottom flue and return- 
ing along the side flues. 
This latter arrangement, 
whilst promoting a more rapid circulation of water, has the dis- 
advantage of requiring two dampers, and it is not suitable for those 
cases in which heavy deposits form on the bottoms of the boilers. 

Where floor space is limited and also for small installations, other 
forms of cylindrical boilers are used, most of them being of the 
vertical type. That most commonly used is the simple Vertical 
vertical boiler, with a plain vertical fire-box, and an internal 
smoke stack traversing the steam space. The fire-box is made slightly 
tapering in diameter, the space between it and the shell being filled 
with water. In all but the small sizes cross tubes are generally fitted. 
These are made about 9 in. in diameter of f-in. plate flanged at 
each end to enable them to be riveted to the fire-box plates. They are 
usually fitted with a slight inclination to facilitate water circulation. 




*wmm. 



m^mm* 



Fig. 2.- 



-Galloway Boiler : Section beyond 
the Bridge. 



14-2 



BOILER 



and a hand-hole closed by a suitable door is provided in the outer 
shell opposite to each tube for cleaning purposes. A boiler of 
this kind is illustrated in fig. 4. This form is often used on board 
ship for auxiliary purposes. Where more heating surface is required 
than can be obtained in the cross-tube boiler other types of vertical 



made from plates originally rolled of a uniform thickness, made 
into a cylindrical form with a welded longitudinal joint and then 
corrugated, the only difference between them being in the shapes of 
the corrugations. In the other three types the plates from which the 
furnaces are made are rolled with ribs or thickened portions at 




Fig. 3. — Lancashire Boiler (Messrs Tinker, Ltd.). 



boiler are employed. For instance, in the " Tyne " boiler (fig. 5) 
the furnace is hemispherical, and the products of combustion are led 
into an upper combustion chamber traversed by four or more 
inclined water-tubes of about 9 in. diameter and by several vertical 
water-tubes of less diameter. In the " Victoria ' boiler made by 
Messrs Clarke, Chapman & Co., and illustrated in fig. 6 , the furnace 
is hemispherical ; the furnace gases are led to an internal combustion 
chamber, and thence through numerous horizontal smoke-tubes 
to a smoke-box placed on the side of the boiler. In the somewhat 
similar boiler known as the " Cochran," the combustion chamber is 
made with a " dry " back. Instead of a water space at thebackof 
the chamber, doors lined with firebrick are fitted. These give easy 

access to the tube ends. 

The cylindrical multitubular re- 
„ . turn tube boiler is in 

almost universal use in 
merchant steamers. It is made in 
various sizes ranging up to 17 ft. 
in diameter, the usual working 
pressure being from 160 to 200 lb 
per sq. in., although in some 
few cases pressures of 265 lb per 
sq. in. are in use. These boilers 
are of two types, double- . and 
single - ended. In single - ended 
boilers, which are those most gener- 
ally used, the furnaces are fitted at 
one end only and vary in number 
from one in the smallest boiler 
to four in the largest. Three fur- 
naces are the most usual practice. 
Each furnace generally has its own 
separate combustion chamber. In 
four furnace boilers, however, one 
chamber is sometimes made com- 
mon to the two middle furnaces, and 
sometimes one chamber is fitted to 
each pair of side furnaces. In 
double-ended boilers furnaces are 

' 1 fitted at each end. In some cases 

. each furnace has a separate com- 

- bustion chamber, but more usually 

one chamber is made to serve for 
two furnaces, one at each end of 
the boiler. The two types of boilers 
are shown in figs. 7 and 8, which 
illustrate boilers made by Messrs 
D. Rowan & Co. of Glasgow, and 
which may be taken as representing 
good modern practice. The fur- 
naces used in the smaller sizes are 
often of the plain cylindrical type, 
the thickness of plate varying from 
J in. up to f in. according to the 
diameter of the furnace and the 
working pressure. Occasionally 
furnaces with " Adamson " joints 
-Simple Vertical Boiler. s ; m ii ar t o those used in Lancashire 
boilers are employed, but for large 
furnaces and for high pressures corrugated or ribbed furnaces 
are usually adopted. Sketches of the sections of these are shown 
in fig. 9. The sections of the Morison, Fox and Deighton types are 




Fig. 4.- 



distances of 9 in. These furnaces are stronger to resist collapse 
than plain furnaces of the same thickness, and accommodate them- 
selves more readily to changes of temperature. 

There are two distinct types of connexion between the furnaces 
and the combustion chambers. In one, shown in fig. 8, the furnace 
is flanged at the crown portion for riveting to the tube plate, and 
the lower part of the furnace is riveted to the " wrapper " or side 
plate of the combustion chamber. In the other type, shown in fig. 7, 
and known generally as the " Gourlay back end, "the end of the 
furnace is contracted into an oval conical form, and is then flanged 
outwards round the whole of its circumference. The tube plate is 
made to extend to the bottom of the combustion chamber, and the 







Fig. 5. — Vertical Boiler with Water-tubes (the " Tyne," by 
Messrs Clarke, Chapman & Co.). 

furnace is riveted to the tube plate. The advantage of the Gourlay 
back end is that in case of accident to the furnace it can be removed 
from the boiler and be replaced by one of the same design without 
disturbing the end plates, which is not possible with the other design. 



BOILER 



H3 



The Gourlay back end, however, is not so stiff as the other, and more 
longitudinal stays are required in the boiler. 

The flat sides and backs of the combustion chambers are stayed 
either to one another or to the shell of the boiler by numerous screw 





|«oo*ooo*oo*oo* 
oooooooooooooo 
oooooooooooooo 
•OOIOOIOOO*OOI 
oooooooooooooo 
oooooooooooooo 
•oo«ooo»oo»oo« 
oooooooooooooo 
oooooooooooooo 
lOOIOOtOOOtOO* 
oooooooooooooo 
oo oooooooooooo 
• oo* 6oo*o OIOOI 



© 




© 



© 





if \\ 

Fig. 6. — Vertical Boiler with internal combustion chamber (the 
" Victoria," by Messrs Clarke, Chapman & Co.). 

stays which are screwed through the two plates they connect, and 
which are nearly always fitted with nuts inside the combustion 
chambers. The tops of the chambers are usually stayed by strong 
girders resting upon the tube plates and chamber back plates. In 



plates. The end plates of the boiler in the steam space and below 
the combustion chambers are stayed by longitudinal stays passing 
through the whole length of the boiler and secured by double nuts 
at each end. The tube plates are strengthened by stay tubes screwed 
into them. 

Where natural or chimney draught is used the tubes are generally 
made 3 or 3J in. outside diameter and are rarely more than 7 ft. 
long, but where " forced " draught is employed they are usually 
made 2j in. diameter and 8 to 8| ft. long. A clear space of if in. 
between the tubes is almost always arranged for, irrespective of size 
of tubes. 

Stay tubes are screwed at both ends, the threads of the two ends 
being continuous so that they can be screwed into both tube plates ; 




Loco- 
motive. 




Fig. 7. — Single-ended Marine Boiler, 
a few cases, however, they are stayed by vertical stays attached to 
T bars riveted to the boiler shell. A few boilers are made in which 
the chamber tops are strengthened by heavy transverse girder 



Fig. 8. — Double-ended Marine Boiler. 

occasionally nuts are fitted to the front ends. The stay tubes are 
expanded into the plates and then beaded over. 

The locomotive boiler consists of a cylindrical barrel attached to 
a portion containing the fire-box, which is nearly rectangular both 
in horizontal and vertical section. The fire-box sides are 
stayed to the fire-box shell by numerous stays about 
I in. in diameter, usually pitched 4 in. apart both vertically 
and horizontally. The top of the fire-box in small boilers is stayed 
by means of girder stays running longitudinally and supported at 
the ends upon the tube plate and the opposite fire-box plate. In 
some boilers the girders are partly supported by slings from the 
crown of the boiler. In larger boilers the crown of the boiler above 
the fire-box is made flat and the fire-box crown is supported by 
vertical stays connecting it with the shell crown. Provision is 

generally made for the expansion 
of the tube plate, which is of 
copper, by allowing the two or 
rig three cross rows of stays nearest 
^ the tube plate to have freedom 
* of motion upwards but not down- 
5 3 wards. The ordinary tubes are 
usually if in. diameter. The fire- 
Jj 3 bars are generally, though not 
always, made to slope down- 
wards away from the fire door, 
and just below the lowest tubes 
a fire-bridge or baffle is fitted, 
extending about half-way from 
the tube plate to the fire-door 
side of the fire-box. In some 
cases water-tubes are fitted, ex- 
tending right across the fire-box. 
In a boiler for the London & 
South- Western Railway Co., hav- 
ing a grate area of 31 5 sq. ft. and 
a total heating surface of 2727 sq. 
ft., there are 112 water-tubes 
each 2 1 in. diameter. These are 
arranged in two clusters, each 
containing 56, one set being 
placed above the fire-bridge, and 
the other set nearer the fire- 
door end of the boiler. The 
water-tubes are of seamless steel, 
fire-box side plates. In way 
side plates are supported by 



and are expanded into the 

of these tubes the outer shell 

stay bars passing right through the water-tubes. The usual 



144 



BOILER 



pressure of locomotive boilers is about 175 lb to 200 lb per 
sq. in. 

A good example of an express locomotive boiler is shown in fig. 10. 
In this case the grate area is 30.9 sq. ft. and the heating surface 




Morison Type. 



«— 6'--* 



Fox Type. 



Purves Type. 



Deighton Type. 



Fig. 9. 



Brown's Arched and 
Ribbed Type. 



Brown's Cambered 
Section. 



2500 sq. ft. The barrel is 5 ft. 6 in. diameter, 16 ft. long between 
tube plates. The fire-box crown is stayed by vertical stays extending 
to the shell crown, except for the three rows of stays nearest the tube 
plates. These are supported by cross girders resting upon brackets 
secured to the outer shell. 



usual pressure is 180 ft). Like all water-tube boilers, they require to 
be frequently cleaned if impure feed-water is used, but the straight- 
ness of their tubes enables their condition to be ascertained at any 
time when the boiler is out of use, and any accumulation of scale to 
be removed. The superheaters, which are frequently fitted, consist 
of two cross-boxes or headers placed transversely under the cylin- 
drical drum and connected by numerous C shaped tubes. They 
are situated between the tubes and the steam-chest, and are exposed 
to the heat of the furnace gases after their first passage across the 
tubes. The steam is taken by an internal pipe passing through the 
bottom of the drum into the upper cross-box, then through the C 
tubes into the lower box, and thence to the steam pipe. When steam 
is being raised, the superheater is flooded with water, which is drained 
out through a blow-off pipe before communication is opened with 
the steam-pipe. In large boilers of this type, two steam-chests are 
placed side by side connected together by two cross steam pipes and 
by the mud drum. Each, however, has its own separate feed supply. 
The largest boiler made has two steam chests 4J ft. diameter by 
25J ft. long a grate surface of 85 sq. ft., and a total heating surface 
of 6182 sq. ft. 

Another type of water-tube boiler in use for stationary purposes 
is the " Stirling " (fig. 12). This boiler consists of four or. five 
horizontal drums, of which the three upper form the Stirling. 
steam-space, and the one or two lower contain water. 
The lower drums, where two are fitted, are connected to each other 
at about the middle of their height by horizontal tubes, and to the 
upper drums by numerous nearly vertical tubes which form the 
major portion of the heating surfaces. The central upper drum is 
at a slightly higher level than the others, and communicates with 
that nearest the back of the boiler by a set of curved tubes entirely 
above the water-level, and with the front drum by two sets — the 
upper one being above and the lower below the water-level. The 
whole boiler is enclosed in brickwork, into which the supporting 




Babcock 
and 
Wilcox 
station- 
ary. 



Fig. 10. — Express Locomotive Boiler, with widened fire-box (Great Northern Railway, England) 



Water-Tube Boilers. — The " Babcock & Wilcox " boiler, as fitted 
for land purposes, and illustrated in fig. 1 1 , consists of a horizontal 
cylinder forming a steam chest, having dished ends and 
two specially constructed cross-boxes riveted to the 
bottom. Under the cylinder is placed a sloping nest of 
tubes, under the upper end of which is the fire. The sides 
and back of the boiler are enclosed in brickwork up to 
the height of the centre of the horizontal cylinder and the 
front is fitted with an iron casing lined with brick at the lower part. 
Suitable brickwork baffles are arranged between the tubes them- 
selves, and between the nests of tubes and the cylinder, to ensure a 
proper circulation of the products of combustion, which are made to 
pass between the tubes three times. The nest of tubes consists of 
several separate elements, each formed by a front and back header 
made of wrought steel of sinuous form connected by a number of 
tubes. The upper ends of the front headers are connected by 
short tubes to the front cross-box of the horizontal cylinder, the 
lower ends being closed. The upper ends of the back headers are 
connected by longer pipes to the back cross-box, and their lower 
ends by sfcort pipes to a horizontal mud drum to which a blow-off 
cock and pipe are attached. The headers are furnished with holes 
on two opposite sides; those on one side form the means of con- 
nexion between the headers and tubes, and the others allow access 
for fixing the tubes in position and cleaning. The outer holes are 
oval, and closed by special fittings shown in fig. 18, the watertight- 
ness of the joints being secured by the outer cover plates. The holes 
being oval, the inside fitting can be placed in position from outside, 
and it is so made as to cover the opening and prevent any great 
outrush of steam or water should the bolt break. Any desired 
working pressure can be provided for in these boilers; in some 
special cases it rises as high as 500 lb per sq. in., but a more 



columns and girders are 
built. Brickwork baffles 
compel the furnace gases to 
take specified courses among 
the tubes. It will be seen 
that the space between the 
boiler front and the tubes 
form a large combustion 
chamber into which all the 
furnace gases must pass 
before they enter the spaces 
between the tubes; in this 
chamber a baffle-bridge is 
sometimes built. Another 
chamber is formed between 
The feed-water enters the 



the first and second sets of tubes. 

back upper drum, and must pass 
down the third set of tubes into the lower drum before it 
reaches the other parts of the boiler. Thus the coldest water is 
always where the temperature of the furnace gases is lowest ; and 
as the current through the lower drum is slight, the solid matters 
separated from the feed-water while its temperature is being raised 
have an opportunity of settling to the bottom of this drum, where 
the heating is not great and where therefore their presence will not 
be injurious. When superheaters are required, they are made of 
two drums connected by numerous small tubes, and are somewhat 
similar in construction to the boiler proper. The superheater is 
placed between the first and second sets of tubes, where it is 
exposed to the furnace gases before too much heat has been taken 
from them. Arrangements are provided for flooding the superheater 
while steam is being raised, and for draining it before the steam is 
passed through it. 



BOILER 



H5 



A somewhat similar boiler is made by Messrs. Clarke, Chapman & 
Co., and is known as the "Woodeson" boiler (fig. 13). It consists 
of three upper drums placed side by side connected 
Woodeson. t g e t ner by numerous short tubes, some above and some 
below the water-level, and of three smaller lower drums also con- 
nected by short cross tubes. The upper and lower drums are 




Fig. 11. — Babcock & Wilcox Water-tube Boiler fitted with Superheaters. 



connected by numerous nearly vertical straight tubes. The whole is 
enclosed in firebrick casing. The design permits of the insides 
of all the tubes being readily inspected, and also of any tube 
being taken out and renewed without displacing any other part 
of the boiler. 

The earliest form of water-tube boiler which came into general use 
in the British navy is the Belleville. Two views of this boiler are 
Belleville, shown in fig. 14. It is composed of two parts, the boiler 
proper and the " economizer." Each of these consists of 
several sets of elements placed side by side; those of the boiler 
proper are situated immediately over the fire, and those of the 



Safety y«'»e'E??'' , ' , Va,! " 



and except in the case of the upper and lower ones at the front of the 
boiler, each connects the upper end of one tube with the lower end 
of the next tube of the element. The boxes at the back of the 
boiler are all close-ended, but those at the front are provided with 
a small oval hole, opposite to each tube end, closed by an internal 
door with bolt and cross-bar; the purpose of these openings is to 
permit the inside of the tubes to be examined and 
cleaned. The lower front box of each element of the 
boiler proper is connected to a horizontal cross-tube of 
square section, called a "feed-collector," which extends 
the whole width of the boiler. When the boiler is not in 
use, any element can be readily disconnected and a spare 
one inserted. The lower part of the steam-chest is 
connected to the feed-collector by vertical pipes at each 
end of the boiler, and prolongations of these pipes below 
the level of the feed-collector form closed pockets for the 
collection of sediment. The tubes are made of seamless 
steel. They are generally about 4.3 in. in external 
diameter; the two lower rows are f in. thick, the next two 
rows f t in., and the remainder about £ in. The construc- 
tion of the economizer is similar to that of the boiler proper, 
but the tubes are shorter and smaller, being generally 
about 2 J in. in diameter. The lower boxes of the econo- 
mizer elements are connected to a horizontal feed pipe 
which is kept supplied with water by a feed-pumping 
engine, and the upper boxes are connected to another 
horizontal pipe from which the heated feed-water is taken 
into the steam-chest. Both the boiler proper and the 
economizer are enclosed in a casing which is formed of 
two thicknesses of thin iion separated by non-conducting 
material and lined with firebrick at the part between the 
fire-bar level and the lower rows of tubes. Along the front 
of the boiler, above the level of the firing-doors, there is 
a small tube having several nozzles directed across the 
fire-grate, and supplied with compressed air at a pres- 
sure of about 10 lb per sq. in. In this way not only 
is additional air supplied, but the gases issuing from 




12. — Stirling Water-tube Boiler. 



economizer in the uptake above the boiler, the intervening space 
being designed to act as a combustion chamber. Each element is 
constructed of a number of straight tubes connected at their ends 
by means of screwed joints to junction-boxes which are made of 
malleable cast iron. These are arranged vertically over one another, 




Fig. 13. — Woodeson Boiler (Messrs Clarke, Chapman & Co.). 

the fire are stirred up and mixed, their combustion being 
thereby facilitated before they pass into the spaces between the 
tubes. A similar air-tube is provided for the space between the 



146 



BOILER 



boiler proper and the economizer. Any water suspended in the 
steam is separated in a special separator fitted in the main steam- 
pipe, and the steam is further dried by passing through a reducing- 
valve, which ensures a steady pressure on the engine side of the 
valve, notwithstanding fluctuations of pressure in the boiler. The 
boiler pressure is usually maintained at about 50 lb per sq. 
in. in excess of that at which the engines are working, the excess 
forming a reservoir of energy to provide for irregular firing or 
feeding. 

Another type of large-tube boiler which has been used in the 
British and in other navies is the " Niclausse," shown in fig. 15. 

Nlclausse. ^ ' s a ' so * n use on ' ant ^ ' n severa ' electric-light installa- 
tions. It consists of ; a horizontal steam-chest under 
which is placed a number of elements arranged side by side 
over the fire, the whole being enclosed in an iron casing lined 
with firebrick where it is exposed to the direct action of the fire. 
Each element consists of a header of rectangular cross-section, 
fitted with two rows of inclined close-ended tubes, which slope 
downwards towards the back of the boiler with an inclination of 
6° to the horizontal. The headers are usually of malleable cast 
iron with diaphragms cast in them, but sometimes steel has been 
employed, the bottoms being closed by a riveted steel plate, and 
the diaphragms being made of the same material. The headers are 




bolted to socket-pieces which are riveted to the bottom of the 
steam-chest, so that any element may be easily removed. The 
tube-holes are accurately bored, at an angle to suit the inclination 
of the tubes, through both the front and back of the headers and 
through the diaphragm, those in the header walls being slightly 
conical. The tubes themselves, which are made of seamless steel, 
are of peculiar construction. The lower or back ends are reduced in 
diameter and screwed and fitted with cap-nuts which entirely close 
them. The front ends are thickened by being upset, and the parts 
where they fit into the header walls and in the diaphragm are care- 
fully turned to gauge. The upper and lower parts of the tubes 
between these fitting portions are then cut away, the side portions 
only being retained, and the end is termed a " lanterne." A small 
water-circulating tube of thin sheet steel, fitted inside each generating 
tube, is open at the lower end, and at the other is secured to a 
smaller " lanterne," which, however, only extends from the front 
of the header to the diaphragm. This smaller " lanterne " closes 
the front end of the generating tube. The whole arrangement is 
such that when the tubes are in place only the small inner circulating 
tubes communicate with the space between the front of the header 
and the diaphragm, while the annular spaces in the generating tubes 
around the water-circulating tubes communicate only with the space 
between the diaphragm and the back of the header. The steam 
formed in the tubes escapes from them into this back space, through 
which it rises into the steam-chest, whilst the space in the front 
of the header always contains a down-current of water supplying 
the inner circulating tubes. The tubes are maintained in position 
by cross-bars, each secured by one stud-bolt screwed into the header 



front wall, and each serving to fix two tubes. The products of com- 
bustion ascend directly from the fire amongst the tubes, and the 
combustion is rendered more complete by the introduction of jets 
of high-pressure air immediately over the fire, as in the " Belleville " 
boiler. 

The " Diirr " boiler, in use in several vessels in the German 
navy, and in a few vessels of the British navy, in some respects 
resembles the " Niclausse." The separate headers of Durr 

the latter, however, are replaced by one large water- 
chamber formed of steel plates with welded joints, and instead of 
the tubes being secured by " lanternes " to two plates they are 
secured to the inner plate only by, conical joints, the, holes in the 
outer plate being closed by small round doors fitted from the inside. 
In fixing the tubes each is separately forced into its position by 
means of a small portable hydraulic jack. The lower ends of the 
caps are closed by cap-nuts made of a special heat-resisting alloy of 
copper and manganese. Circulation is provided for by a diaphragm 
in the water-chamber and by inner tubes as in the Niclausse boiler. 
Baffle plates are fitted amongst the tubes to ensure a circulation 
of the furnace gases amongst them. Above the main set of tubes 
is a smaller set arranged horizontally, and connected directly to the 
steam receiver. These are fitted with internal tubes, and an internal 
diaphragm is provided so that steam from the chest circulates through 
tfiese tubes on its way to the stop-valves. This 
supplementary set of tubes is intended to serve 
as a superheater, but the amount of surface is 
not sufficient to obtain more than a very small 
amount of superheat. 

The Yarrow boiler (fig. 16) is largely in use in 
the British and also in several other navies. It 
consists of a large cylindrical steam Yarrow. 
chest and two lower water-chambers, 
connected by numerous straight tubes. In the 
boilers for large vessels all the tubes are of i| in. 
external diameter, but in the large express boilers 
the two rows nearest to the fire on each side are 
of 1 J in. and the remainder of 1 in. diameter. 
They are arranged with their centres forming 
equilateral triangles, and are spaced so that 
they can be cleaned externally both from the 
front of the boiler and also cross-ways in two 
directions. In some boilers the lower part of 
the steam-chest is connected with the water- 
chambers by large pipes outside the casings with 
the view of improving the circulation. 

The largest size of single-ended large tube 
boiler in use has a" steam drum 4 ft. 2 in. 
diameter, a grate area of 73-5 sq. ft. and 3750 
sq. ft. of heating surface, but much larger double- 
ended boilers have been made, these being fired 
from both ends. 

In most of the boilers made, access to the 
inside is obtained by manholes in the steam- 
chest and water-chamber ends, but in the 
smaller sizes fitted in torpedo boats the water- 
chambers are too small for this, and they are 
each arranged in two parts connected by a bolted 
joint, which makes all the tube ends accessible. 

The Babcock & Wilcox marine boiler (fig. 17) is 
much used in the American and British navies, and 
it has also been used in several yachts and merchant 
steamers. It consists of a horizontal cylindrical 
steam-chest placed transversely over a group of elements, beneath 
which is the fire, the whole being enclosed in an iron casing lined 
with firebrick. Each element consists of a front and back header 
connected by numerous water-tubes which have a considerable 
inclination to facilitate the circulation. The upper ends of the front 
headers are situated immediately under the steam-chest and are 
connected to it by short nipples; by a similar means they are 
connected at the bottom to a pipe of square section which extends 
across the width of the boiler. Additional connexions are made by 
nearly vertical tubes between this cross-pipe and the bottom of the 
steam-chest. The back headers are each connected at their upper 
ends by means of two long horizontal tubes with the steam-chest, 
the bottom ends of the headers being closed. The headers are made 
of wrought steel, and except the outer pairs, which are flat on the 
outer portions, they are sinuous on both sides, the sinuosities fitting 
into one another. The tubes are of two sizes, the two lower rows 
and the "return tubes between the back headers and steam-chest 
being 3}! in. outside diameter, and the remaining tubes \\\ in. 
The small tubes are arranged in groups of two or four to nearly all 
of the sinuosities of the headers, the purpose of this arrangement 
being to give opportunities for the furnace gases to become well 
mixed together, and to ensure their contact with the heating sur- 
faces. Access for securing the tubes in the headers is provided by a 
hole formed on the other side of the header opposite each of the tubes, 
where they are grouped in fours, and by one larger hole opposite 
each group of two tubes. The larger holes are oval, and are closed 
by fittings similar to those used in the land boiler (fig. 18). The 
smaller holes are conical, with the larger diameter on the inside, 



BOILER 



147 



and are closed by special conical fittings: the conical portion and 
bolt are one forging, and the nut is close-ended. In case of the 
breakage of the bolt, the fitting would be retained in place by the 
steam-pressure. A set of firebrick baffles is placed so as to cover 
rather more than half of the spaces between the upper of the two 
bottom rows of large tubes, and another set of baffles covers about 
two-thirds of the spaces between the upper small tubes. Vertical 
baffles are also built between the smaller tubes, as shown in the 
longitudinal section. These baffles compel the products of com- 
bustion to circulate among the tubes in the direction shown by the 
arrows. Experience has shown that this arrangement gives a better 
evaporative efficiency than where the furnace gases are allowed to 
pass unbaffled straight up between the tubes. The boilers are 
usually fitted in pairs placed back to back, and one side of each is 
always made accessible. On this side the casing is provided with 




Fig. 15. — Niclausse Boiler — transverse section. 

numerous small doors, through any of which a steam jet can be 
inserted for the purpose of sweeping the tubes. 

A class of water-tube boilers largely in use in torpedo-boat 
destroyers and cruisers, where the maximum of power is required 
in proportion to the total weight of the installation, is 
h iki* 33 generally known as express boilers. In these the tubes 
boilers. arg ma j e f sraa ]i er diameter than those used in the 
boilers already described, and the boilers are designed to admit of a 
high rate of combustion of fuel obtained by a high degree of _" forced 
draught." Of these express boilers the Yarrow is of similar con- 
struction to the large tube Yarrow boiler already described, with 
the exception that the tubes are smaller in diameter and much more 
closely arranged. 

In the Normand boiler (fig. 19) there are three chambers, as in the 
Yarrow, connected together by a large number of bent tubes which 
Normand f° rm tne heating surface, and also connected at each end 
by large outside circulating tubes. The two outer rows 
of heating tubes on each side are arranged to touch one another for 
nearly their whole length so as to form a " water-wall " for the 
protection of the outer casing. They enter the steam-chest at about 



the water-level. The two inner rows of tubes, which are bent to the 
form shown in the figure, also form a water-wall for the larger portion 
of the length of the boiler, and thus compel the products of com- 
bustion to pass in a definite course amongst all the tubes. In the 
Blechynden and White-Foster boilers there are also three chambers 
connected by bent tubes, the curvature being so arranged that in the 
former boiler any of the tubes can be taken out of the boiler through 
small doors provided in the upper part of the steam-chest, and in 
the White-Foster boiler they can be taken out through the manhole 
in the end of the steam-chest. 

In the Reed boiler the tubes are longer and more curved than in 
the Normand boiler, and there are no " water-walls," the products 
of combustion passing from the fire-grate amongst all _ . 

the tubes direct to the chimney. The special feature of ««*«• 

the boiler is that each tube, instead of being expanded into the 
tube plate, is fitted at each end with specially 
designed screw and nut connexions to enable 
them to be quickly taken out and replaced if 
necessary. At their lower ends the tubes are 
reduced in diameter to enable smaller chambers 
to be used than would otherwise be necessary. 
Provision is made, for access to the lower tube 
ends by means of numerous doors in the water- 
chambers. Access to the top ends is obtained in 
the steam-chest. 

Messrs John I. Thornycroft & Co. make 
two forms of express boiler. One called the 
Thornycroft boiler consists of three Thorav 
chambers connected by tubes which „ 

are straight for the major portion of 
their length but bent at each end to enable 
them to enter the steam- and water-chambers 
normally. The outer rows of tubes form " water- 
walls " at their lower parts, but permit the 
passage of the gases between them at their 
upper ends. Similarly the inner rows form 
" water-walls " at their upper parts, but are 
open at the lower ends. The products of 
combustion are thus compelled to pass over the 
whole of the heating surfaces. The fire-rows of 
tubes in this boiler are made if in. outside 
diameter and the remainder are made if in. 
diameter. Large outside circulating pipes are 
provided at the front end of the boiler. 

In the other type of boiler, known as the 
Thornycroft-Schulz boiler (fig. 20), there are four 
chambers, and thefire-grateis arranged Thorn 
in two separate portions. The two croft- 3 " 
outermost rows of tubes on each side schulz. 
are arranged to form water-walls at 
their lower part, and permit the gases to pass 
between them at the upper part. The rows 
nearest the fires are arranged similarly to those 
in the Thornycroft boiler. Circulation in the 
outer sets of tubes is arranged for by outer cir- 
culating pipes of large diameter connecting the 
steam- and water-chambers. For the middle 
water-chamber several nearly vertical down- 
comers are provided in the centre of the boiler. 
Boilers of this type are extensively used in the 
British and German navies. 

Material of Boilers. — In ordinary land 
boilers and in marine boilers of all types the 
plates and stays are almost invariably made 
of mild steel. For the shell plates and for 
long stays, a quality having a tensile strength 
ranging from 28 to 32 tons per sq. in. is usually 
employed, and for furnaces and flues, for plates 
which have to be flanged, and for short-screwed stays, a somewhat 
softer steel with a strength ranging from 26 to 30 tons per sq. in. 
is used. The tubes of ordinary land and marine boilers are 
usually made of lap-welded wrought iron. In water-tube boilers 
for naval purposes seamless steel tubes are invariably used. In 
locomotive boilers the shells are generally of mild steel, the 
fire-box plates of copper (in America of steel), the fire-box side 
stays of copper or special bronze, and other stays of steel. The 
tubes are usually of brass with a composition either of two parts 
by weight of copper to one of zinc or 70% copper, 30% zinc; 
sometimes, however, copper tubes and occasionally steel tubes 
are used. Where water tubes are used they are made of seamless 
steel. 

Boiler Accessories. — All boilers must be provided with certain 
mountings and accessories. The water-level in them must be 
kept above the highest part of the heating surfaces. In some 



148 



BOILER 



land boilers, and in some of the water-tube boilers used on 
shipboard, the feeding is automatically regulated by mechanism 
actuated by a float, but in these cases means of regulating the 
feed-supply by hand are also provided. In most boilers hand 
regulation only is relied upon. The actual level of water in the 
boiler is ascertained by a glass water-gauge, which consists of a 
glass tube and three cocks, two communicating directly with the 
boiler, one above and one below the desired water-level, and the 
third acting as a blow-out for cleaning the gauge and for testing 
its working. Three small try-cocks are also fitted, one just at, 
one above, and one below the proper water-level. The feeding 
of the boiler is sometimes performed by a pump driven from the 
main engine, sometimes by an independent steam-pump, and 
sometimes by means of an injector. The feed- water ft admitted 
by a " check-valve," the lift of which is regulated by a screw and 




Fig. 16. — Yarrow Water-tube Boiler. 

hand-wheel, and which when the feed-pump is not working is 
kept on its seating by the boiler pressure. 

Every boiler is in addition supplied with a steam-gauge to 
indicate the steam-pressure, with a stop-valve for regulating the 
admission of steam to the steam-pipes, and with one or two safety- 
valves. These last in stationary boilers usually consist of valves 
kept in their seats against the steam-pressure in the boiler by 
levers carrying weights, but in marine and locomotive boilers the 
valves are kept closed by means of steel springs. One at least of 
the safety-valves is fitted with easing gear by which it can be 
lifted at any time for blowing off the steam. Blow-out cocks are 
fitted for emptying the boiler. 

Openings must always be made in boilers for access for cleaning 
and examination. When these are large enough to allow a man 
to enter the boiler they are termed man-holes. They are usually 
made oval, as this shape permits the doors by which they are 
closed to be placed on the inside so that the pressure upon them 
tends to keep them shut. The doors are held in place by one or 



two bolts, secured to cross-bars or " dogs " outside the boiler. 
It is important in making these doors that they should fit the 
holes so accurately that the jointing material cannot be forced 
out of its proper position. In the few cases where doors are 
fitted outside a boiler, so that the steam-pressure tends to 
open them, they are always secured by several bolts so 
that the breakage of one bolt will not allow the door to be 
forced off. 

Waler-softening. — Seeing that the impurities contained in the 
feed-water are not evaporated in the steam they become con- 
centrated in the boiler water. Most of them become precipitated 
in the boiler either in the form of mud or else as scale which forms 
on the heating surfaces. Some of the mud and such of the 
impurities as remain soluble may be removed by means of the 
blow-off cocks, but the scale can only be removed by periodical 
cleaning. Incrustations on the heat- 
ing surface not only lessen the 
efficiency of the boiler by obstructing 
the transmission of heat through the 
plates and tubes, but if excessive they 
become a source of considerable danger 
by permitting the plates to become over- 
heated and thereby weakened. When 
the feed- water is very impure, there- 
fore, the boilers used are those which 
permit of very easy cleaning, such as 
the Lancashire, Galloway and Cornish 
types, to the exclusion of multitubular 
or water-tube boilers in which thorough 
cleaning is more difficult. In other 
cases, however, the feed-water is puri- 
fied by passing it through some type 
of " softener " before pumping it into 
the boiler. Most of the impurities in 
ordinary feed-water are either lime or 
magnesia salts, which although soluble 
in cold water are much less so in hot 
water. In the " softener " measured 
quantities of feed-water and of some 
chemical reagents are thoroughly 
mixed and at the same time the tem- 
perature is raised either by exhaust 
steam or by other means. Most of 
the impurity is thus precipitated, and 
some of the remainder is converted 
into more soluble salts which remain 
in solution in the boiler until blown 
out. The water is filtered before being 
pumped into the boiler. The quantity 
and kind of chemical employed is 
determined according to the nature 
and amount of the impurity in the 
" hard " feed-water. 

Thermal Storage. — In some cases 
where the work required is very intermittent, " thermal storage " 
is employed. Above the boiler a large cylindrical storage vessel 
is placed, having sufficient capacity to contain enough feed-water 
to supply the boiler throughout the periods when the maximum 
output is required. The upper part of this storage vessel is 
always in free communication with the steam space of the boiler, 
and from the lower part of it the feed- water may be run into the 
boiler when required. The feed- water is delivered into the upper 
part of the vessel, and arrangements are made by which before it 
falls to the bottom of the chamber it runs over very extended sur- 
faces exposed to the steam, its temperature being thus raised to 
that of the steam. At times when less than the normal supply 
of steam is required for the engine more than the average quantity 
of feed-water is pumped into the chamber, and the excess accumu- 
lates with its temperature raised to the evaporation point. 
When an extra supply of steam is required, the feed-pump is 
stopped and the boiler is fed with the hot water stored in the 
chamber. Besides the " storage " effect, it is found that many 



BOILER 



49 



of the impurities of the feed become deposited in the chamber, 
where they are comparatively harmless and from which they are 
readily removable. 

Oil Separators. — When the steam from the engines is con- 
densed and used as feed-water, as is the case with marine boilers, 
much difficulty is often experienced with the oil which passes 



metallic contact between the zinc and the boiler-plate. The 
function of the zinc is to set up galvanic action; it plays the 
part of the negative metal, and is dissolved while the metal of 
the shell is kept electro-positive. Care must always be taken 
that the fragments which break off the zinc as it wastes away 
cannot fall upon the heating surfaces of the boiler. 





Longitudinal section. 
Fig. 17.- 



Section at AB — Front elevation. 
-Babcock &' Wilcox Water-tube Boiler (marine type). 



over with the steam. Feed-filters are employed to stop the 
coarser particles of the oil, but some of the oil becomes " emulsi- 
fied " or suspended in the water in such extremely minute 
particles that they pass through the finest filtering materials. 
On the evaporation of the water in the boiler, this oil is left as 
a thin film upon the heating surfaces, and by preventing the 
actual contact of water with the plates has been the cause of 
serious trouble. An attempt has been made to overcome the 
emulsion difficulty by uniformly mixing with the water a small 
quantity of solution of lime. On the water being raised in tem- 
perature the lime is precipitated, and the minute particles 
separated apparently attract the small globules of oil and become 
aggregated in sufficient size to deposit themselves in quiet parts 
of the boiler, whence they can be occasionally removed either 
by blowing out or by cleaning. Much, however, still remains 
Lo be done before the oil difficulty will be thoroughly removed. 

Corrosion. — When chemicals of any kind are used to soften 
or purify feed-water it is essential that neither they nor the 
products they form should have a corrosive effect upon the 
boiler-plates, &c. Much of the corrosion which occasionally 
occurs has been traced to the action of the oxygen of the air 
which enters the boiler in solution in the feed-water, and the 
best practice now provides for the delivery of the feed into the 
boiler at such positions that the air evolved from it as it becomes 
heated passes direct to the steam space without having an 
opportunity of becoming disengaged upon the under-water 
surfaces of the boiler. 

Where corrosion is feared it is usual to fit zinc slabs in the 
water spaces of the boiler. Experience shows that it is better 
to make them of rolled rather than of cast zinc, and to secure 
them on studs which can be kept bright, so as to ensure a direct 



Evaporators. — In marine boilers the waste of water which 
occurs from leakages in the cycle of the evaporation in the boiler, 
use in the engine, condensation in the condenser and return to 
the boiler as feed-water, is made up by fresh water distilled from 
sea-water in " evaporators. " Of these there are many forms 
with different provisions for cleaning the coils, but they are all 
identical in principle. They are fed with sea-water, and means 
are provided for blowing out the brine produced in them when 
some of the water is evaporated. The heat required for the 
evaporation is obtained from live 
steam from the boilers, which is 
admitted into coils of copper pipe. 
The water condensed in these 
coils is returned direct to the feed- 
water, and the steam evaporated 
from the sea-water is led either ^^^. 
into the low-pressure receiver of llllii 
the steam-engine or into the 
condenser. 

Efficiency of Boilers. — The use- 
ful work obtained from any boiler 
depends upon many considera- 
tions. For a high efficiency, that 
is, a large amount of steam 
produced in proportion to the 
amount of fuel consumed, different FlG - 18.— Handhole Fittings, 
conditions have to be fulfilled 

from those required where a large output of steam from a given 
plant is of more importance than economy of fuel. For a high 
efficiency, completeness of combustion of fuel must be combined 
with sufficient heating surface to absorb so much of the heat 




i5° 



BOILER 



produced as will reduce the temperature of the funnel gases 
to nearly that of steam. Completeness of combustion can 
only be obtained by admitting considerably more air to the fire 
than is theoretically necessary fully to oxidize the combustible 
portions of the fuel, and by providing sufficient time and oppor- 
tunity for a thorough mixture of the air and furnace gases to 
take place before the temperature is lowered to that critical 
point below which combustion will not take place. It is gener- 
ally considered that the amount of excess air required is nearly 
equal to that theoretically necessary; experience, however, 
tends to show that much less than this is really required if 
proper means are provided for ensuring an early complete mix- 
ture of the gases. Different means are needed to effect this 
with different kinds of coal, those necessary for properly burning 
Welsh coal being altogether unsuitable for use with North 
Country or Scottish coal. As all the excess air has to be raised 
to the same temperature as that of the really burnt gases, it 
follows that an excess of air passing through the fire lowers the 
temperature in the fire and flues, and therefore lessens the heat 
transmission; and as it leaves the boiler at a high temperature 
it carries off some of the heat produced. A reduction of the 
amount of air, therefore, may, by increasing the fire temperature 



purposes, although " natural " draught is the more common, 
many boiler installations are fitted with " forced " draught 
arrangements. Two distinct systems are used. In that known 
as the " closed stokehold " the stokehold compartment of the 
vessel is so closed that the only exit for air from it is through 
the fires . Air is driven into the stokehold by means of fans 
which are made so that they can maintain an air pressure in the 
stokehold above that of the outside atmosphere. This is the 
system almost universally adopted in war vessels, and it is used 
also in some fast passenger ships. The air pressure usually 
adopted in large vessels is that corresponding to a height of from 
i to 15 in. of water, whilst so much as 4 in. is sometimes used in 
torpedo-boats and similar craft. This is, of course, in addition 
to the chimney-draught due to the height of the funnel. In the 
closed ashpit or Howden system, the stokehold is open, and fans 
drive the air round a number of tubes, situated in the uptake, 
through which the products of combustion pass on their way to 
the chimney. The air thus becomes heated, and part of it is 
then delivered into the ashpit below the fire and part into a 
casing round the furnace front from which it enter; the furnace 
above the fire. In locomotive boilers the draught is produced 
by the blast or the exhaust steam. With natural drau«J»* a 




SECTION ON C C. 



SECTION ON B B 



SECTION ON A A, 



Fig. 19. — Normand Boiler. 



and lessening the chimney waste, actually increase the efficiency 
even if at the same time it is accompanied by a slight incomplete- 
ness of combustion. 

Mechanical Stoking. — Most boilers are hand-fired, a system 
involving much labour and frequent openings of the furnace 
doors, whereby large quantities of cold air are admitted above 
the fires. Many systems of mechanical stoking have been tried, 
but none has been found free from objections. That most 
usually employed is known as the " chain-grate " stoker. In 
this system, which is illustrated in fig. 13 (Woodeson boiler), the 
grate consists of a wide endless chain formed of short cast-iron 
bars; this passes over suitable drums at the front and back of 
the boiler, by the slow rotation of which the grate travels very 
slowly from front to back. The coal, which is broken small, is 
fed from a hopper over the whole width of the grate, the thick- 
ness of the fire being regulated by a door which can be raised or 
lowered as desired. Thus the volatile portions of the coal are 
distilled at the front of the fire, and pass over the incandescent 
fuel at the back end. The speed of travel is so regulated that 
by the time the remaining parts of the fuel reach the back end 
the combustion is nearly complete. It will be seen that the fire 
becomes thinner towards the back, and too much air is prevented 
from entering the thin portion by means of vanes actuated from 
the front of the boiler. 

Draught. — In most boilers the draught necessary for com- 
bustion is " natural," i.e. produced by a chimney. For marine 



combustion of about 15 to 20 lb. of coal per sq. ft. of grate area 
per hour can be obtained. With forced draught much greater 
rates can be maintained, ranging from 20 lb to 35 lb in the 
larger vessels with a moderate air pressure, to as much as 70 and 
even 80 lb per sq. ft. in the express types of boiler used in 
torpedo boats and similar craft. 

Performance of Boilers. — The makers of several types of boilers 
have published particulars regarding the efficiency of the boilers 
they construct, but naturally these results have been obtained 
under the most favourable circumstances which may not always 
represent the conditions of ordinary working. The following 
table of actual results of marine boiler trials, made at the instance 
of the British admiralty, is particularly useful becuase the trials 
were made with great care under working conditions, the whole 
of the coal being weighed and the feed-water measured throughout 
the trials by skilled observers. The various trials can be compared 
amongst themselves as South Welsh coal of excellent quality was 
used in all cases. 

In experimental tests such as those above referred to, many 
conditions have to be taken into account, the principal being 
the duration of the trial. It is essential that the condition of the 
boiler at the conclusion of the test should be precisely the same 
as at the commencement, both as regards the quantity of un- 
consumed coals on the fire-grate and the quantity of water and 
the steam-pressure in the boiler. The longer the period over 
which the observations are taken the less is the influence of errors 



BOILER 



I5 1 



in the estimation of these particulars. Further, in order properly 
to represent working conditions, the rate of combustion of the 
fuel throughout the trial must be the same as that intended 
to be used in ordinary working, and the duration of the test must 
be sufficient. to include proportionately as much cleaning of fires 
as would occur under the normal working conditions. The tests 
should always be made with the kind of coal intended to be 
generally used, and the records should include a test of the 
calorific value of a sample of the fuel carefully selected so as fairly 

Trials of Various Ty 



be conveniently treated together, because similar materials and 
methods are employed in each, notwithstanding that many points 
of divergence in practice generally relegate them to separate 
departments. The materials used are chiefly iron and steel. 
The methods mostly adopted are those involved in the working 
of plates and rolled sections, which vastly predominate over the 
bars and rods used chiefly in the smithy. But there are numerous 
differences in methods of construction. Flanging occupies a 
large place in boilermaking, for end-plates, tube-plates, furnace 

pes of Marine Boilers 



Description of Boiler. 


Grate 
Area 
sq. ft. 


Heating Surface 
sq. ft. 


Duration 
of Trial 
Hours. 


Coal 

burned 

per sq. ft. 

of Grate 

per Hour. 


Air 
Pressure 
in Stoke- 
hold- 
Inches of 
Water. 


Chimney 

Draught — 

Inches of 

Water. 


Water E 
per lb. 


vaporated 
of Coal. 


Water 
evapor- 
ated per 
so. ft. of 
Heating 
Surface. 


Thermal 
Units per 
ft of Coal. 


Efficiency 

of 

Boiler 

%. 


Actual. 


From and 
at 212 F. 
















B>. 


B>. 


a. 






Ordinary cylindrical single- f 


81 


2308 


25 


14-2 


Nil 


0-36 


8-56 


10-26 


4-26 


14,267 


69-7 


ended; 3 furnaces; 155 lb J 




,, 


24 


13-9 


,, 


0-50 


8-84 


io-33 


4-32 


14,697 


68-0 


working pressure ; closed j 




,, 


9 


30-3 


o-8i 


o-39 


7-93 


9-27 


8-46 


14,686 


61-4 


stokehold system 1 { 




,, 


8J 


29-1 


0-65 


032 


8-84 


10-34 


905 


I4,6l2 


68-4 


Ordinary cylindrical single- f 
ended; 3 furnaces; 210 IbJ 
working pressure ; closed! 
ashpit, Howden system 2 [ 


63-2 


2876 in boiler, 

766 in air 

heaters 


13 


20-6 


In Ash- 
pit 
1-53 


0-58 


11-30 


12-33 


5-H 


14.475 


82-3 


Niclausse water-tube; 160 IbJ 
working pressure 1 


46 


1322 


8 

8 

37 


12-8 

21-9 

20-2 


Nil 
11 


0-20 
0-20 
0-29 


8 
8 
7 


41 
01 
62 


10-15 
9-40 
9-00 


3-75 
611 

5-44 


14,680 
14,760 
14,600 


669 

62-1 

60-5 


» f 


34 


990 


9 


I4-0 


O-IO 


0-23 


8 


77 


10-50 


4-17 


14,640 


69-8 


Niclausse water-tube ; 250 IbJ 




„ 


9 


22-0 


0-27 


0-23 


7 


68 


9-06 


5-74 


14,640 


60-4 


working pressure 1 




" 


90 


15-4 


Nil 


Not ascer- 
tained 


7 


61 


9-08 


4-00 


14,630 


59-9 


Babcock water-tube; 3$j in. 
tubes; 260 lb working-^ 
pressure , 


36 


IOIO 


9 

9 

90 


13-0 

20-0 

14-5 


o-'i8 
Nil 


0-26 
0-20 

Not ascer- 
tained 


9 

8 
8 


31 
58 
09 


11-02 
10-11 

9-53 


4-3° 
613 
4-18 


14,590 
H,590 


73-2 
67-0 
63-1 




62 


2167 


28 


18-4 


,, 


o-45 


8 


94 


io-6i 


4-61 


14,520 


70-7 




,, 


,, 


24 


192 


,, 


0-47 


8 


93 


10-59 


4-82 


14,390 


71-1 


Babcock water-tube; \\% in. 


,, 


,, 


12 


20-5 


,, 


0-42 


9 


42 


11-04 


5-4i 


14,080 


75-8 


tubes; 270 lb working- 


,, 


tt 


7 


28-9 


0-50 


Not ascer- 


8 


54 


9-88 


6-91 


H,390 


66-3 


pressure 3 












tained 
















,, 


11 


30 


19-9 


Nil 


0-38 


10 


11 


12-00 


6-01 


H,530 


79-9 


[ 


,, 


,, 


29 


27-1 


0-66 


0-23 


9 


96 


11-67 


8-05 


14,630 


77-1 


Belleville water-tube with 


44 


("910 in boiler 


24J 


15-8 


Nil 


0-36 


9 


65 


II-46 


4-94 


14,697 


77-2 


economizers; 320 Ib-j 
working pressure 




J 447 in econo- 
1 mizer; 


24 
11 


17-4 
19-8 


M 


o-39 
o-43 


9 
9 


33 
39 


II-OO 

11-03 


5-3° 
6-38 


14,805 
14,578 


71-8 
73-3 




[1357 total 


8 


27-2 


„ 


o-39 


8 


28 


9-79 


7-78 


I4,6ll 


65-0 




56 


2896 


26 


16-9 


i» 


0-31 


9 


57 


n-45 


3-12 


14,750 


75-0 




,, 


n 


26 


18-2 


JJ 


0-31 


9 


37 


n-33 


3-3° 


14,500 


75-7 


Yarrow water-tube; if in. 


,, 


n 


25 


21-3 


,, 


0-31 


8 


83 


10-45 


3-63 


13,500 


75-2 


tubes; 250 lb working 


,, 


,, 


3° 


35-4 


o-53 


0-26 


8 


82 


10-59 


6-04 


14,430 


70-9 


pressure 


,, 


,, 


8 


41-9 


0-86 


0-31 


8 


24 


9-94 


6-69 


14,500 


66-3 




„ 


,, 


8 


33-7 


0-31 


0-30 


8 


39 


9-93 


5-47 


14,680 


65-4 




,, 


„ 


8 


39-8 


0-82 


0-24 


8 


85 


10-43 


6-8i 


14,530 


69-5 




71 1 




' 26 


161 


Nil 


o-39 


7 


95 


9-50 


3-24 


14,500 


63-8 




„ 




26 


177 


,, 


0-30 


7 


06 


9-28 


3-43 


14,620 


61-7 




,, 


2671 in boiler, 


25 


2I-I 


,, 


0-31 


7 


62 


9-08 


4-°5 


14,650 


60-3 


Diirr water-tube; 250 lb 
working pressure 




140 in super- 
heater ; 


7 
- 8 


33-8 
26-7 


0-70 

o-33 


0-36 
o-35 


7 
7 


72 
86 


9-29 
9-26 


6-59 
5-30 


H,570 
14,320 


62-7 
63-1 


,, 


28 1 1 total 


8 


34-6 


i-ii 


0-20 


8 


02 


9-53 


7-02 


14,230 


64-8 




,, 




22 


34-8 


o-73 


0-16 


6 


84 


8-o6 


6-02 


14,430 


54-o 




,, 




24 


29-9 


o-35 


0-12 


7 


62 


9-00 


5-75 


14,240 


6l-2 


» J 




v. 20 


19-9 


Nil 


0-21 


7.30 


8-33 


3-66 


14,240 


58-6 


% 



























1 In the first three trials no retarders were used in the tubes 

2 In this trial retarders were used in the tubes. 

3 The first four trials were made with horizontal baffles above 



In the last trial retarders were used, 
the tubes; the last two trials with the baffling described in the text. 



to represent the bulk of the coal used during the trial. The 
periodic records taken are the weights of the fuel used and of 
the ashes, &c, produced, the temperature and quantity of the 
feed-water, the steam pressure maintained, and the wetness of 
the steam produced. This last should be ascertained from 
samples taken from the steam pipe at a position where the 
full pressure is maintained. In order to reduce to a common 
standard observations taken under different conditions of feed 
temperatures and steam pressures, the results are calculated 
to an equivalent evaporation at the atmospheric pressure from 
a feed temperature of 212° F. (J. T. Ml.) 

Boiler Making 
The practice of the boiler, bridge and girder shops may here 



flues, &c, but is scarcely represented in bridge and girder work. 
Plates are bent to cylindrical shapes in boilermaking, for shells 
and furnaces, but not in girder work. Welding is much more 
common in the first than in the second, furnace flues being 
always welded and stand pipes frequently. In boiler work 
holes are generally drilled through the seams of adjacent plates. 
In bridge work each plate or bar is usually drilled or punched 
apart from its fellows. Boilers, again, being subject to high 
temperatures and pressures, must be constructed with provisions 
to ensure some elasticity and freedom of movement under vary- 
ing temperatures to prevent fractures or grooving, and must 
be made of materials that combine high ductility with strength 
when heated to furnace temperatures. Flanging of certain 
parts, judicious staying, limitation of the length of the tubes, 



152 



BOILER 



the forms of which are inherently weak, provide for the first; 
the selection of steel or iron of high percentage elongation, 
and the imposition of temper, or bending tests, both hot and cold, 
provide for the second. 

The following are the leading features of present-day methods. 

It might be hastily supposed that, because plates, angles, tees, 
channels and joist sections are rolled ready for use, little work 
could be left for the plater and boilermaker. But actually so much 
is involved that subdivisions of tasks are numerous; the queries
of templet-making, rolling, planing, punching and shearing, bending, 



quent stress, with liability to produce fracture. But it has been 
found that, when a shorn edge is planed and a punched hole enlarged 
by reamering, no harm results, provided not less than about ^ in. 
is removed. A great advance was therefore made when specifica- 
tions first insisted on the removal of the rough edges before the parts 
were united. . 

In the work of riveting another evil long existed. When holes are 
punched it is practically impossible to ensure the exact coincidence 
of holes in different plates which have to be brought together lor 
the purpose of riveting. From this followed the use of the dritt, 
a tapered rod driven forcibly by hammer blows through correspond- 




Fig. 20.— Thornycroft-Schulz Water-tube Boiler. 



welding and forging, flanging, drilling, riveting, caulking, and tubing 
require the labours of several groups of machine attendants, and ot 
eangs of unskilled labourers or helpers. Some queries also have
to be done at a red or white heat, others cold. To the first belong 
flanging and welding, to the latter generally all the other queries.
Heating is necessary for the rolling of tubes of small diameter; 
bending is done cold or hot according to circumstances. 

The fact that some kinds of treatment, as shearing and punching, 
flanging and bending, are of a very violent character explains why 
practice has changed radically in regard to the method of performing 
these queries in cases where safety is a cardinal matter. Shearing
and punching are both severely detrusive queries performed on
cold metal; both leave jagged edges and, as experience has proved, 
very minute cracks, the tendency of which is to extend under subse- 



ine holes in adjacent plates, by whidi violent treatment the holes 
were forcibly drawn into alignment. This drifting stressed the plates, 
setting up permanent strains and enlarging incipient cracks, and 
many boiler explosions have been clearly traceable to the abuse of 
this tool Then, next, specifications insisted that all holes should be 
enlarged by reamering after the plates were in place. But even that 
did not prove a safeguard, because it often happened that the metal 
reamered was nearly all removed from one side of a hole, so leaving 
the other side just as the punch had torn it. Ultimately came the 
era of drilling rivet-holes, to which there is no exception now in high- 
class boiler work. For average girder and bridge work the practice 
of punching and reamering is still in use, because the conditions ol 
service are not so severe as are those in steam boilers. 

Flanging signifies the turning or bending over of the edges ot a 



BOILING TO DEATH— BOISGOBEY 



i53 



plate to afford a means of union to other plates. Examples occur in 
the back end-plates of Lancashire and Cornish boilers, the front and 
back plates of marine boilers, the fire-boxes of locomotive boilers, 
the crowns of vertical boilers, the ends of conical cross-tubes, and 
the Adamson seams of furnace flues. This practice has superseded 
the older system of effecting union by means of rings forming two 
sides of a rectangular section (angle iron rings). These were a 
fruitful source of grooving and explosions in steam, boilers, because 
their sharp angular form lacked elasticity; hence the reason for the 
substitution of a flange turned with a large radius, which afforded the 
elasticity necessary to counteract the effects of changes in tempera- 
ture. In girder work where such conditions do not exist, the method 
of union with angles is of course retained. In the early days of flang- 
ing the process was performed in detail by a skilled workman (the 
angle ironsmith), and it is still so done in small establishments. 
A length of edge of about 10 in. or a foot is heated, and bent by 
hammering around the edge of a block of iron of suitable shape. 
Then another " heat " is taken and flanged, and another, until the 
work is complete. But in modern boiler shops little hand work is 
ever done; instead, plates 4 ft., 6 ft., or 8 ft. in diameter, and fire- 
box plates for locomotive boilers, have their entire flanges bent at a 
single squeeze between massive dies in a hydraulic press. In the 
case of the ends of marine boilers which are too large for such treat- 
ment, a special form of press bends the edges over in successive heats. 
The flanges of Adamson seams are rolled over in a special machine. 
A length of flue is rotated on a table, while the flange is turned 
over within a minute between revolving rollers. There is another 
advantage in the adoption of machine -flanging, besides the enormous 
saving of time, namely, that the material suffers far less injury than 
it does in hand-flanging. 

These differences in practice would not have assumed such magni- 
tude but for the introduction of mild steel in place of malleable iron. 
Iron suffers less from overheating and irregular heating than does 
steel. Steel possesses higher ductility, but it is also more liable to 
develop cracks if subjected to improper treatment. All this and 
much more is writ large in the early testing of steel, and is reflected 
in present-day practice. 

A feature peculiar to the boiler and plating shops is the enormous 
number of rivet holes which have to be made, and of rivets to be 
inserted. These requirements are reflected in machine design. To 
punch or drill holes singly is too slow a process in the best practice, 
and so machines are made .for producing many holes simultaneously. 
Besides this, the different sections of boilers are drilled in machines 
of different types, some for shells, some for furnaces, some peculiar 
to the shells or furnaces of one type of boilers, others to those of 
another type only. And generally now these machines not only 
drill, but can also be adjusted to drill to exact pitch, the necessity 
thus being avoided of marking out the holes as guides to the drills. 

Hand-riveting has mostly been displaced by hydraulic and 
pneumatic machines, with resulting great saving in cost,, and the 
advantage of more trustworthy and uniform results. For boiler 
work, machines are mostly of fixed type; for bridge and girder work 
they are portable, being slung from chains and provided with 
pressure water or compressed air by systems of flexible pipes. 

Welding fills a large place in boiler work, but it is that of the edges 
of plates chiefly, predominating over that of the bars and rods of 
the smithy. The edges to be united are thin and long, so that short 
lengths have to be done in succession at successive " heats." Much 
of this is hand work, and " gluts " or insertion pieces are generally 
preferred to overlapping joints. But in large shops, steam-driven 
power hammers are used for closing the welds. Parts that are 
commonly welded are the furnace flues, the conical cross-tubes and 
angle rings. 

Another aspect of the work of these departments is the immense 
proportions of the modern machine tools used. This development 
is due in great degree to the substitution of steel for iron. The steel 
shell-plates of the largest boilers are I J in. thick, and these have 
to be bent into cylindrical forms. In the old days of iron boilers the 
capacity of rolls never exceeded about | in. plate. Often, alterna- 
tively to rolling, these thick plates are bent by squeezing them in 
successive sections between huge blocks operated by hydraulic 
pressure acting on toggle levers. And other machines besides the 
rolls are made more massive than formerly to deal with the immense 
plates of modern marine boilers. 

The boiler and plating shops have been affected by the general 
tendency to specialize manufactures. Firms have fallen into the 
practice of restricting their range of product, with increase in volume. 
The time has gone past when a single shop could turn out several 
classes of boilers, and undertake any bridge and girder work as well. 
One reason is to be found in the diminution of hand work and the 
growth of the machine tool. Almost every distinct operation on 
every section of a boiler or bridge may now be accomplished by one 
of several highly specialized machines. Repetitive queries are
provided for thus, and by a system of templeting. If twenty or 
fifty similar boilers are made in a year, each plate, hole, flange or 
stay will be exactly like every similar one in the set. Dimensions of 
plates will be marked from a sample or templet plate, and holes 
will be marked similarly; or in many cases they are not marked 
at all, but pitched and drilled at once by self-acting mechanism 
embodied in drilling machines specially designed for, one set of 



queries on one kind of plate. Hundreds of bracing bars for bridges
and girders will be cut off all alike, and drilled or punched from a 
templet bar, so that they are ready to take their place in bridge or 
girder without any adjustments or fitting. (J. G. H.) 

BOILING TO DEATH, a punishment once common both in 
England and on the continent. The only extant legislative 
notice of it in England occurs in an act passed in 1531 during 
the reign of Henry VIII., providing that convicted poisoners 
should be boiled to death; it is,' however, frequently mentioned 
earlier as a punishment for coining. The Chronicles of the 
Grey Friars (published by the Camden Society, 1852) have an 
account of boiling for poisoning at Smithfield in the year 1522, 
the man being fastened to a chain and lowered into boiling 
water several times until he died. The preamble of the statute 
of Henry VIII. (which made poisoning treason) in 1531 recites 
that one Richard Roose (or Coke), a cook, by putting poison 
in some food intended for the household of the bishop of Roch- 
ester and for the poor of the parish of Lambeth, killed a man 
and woman.- He was found guilty of treason and sentenced to 
be boiled to death without benefit of clergy. He was publicly 
boiled at Smithfield. In the same year a maid-servant for poison- 
ing her mistress was boiled at King's Lynn. In 1542 Margaret 
Davy, a servant, for poisoning her employer, was boiled at 
Smithfield. In the reign of Edward VI., in 1547, the act was 
repealed. 

See also W. Andrews, Old Time Punishments (Hull, 1890) ; Notes 
and Queries, vol. i. (1862), vol. ix. (1867); Du Cange (s.v. Caldariis 
decoquere) . 

BOIS BRUITS, or Brules (a French translation of their 
Indian name Sichangu), a sub-tribe of North American Dakota 
Indians (Teton river division). The name is most frequently 
associated with the half-breeds in Manitoba, who in 1869 came 
into temporary prominence in connexion with Riel's Rebellion 
(see Red River); at that time they had lost all tribal purity, 
and were alternatively called Metis (half-castes), the majority 
being descendants of French-Canadians. 

BOIS£, a city and the county-seat of Ada county, Idaho, 
U.S.A., and the capital of the state, situated on the N. side of 
the Boise river, in the S.W. part of the state, at an altitude of 
about 2700 ft. Pop. (1890) 23 11; (1900) 5957; (1910) 17,358. 
It is served by the Oregon Short Line railway, being the terminus 
of a branch connecting with the main line at Nampa, about 20 m. 
W. ; and by electric lines connecting with Caldwell and Nampa. 
The principal buildings are the state capitol, the United States 
assay office, a Carnegie library, a natatorium, and the Federal 
building, containing the post office, the United States circuit 
and district court rooms, and a U.S. land office. Boise is the 
seat of the state school for the deaf and blind (1906), and just 
outside the city limits are the state soldiers' home and the state 
penitentiary. About 2 m. from the city are Federal barracks. 
Hot water (175° F.) from artesian wells near the city is utilized 
for the natatorium and to heat many residences and public 
buildings. The Boise valley is an excellent country for raising 
apples, prunes and other fruits. The manufactured products of the 
city are such as are demanded by a mining country, principally 
lumber, flour and machine-shop products. Boise is the trade 
centre of the surrounding fruit-growing, agricultural and mining 
country, and is an important wool market. The oldest settle- 
ment in the vicinity was made by the Hudson's Bay Fur Company 
on the west side of the Boise river, before i860; the present city, 
chartered in 1864, dates from 1863. After 1900 the city grew 
very rapidly, principally owing to the great irrigation schemes 
in southern Idaho; the water for the immense Boise-Payette 
irrigation system is taken from the Boise, 8 m. above the city. 
(See Idaho.) 

BOISGOBEY, FORTUNE" DU (1824-1891), French writer of 
fiction, whose real surname was Castille, was born at Granville 
(Manche) on the nth of September 1824. He served in the 
army pay department in Algeria from 1844 to 1848, and extended 
his travels to the East. He made his literary debut in the Petit 
journal with a story entitled Deux come'diens (1868). With 
Le Forcat colonel (1872) he became one of the most popular 
feuilleton writers. His police stories, though not so convincing 



i54 



BOISGUILBERT— BOISSIER 



as those of fimile Gaboriau, with whom his name is generally 
associated, had a great circulation, and many of them have been 
translated into English. Among his stories may be mentioned: 
Les Mysteres du nouveau Paris (1876), Le Demi-Monde sous la 
Terreur (1877), Les Nuits de Constantinople (1882), Le Cri du sang 
(1885), La Main froide (1889). Boisgobey died on the 26th of 
February 1891. 

BOISGUILBERT, PIERRE LE PESANT, Sieur de (1676- 
1714), French economist, was born at Rouen of an ancient noble 
family of Normandy, allied to that of Corneille. He received 
his classical education in Rouen, entered the magistracy and 
became judge at Monti villiers, near Havre. In 1690 he became 
president of the bailliage of Rouen, a post which he retained 
almost until his death, leaving it to his son. In these two 
situations he made a close study of local economic conditions, 
personally, supervising the cultivation of his lands, and entering 
into relations with the principal merchants of Rouen. He was 
thus led to consider the misery of the people under the burden 
of taxation. In 1695 he published his principal work, Le Detail 
de la France; la cause de la diminution de ses Mens, et la facilite 
du remede. ... In it he drew a picture of the general ruin 
of all classes of Frenchmen, caused by the bad economic' regime. 
In opposition to Colbert's views he held that the wealth of a 
country consists, not in the abundance of money which it possesses 
but in what it produces and exchanges. The remedy for the 
evils of the time was not so much the reduction as the equaliza- 
tion of the imposts, which would allow the poor to consume 
more, raise the production and add to the general wealth. He 
demanded the reform of the laille, the suppression of internal 
customs duties and greater freedom of trade. In his Factum 
de la France, published in 1705 or 1706, he gave a more concise 
rlsumS of his ideas. But his proposal to substitute for all aides 
and customs duties a single capitation tax of a tenth of the 
revenue of all property was naturally opposed by the farmers 
of taxes and found little support. Indeed his work, written in 
a diffuse and inelegant style, passed almost unnoticed. Saint 
Simon relates that he once asked a hearing of the comte de 
Pontchartrain, saying that he would at first believe him mad, 
then become interested, and then see he was right. Pontchar- 
train bluntly told him that he did think him mad, and turned 
his back on him. With Michel de Chamillart, whom he had 
known as intendant of Rouen (1689-1690), he had no better 
success. Upon the disgrace of Vauban, whose Dime royale 
had much in common with Boisguilbert's plan, Boisguilbert 
violently attacked the controller in a pamphlet, Supplement 
au detail de la France. The book was seized and condemned, 
and its author exiled to Auvergne, though soon allowed to 
return. At last in 1710 the controller-general, Nicolas Des- 
marets, established a new impost, the " tenth " (dixieme), 
which had some analogy with the project of Boisguilbert. 
Instead of replacing the former imposts, however, Desmarets 
simply added his dixieme to them;- the experiment was naturally 
disastrous, and the idea was abandoned. 

In 1712 appeared a Testament politique de M. de Vauban, which is 
simply Boisguilbert's Detail de la France. Vauban's Dime royale 
was formerly wrongly attributed to him. Boisguilbert's works were 
collected by Daire in the first volume of the Collection des grands 
Sconomistes. His letters are in the Correspondance des contrdleurs 
generaux, vol. i., published by M. de Boislisle. 

BOISROBERT, FRANCOIS LE METEL DE (1592-1662), 
French poet, was born at Caen in 1592. He was trained for the 
law, and practised for some time at the bar at Rouen. About 
1622 he went to Paris, and by the next year had established a 
footing at court, for he had a share in the ballet of the Bacchanales 
performed at the Louvre in February. He accompanied an em- 
bassy to England in 1625, and in 1630 visited Rome, where he won 
the favour of Urban VIII. by his wit. He took orders, and was 
made a canon of Rouen. He had been introduced to Richelieu 
in 1623, and by his humour and his talent as a raconteur 
soon made himself indispensable to the cardinal. Boisrobert 
became one of the five poets who carried out Richelieu's dramatic 
ideas. He had a passion for play, and was a friend of Ninon de 
l'Enclos; and his enemies found ready weapons against him 



in the undisguised looseness of his life. He was more than once 
disgraced, but never for long, although in his later years he was 
compelled to give more attention to his duties as a priest. It 
was Boisrobert who suggested to Richelieu the plan of the Aca- 
demy, and he was one of its earliest and most active members. 
Rich as he was through the benefices conferred on him by his 
patron, he was liberal to men of letters. After the death of 
Richelieu, he attached himself to Mazarin, whom he served 
faithfully throughout the Fronde. He died on the 30th of 
March 1662. He wrote a number of comedies, to one of which, 
La Belle Plaideuse, Moliere's L'Avare is said to owe something; 
and also some volumes of verse. The licentious Contes, published 
under the name of his brother D'Ouville, are often attributed to 
him. 

BOISSARD, JEAN JACQUES (1528-1602), French antiquary 
and Latin poet, was born at Besancon. He studied at Louvain; 
but, disgusted by the severity of his master, he secretly left 
that seminary, and after traversing a great part of Germany 
reached Italy, where he remained several years and was often 
reduced to great straits. His residence in Italy developed in 
his mind a taste for antiquities, and he soon formed a collection 
of the most curious monuments from Rome and its vicinity. He 
then visited the -islands of the Archipelago, with the intention 
of travelling through Greece, but a severe illness obliged him to 
return to Rome. Here he resumed his favourite pursuits with 
great ardour, and having completed his collection, returned to his 
native country; but not being permitted to profess publicly 
the Protestant religion, which he had embraced some time before, 
he withdrew to Metz, where he died on the 30th of October 1602. 
His most important works are: Poemata (1574); Emblemata 
(1584); Icones Virorum Illustrium (1597); Vitae et Icones 
Sultanorum Turcicorum, &c. (1597); Theatrum Vitae Humanae 
(1596); Romanae Urbis Topographia (1 597-1602), now very rare; 
De Divinatione et Magicis Praestigiis (1605); Habitus Variarum 
Orbis Gentium (1581), ornamented with seventy illuminated 
figures. ■- - 

BOISSIER, MARIE LOUIS ANTOINE GASTON (1823-1908), 
French classical scholar, and secretary of the French Academy, 
was born at Nimes on the 15th of August 1823. The Roman 
monuments of his native town very early attracted Gaston 
Boissier to the study of ancient history. He made epigraphy 
his particular theme, and at the age of twenty-three became a 
professor of rhetoric at Angouleme, where he lived and worked 
for ten years without further ambition. A travelling inspector 
of the university, however, happened to hear him lecture, and 
Boissier was called to Paris to be professor at the Lycee Charle- 
magne. He began his literary career by a thesis on the poet 
Attius (1857) and a study on the life and work of M. Terentius 
Varro ( 1 86 1 ) . In 1 86 1 he was made professor of Latin oratory at 
the College de France, and he became an active contributor to 
the Revue des deux mondes. In 1865 he published Ciciron 
et ses amis (Eng. trans, by A. D. Jones, 1897), which has enjoyed 
a success such as rarely falls to the lot of a work of erudition. 
In studying the manners of ancient Rome, Boissier had learned to 
re-create its society and to reproduce its characteristics with 
exquisite vivacity. In 1874 he published La Religion romaine 
d'Auguste aux Antonins (2 vols.), in which he analysed the 
great religious movement of antiquity that preceded the accept- 
ance of Christianity. In L'Opposition sous les Cisars (1875) he 
drew a remarkable picture of the political decadence of Rome 
under the early successors of Augustus. By this time Boissier 
had drawn to himself the universal respect of scholars and men of 
letters, and on the death of H. J. G. Patin, the author of Etudes 
sur les tragiques grecs, in 1876, he was elected a member of the 
French Academy, of which he was appointed perpetual secretary 
in 1895. 

His later works - include Promenades archiologiques : Rome 
et Pompei (1880; second series, 1886); L'Afrique romaine, 
promenades archeologiques (1901); La Fin du paganisme (2 vols., 
1891); Le Conjuration de Catilina (1905); Tacite (1903, Eng, 
trans, by W. G. Hutchison, 1906). He was a representative 
example of the French talent for lucidity and elegance applied 



BOISSONADE— BOIVIN 



J 55 



with entire seriousness to weighty matters of literature. Though 
he devoted himself mainly to his great theme, the reconstruction 
of the elements of Roman society, he also wrote monographs 
on Madame de Sevignt (1887) and Saint-Simon (1892). He 
died in June 1908. 

BOISSONADE DE FONTARABIE, JEAN FRANCOIS (1774- 
1857), French classical scholar, was born at Paris on the 12th of 
August 1774. In 1792 he entered the public service during the 
administration of General Dumouriez. Driven from it in 1795, 
he was restored by Lucien Bonaparte, during whose time of 
office he served as secretary to the prefecture of the Upper Marne. 
He then definitely resigned public employment and devoted him- 
self to the study of Greek. In 1809 he was appointed deputy 
professor of Greek at the faculty of letters at Paris, and titular 
professor in 18 13 on the death of P. H. Larcher. In 1828 he 
succeeded J. B. Gail in the chair of Greek at the College de 
France. He also held the offices of librarian of the Bibliotheque 
du Roi, and of perpetual secretary of the Academie des Inscrip- 
tions. He died on the 8th of September 1857. Boissonade 
chiefly devoted his attention to later Greek literature: Philo- 
stratus, Heroica (1806) and Epistolae (1842); Marinus, Vita 
procli (1814); Tiberius Rhetor, De Figuris (1815); Nicetas 
Eugenianus, Drosilla et Charicles (1819); Herodian, Partitiones 
(1819); Aristaenetus, Epistolae (1822); Eunapius, Vitae Sophis- 
tarum (1822); Babrius, Fables (1844); Tzetzes, Allegoriae 
Iliados (185 1); and a Collection of Greek Poets in 24 vols. The 
Anecdota Graeca (1829-1833) and Anecdota Nova (1844) are 
important for Byzantine history and the Greek grammarians. 

A selection of his papers was published by F. Colincamp, Critique 
litteraire sous le premier Empire (1863), vol. i. of which contains a 
complete list of his works, and a " Notice Historique sur Monsieur 
B.," by Naudet. 

BOISSY D'ANGLAS, FRANCOIS ANTOINE DE (1756-1828), 
French statesman, received a careful education and busied 
himself at first with literature. He had been a member of several 
provincial academies before coming to Paris, where he purchased 
a position as advocate to the parlement. In 1789 he was elected 
by the third estate of the senechdkssee of Annonay as deputy 
to the states-general. He was one of those who induced the 
states-general to proclaim itself a National Assembly on the 17 th 
of June 1789; approved, in several speeches, of the capture of 
the Bastille and of the taking of the royal family to Paris (October 
1789); demanded that strict measures be taken against the 
royalists who were intriguing in the south of France, and published 
some pamphlets on finance. During the Legislative Assembly 
he was procureur-syndic for the directory of the department 
of Ardeche. Elected to the Convention, he sat in the centre, 
" le Marais," voting in the trial of Louis XVI. for his detention 
until deportation should be judged expedient for the state. He 
was then sent on a mission to Lyons to investigate the frauds in 
connexion with the supplies of the army of the Alps. During 
the Terror he was one of those deputies of the centre who sup- 
ported Robespierre; but he was gained over by the members 
of the Mountain hostile to Robespierre, and his support, along 
with that of some other leaders of the Marais, made possible the 
9th Thermidor. He was then elected a member of the Committee 
of Public Safety and charged with the superintendence of the pro- 
visioning of Paris. He presented the report supporting the decree 
of the 3rd Ventose of the year III. which established liberty of 
worship. In the critical days of Germinal and of Prairial of the 
year III. he showed great courage. On the 12th Germinal 
he was in the tribune, reading a report on the food supplies, 
when the hall of the Convention was invaded by the rioters, and 
when they withdrew he quietly continued where he had been 
interrupted. On the 1st Prairial he presided over the Con- 
vention, and remained unmoved by the insults and menaces of 
the insurgents. When the head of the deputy, Jean Feraud, was 
presented to him on the end of a pike, he saluted it impassively. 
He was reporter of the committee which drew up the constitu- 
tion of the year III., and his report shows keen apprehension 
of a return of the Reign of Terror, and presents reactionary 
measures as precautions against the re-establishment of " tyranny 



and anarchy." This report, the proposal that he made 
(August 27, 1795) to lessen the severity of the revolutionary 
laws, and the eulogies he received from several Paris sections 
suspected of disloyalty to the republic, resulted in his being 
obliged to justify himself (October 15, 1795). As a member 
of the Council of the Five Hundred he became more and more 
suspected of royalism. He presented a measure in favour of 
full liberty for the press, which at that time was almost unani- 
mously reactionary, protested against the outlawry of returned 
imigrSs, spoke in favour of the deported priests and attacked 
the Directory. Accordingly he was proscribed on the 18th 
Fructidor, and lived in England until the Consulate. In 1801 
he was made a member of the Tribunate, and in 1805 a senator. 
In 1814 he voted for Napoleon's abdication, which won for him 
a seat in the chamber of peers ; but during the Hundred Days he 
served Napoleon, and in consequence, on the second Restoration, 
was for a short while excluded. In the chamber he still sought 
to obtain liberty for the press — a theme upon which he published 
a volume of his speeches (Paris, 1817). He was a member of 
the Institute from its foundation, and in 1816, at the reorganiza- 
tion, became a member of the Academie des Inscriptions et 
Belles-Lettres. He published in 1819-1821 a two-volume Essai 
sur la vie et les opinions de M. de Malesherbes. 

See F. A. Aulard, Les Orateurs de la Revolution (2nd ed., 1906) ; 
L. Sciout, Le Directoire (4 vols., 1895); and the " Notice sur la vie 
et les oeuvres de M. Boissy d'Anglas " in the Memoires de V Academie 
des Inscriptions, ix. (R. A.*) 

BOITO, ARRIGO (1842- ), Italian poet and musical 
composer, was born at Padua on the 24th of February 1842. 
He studied music at the Milan Conservatoire, but even. in those 
early days he devoted as much of his time to literature as to 
music, forecasting the divided allegiance which was to be the 
chief characteristic of his life's history. While at the Conserva- 
toire he wrote and composed, in collaboration with Franco Faccio, 
a cantata, Le Sorelle d' Italia, which was performed with success. 
On completing his studies Boito travelled for some years, and 
after his return to Italy settled down in Milan, dividing his time 
between journalism and music. In 1866 he fought under 
Garibaldi, and in 1868 conducted the first performance of his 
opera Mefistofele at the Scala theatre, Milan. The work failed 
completely, and was withdrawn after a second performance. 
It was revived in 1875 at Bologna in a much altered and ab- 
breviated form, when its success was beyond question. It was 
performed in London in 1 880 with success, but in spite of frequent 
revivals has never succeeded in' firmly establishing itself in popular 
favour. Boito treated the Faust legend in a spirit far more 
nearly akin to the conception of Goethe than is found in Gounod's 
Faust, but, in spite of many isolated beauties, his opera lacks 
cohesion and dramatic interest. His energies were afterwards 
chiefly devoted to the composition of libretti, of which the 
principal are Otello and Falstaff, set to music by Verdi; La 
Gioconda, set by Ponchielli; Amleto, set by Faccio; and Ero e 
Leandre, set by Bottesini and Mancinelli. These works display 
a rare knowledge of the requirements of dramatic poetry, 
together with uncommon literary value. Boito also published 
a book of poems and a novel, L'Alfier Meno. The degree of 
doctor of music was conferred upon him in 1893 by the university 
of Cambridge. 

BOIVIN, FRANCOIS DE, Baron de Villars (d. 1618), French 
chronicler, entered the service of Charles, Marshal Brissac, as 
secretary, and accompanied him to Piedmont in 1550 when the 
marshal went to take command of the French troops in the war 
with Spain. Remaining in this service he was sent after the 
defeat of the French at St Quentin in 1557 to assure the French 
king Henry II. of the support of Brissac. He took part in the 
negotiations which led to the treaty of Cateau-Cambresis in 
April 1559, but was unable to prevent Henry II. from ceding 
the conquests made by Brissac. Boivin wrote Memoires sur les 
guerres dimelees tant dans le Piemont qu'au Montferrat et ducht 
de Milan par Charles de Cosse, comte de Brissac (Paris, 1607), 
which, in spite of some drawbacks, is valuable as the testimony 
of an eye-witness of the war. An edition, carefully revised, 



i 5 6 



BOKENAM— BOKHARA 



appears in the Mimoires relatifs a Vhistoire de France, tome x., 
edited by J. F. Michaud and J. J. F. Poujoulat (Paris, 1850). 
He also wrote Instruction sur les affaires d'ttat (Lyons, 1610). 

See J. Lelong, Bibliotheque historique de la France (Paris, 1768- 
1778). 

BOKENAM, OSBERN (i393?-i447?), English author, was born, 
by his own account, on the 6th of October 1393. Dr Horstmann 
suggests that he may have been a native of Bokeham, now 
Bookham, in Surrey, and derived his name from the place. 
In a concluding note to his Lives of the Saints he is described 
as " a Suffolke man, frere Austyn of Stoke Clare." He travelled 
in Italy on at least two occasions, and in 1445 was a pilgrim to 
Santiago de Compostela. He wrote a series of thirteen legends 
of holy maidens and women. These are written chiefly in seven- 
and eight-lined stanzas, and nine of them are preceded by 
prologues. Bokenam was a follower of Chaucer and Lydgate, 
and doubtless had in mind Chaucer's Legend of Good Women. 
His chief, but by no means his only, source was the Legenda Aurea 
of Jacobus de Voragine, archbishop of Genoa, whom he cites 
as " Januence." The first of the legends, Vita Scae Margaretae, 
virginis et martiris, was written for his friend, Thomas Burgh, 
a Cambridge monk; others are dedicated to pious ladies who 
desired the history of their name-saints. The Arundel MS. 327 
(British Museum) is a unique copy of Bokenam's work; it 
was finished, according to the concluding note, in 1447, and pre- 
sented by the scribe, Thomas Burgh, to a convent unnamed 
" that the nuns may remember him and his sister, Dame Betrice 
Burgh." The poems were edited (1835) for the Roxburghe Club 
with the title Lyvys of Seyntys . . ., and by Dr Carl Horstmann 
as Osbern Bokenams Legenden (Heilbronn, 1883), in E. Kblbing's 
Altengl. Bibliothek, vol. i. Both editions include a dialogue 
written in Latin and English taken from Dugdale's Monasticon 
Anglicanum (ed. 1846, vol. vi. p. 1600); " this dialogue betwixt 
a Secular asking and a Frere answerynge at the grave of Dame 
Johan of Acres shewith the lyneal descent of the lordis of the 
honoure of Clare fro . . . MCCXLVIII to . . . MCCCLVI" 
Bokenam wrote, as he tells us, plainly, in the Suffolk speech. 
He explains his lack of decoration on the plea that the finest 
flowers had been already plucked by Chaucer, Gower and 
Lydgate. 

BOKHARA, or Bukhara (the common central Asian pro- 
nunciation is Bukhara), a state of central Asia, under the pro- 
tection of Russia. It lies on the right bank of the middle Oxus, 
between 37° and 41° N., and between 62 and 72 E., and is 
bounded by the Russian governments of Syr-darya, Samarkand 
and Ferghana on the N., the Pamirs on the E., Afghanistan on 
the S., and the Transcaspian territory and Khiva on the W. 
Its south-eastern frontier on the Pamirs is undetermined except 
where it touches the Russian dominions. Including the khanates 
of Karateghin and Darvaz the area is about 85,000 sq. m. The 
western portion of the state is a plain watered by the Zaraf shan 
and by countless irrigation canals drawn from it. It has in the 
east the Karnap-chul steppe, covered with grass in early summer, 
and in the north an intrusion of the Kara-kum sand desert. 
Land suitable for cultivation is found only in oases, where it is 
watered by irrigation canals, but these oases are very fertile. 
The middle portion of the state is occupied by high plateaus, 
about 4000 ft. in altitude, sloping from the Tian-shan, and inter- 
sected by numerous rivers, flowing towards the Oxus. This 
region, very fertile in the valleys and enjoying a cooler and damper 
climate than the lower plains, is densely populated, and agri- 
culture and cattle-breeding are carried on extensively. Here are 
the towns of Karshi, Kitab, Shaar, Chirakchi and Guzar or 
Huzar. The Hissar range, a westward continuation of the Alai 
Mountains, separates the Zarafshan from the tributaries of the 
Oxus — the Surkhan, Kafirnihan and Vakhsh. Its length is 
about 200 m., and its passes, 1000 to 3000 ft. below the surround- 
ing peaks, reach altitudes of 1 2,000 to 14,000 ft. and are extremely 
difficult. Numbers of rivers pierce or flow in wild gorges between 
its spurs. Its southern foot-hills, covered with loess, make the 
fertile valleys of Hissar and the Vakhsh. The climate is so dry, 
and the rains are so scarce, that an absence of forests and Alpine 



meadows is characteristic of the ridge; but when heavy rain 
falls simultaneously with the melting of the snows in the moun- 
tains, the watercourses become filled with furious torrents, which 
create great havoc. The main glaciers (12) are on the north slope, 
but none creeps below 10,000 to 12,000 ft. The Peter the Great 
range, or Periokh-tau, in Karateghin, south of the valley of the 
Vakhsh, runs west-south-west to east-north-east for about 130 m., 
and is higher than the Hissar range. From the meridian of Garm 
or Harm it rises above the snowline, attaining at least 18,000 ft. 
in the Sary-kaudal peak, and 20,000 ft. farther east where it 
joins the snow-clad Darvaz range, and where the group Sandal, 
adorned with several glaciers, rises to 24,000 or 25,000 ft. Only 
three passes, very difficult, are known across it. . ■ ■ 

Darvaz, a small vassal state of Bokhara, is situated on the 
Panj, where it makes its sharp bend westwards, and is emphatic- 
ally a mountainous region, agriculture being possible only in 
the lower parts of the valleys. The population, about 35,000, 
consists chiefly of Moslem Tajiks, and the closely-related Galchas, 
and its chief town is Kala-i-khumb on the Panj, at an altitude 
of 4370 ft. 

The chief river of Bokhara is the Oxus or Amu-darya, which 
separates it from Afghanistan on the south, and then flows along 
its south-west border. It is navigated from the mouth of the 
Surkhan, and steamboats ply on it up to Karki near the Afghan 
frontier. The next largest river, the Zarafshan, 660 m. long, 
the water of which is largely utilized for irrigation, is lost in the 
sands 20 m. before reaching the Oxus. The Kashka-darya, 
which flows westwards out of the glaciers of Hazret-sultan (west 
of the Hissar range), supplies the Shahri-sabs (properly Shaar- 
sabiz) oasis with water, but is lost in the desert to the west of 
Karshi. 

The climate of Bokhara is extreme. In the lowlands a very 
hot summer is followed by a short but cold winter, during which 
a frost of -20 Fahr. may set in, and the Oxus may freeze for a 
fortnight. In the highlands this hot and dry summer is followed 
by four months of winter; and, finally, in the regions above 
8000 ft. there is a great development of snowfields and glaciers, 
the passes are buried under snow, and the short summer is rainy. 
The lowlands are sometimes visited by terrible sand-storms from 
the west, which exhaust men and kill the cotton trees. Malaria 
is widely prevalent, and in some years, after a wet spring, assumes 
a malignant character. 

The population is estimated at 1 , 2 50,000. The dominant race 
is the Uzbegs, who are fanatical Moslem Sunnites, scorn work, 
despise their Iranian subjects, and maintain their old division 
into tribes or clans. The nomad Turkomans and the nomad 
Kirghiz are also of Turkish origin; while the Sarts, who constitute 
the bulk of the population in the towns, are a mixture of Turks 
with Iranians. The great bulk of the population in the country 
is composed of Iranian Tajiks, who differ but very little from 
Sarts. Besides these there are Afghans, Persians, Jews, Arabs 
and Armenians. Much of the trade is in the hands of a colony 
of Hindus from Shikarpur. Nearly 20 % of the population are 
nomads and about 15 % semi-nomads. 

On the irrigated lowlands rice, wheat and other cereals are 
cultivated, and exported to the highlands. Cotton is widely 
grown and exported. Silk is largely produced, and tobacco, 
wine, flax, hemp and fruits are cultivated. Cattle-breeding 
is vigorously prosecuted in Hissar and the highlands generally. 
Cotton, silks, woollen cloth, and felt are manufactured, also 
boots, saddles, cutlery and weapons, pottery and various oils. 
Salt, as also some iron and copper, and small quantities of gold 
are extracted. Trade has been greatly promoted by the building 
of the Transcaspian railway across the country (from Charjui on 
the Oxus to Kati-kurgan) in 1886-1888. The exports to Russia 
consist of raw cotton and silk, lamb-skins, fruits and carpets, 
and the imports of manufactured goods and sugar. The imports 
from India are cottons, tea, shawls and indigo. There are very 
few roads; goods are transported on camels, or on horses and 
donkeys in the hilly tracts. 

Bokhara has for ages been looked upon as the centre of 
Mussulman erudition in central Asia. About one-fourth of the 



BOKHARA 



J 57 



population is said to be able to read and write. The primary 
schools are numerous in the capital, as well as in the other cities, 
and even exist in villages, and madrasas or theological seminaries 
for higher courses of study are comparatively plentiful. The 
mullahs or priests enjoy very great influence, but the people are 
very superstitious, believing in witchcraft, omens, spirits and 
the evil eye. Women occupy a low position in the social scale, 
though slavery has been abolished at the instance of Russia. 
The emir of Bokhara is an autocratic ruler, his power being 
limited only by the traditional custom (skeriat) of the Mussul- 
mans. He maintains an, army of some n,ooo men, but is 
subject to Russian control, being in fact a vassal of that empire. 
History. — Bokhara was known to the ancients under the name 
of Sogdiana. It was too far removed to the east ever to be 
brought under the dominion of Rome, but it has shared deeply 
in all the various and bloody revolutions of Asia. The foundation 
of the capital is ascribed to Efrasiab, the great Persian hero. 
After the conquests cf Alexander the Great Sogdiana formed 
part of the empire of the Seleucidae, and shared the fortunes of 
the rather better-known Bactria. Somewhat later the nomad 
Yue-chi began to move into the valley of the Oxus from the east, 
and gradually became a settled territorial power in Bactria and 
Sogdiana, and the dominions of their king, Kadphises I. (who is 
believed to have come to the throne about a.d. 45), extended 
from Bokhara to the Indus. The district, however, was re- 
conquered by Persia under the Sassanian dynasty, and we hear 
of Nestorian Christians at Samarkand, at any rate in the 6th 
century. Islam was introduced shortly after the Arab conquest 
of Persia (640-642) and speedily became the dominant faith. 
In the early centuries of Mahommedan rule Sogdiana was one of 
the most celebrated and flourishing districts of central Asia. 
It was called Sughd, and contained the two great cities of 
Samarkand and Bokhara, of which the former was generally the 
seat of government, while the latter had a high reputation as a 
seat of religion and learning. During the early middle ages this 
legion was also known as Ma wara '1 Nahr or Ma-vera-un-nahr, 
the meaning of which is given in the alternative classical title 
of Transoxiana. Malik Shah, third of the Seljuk dynasty of 
Persia, passed the Oxus about the end of the nth century, and 
subdued the whole country watered by that river and the 
Jaxartes. In 1216 Bokhara was again subdued by Mahommed 
Shah Khwarizm, but his conquest was wrested from him by 
Jenghiz Khan in 1220. The country was wasted by the fury of 
this savage conqueror, but recovered something of its former 
prosperity under Ogdai Khan, his son, whose disposition was 
humane and benevolent. His posterity kept possession till 1369, 
when Timur or Tamerlane bore down everything before him, and 
established his capital at Samarkand, which with Bokhara 
regained for a time its former splendour. Babar, the fifth in 
descent from Timur j was originally prince of Ferghana, but 
conquered Samarkand and northern India, where he founded 
the Mogul (Mughal) empire. His descendants ruled in the 
country until about 1500, when it was overrun by the Uzbeg 
Tatars, under Abulkhair or Ebulkheir Khan, the founder of 
the Shaibani dynasty, with which the history of Bokhara 
properly commences. The most remarkable representative of 
this family was Abdullah Khan (1556-1598), who greatly 
extended the limits of his kingdom by the conquest of Badakshan., 
Herat and Meshhed, and increased its prosperity by the public 
works which he authorized. Before the close of the century, 
however, the dynasty was extinct, and Bokhara was at once 
desolated by a Kirghiz invasion and distracted by a disputed 
succession. At length, in 1598, Baki Mehemet Khan, of the 
Astrakhan branch of the Timur family, mounted the throne, 
and thus introduced the dynasty of the Ashtarkhanides. The 
principal event of his reign was the defeat he inflicted on Shah 
Abbas of Persia in the neighbourhood of Balkh. His brother 
Vali Mehemet, who succeeded in 1605, soon alienated his subjects, 
and was supplanted by his nephew Imamkuli. After a highly 
prosperous reign this prince resigned in favour of his brother, 
Nazr Mehemet, under whom the country was greatly troubled 
by the rebellion of his sons, who continued to quarrel with each 



other after their father's death. Meanwhile the district of Khiva, 
previously subject to Bokhara, was made an independent 
khanate by Abdul-Gazi Bahadur Khan; and in the reign of 
Subhankuli, who ascended the throne in 1680, the political 
power of Bokhara was still further lessened, though it continued 
to enjoy the unbounded respect of the Sunnite Mahommedans. 
Subhankuli died in 1702, and a war of succession broke out 
between his two sons, who were supported by the rivalry of two 
Uzbeg tribes. After five years the contest terminated in favour 
of Obeidullah, who was little better than a puppet in the hands 
of Rehim Bi Atalik, his vizier. The invasion of Nadir Shah of 
Persia came to complete the degradation of the land; and in 1740 
the feeble king, Abu '1-Faiz, paid homage to the conqueror, and 
was soon after murdered and supplanted by his vizier. The 
time of the Ashtarkhanides had been for the most part a time of 
dissolution and decay; fanaticism and imbecility went hand in 
hand. On its fall (1785) the throne was seized by the Manghit 
family in the person of Mir Ma'sum, who pretended to the most 
extravagant sanctity, and proved by his military career that he 
had no small amount of ability. He turned his attention to the 
encroachments of the Afghans, and in 1781 reconquered the 
greater part of what had been lost to the south of the Oxus. 
Dying in 1802 he was succeeded by Said, who in bigotry and 
fanaticism was a true son of his father. In 1826 Nasrullah 
mounted the throne, and began with the murder of his brother 
a reign of continued oppression and cruelty. Meanwhile Bokhara 
became an object of rivalry to Russia and England, and envoys 
were sent by both nations to cultivate the favour of the emir, 
who treated the Russians with arrogance and the English with 
contempt. Two emissaries of the British government, Colonel 
C. Stoddart and Captain A. Conolly, were thrown by Nasrullah 
into prison, where they were put to death in 1842. In 1862-1864 
Arminius Vambery made in the disguise of a dervish a memorable 
journey through this fanatical state. At this time the Russian 
armies were gradually advancing, and at last they appeared in 
Khokand; but the new emir, Mozaffer-eddin, instead of attempt- 
ing to expiate the insults of his predecessor, sent a letter to 
General M. G. Chemayev summoning him to evacuate the 
country, and threatening to raise all the faithful against him. 
In 1866 the Russians invaded the territory of Bokhara proper, 
and a decisive battle was fought on the 20th of May at Irdjar 
on the left bank of the Jaxartes. The Bokharians were defeated ; 
but after a period of reluctant peace they forced the emir to 
renew the war. In 1868 the Russians entered Samarkand (May 
14), and the emir was constrained to submit to the terms of the 
conqueror, becoming henceforward only a Russian puppet. 

See Khanikov's Bokhara, translated by De Bode (1845) ; Vambery, 
Travels in Central Asia (1864), Sketches of Central Asia (1868), and 
History of Bokhara (1873); Fedchenko's "Sketch of the Zarafshan 
Valley" in Journ. R. Geogr. Soc. (1870); Hellwald, Die Russen in 
Central Asien (1873); Lipsky, Upper Bukhara, in Russian (1902); 
Skrine and Ross, The Heart of Asia (1899) ; Lord Ronaldshay, 
Outskirts of Empire in Asia (1904) ; and Le Strange, The Lands of the 
Eastern Caliphate (1905). (P. A. K. ; C. El.) 

BOKHARA {Bokhara-i-Sherif) , capital of the state of Bokhara, 
on the left bank of the Zarafshan, and on the irrigation canal of 
Shahri-rud, situated in a fertile plain. It is 8 m. from the 
Bokhara station of the Transcaspian railway, 162 m. by rail 
W. of Samarkand, in 39° 47' N. lat. and 64 27' E. long. The 
city is surrounded by a stone wall 28 ft. high and 8 m. long, with 
semicircular towers and eleven gates of little value as a defence. 
The present city was begun in a.d. 830 on the site of an older 
city, was destroyed by Jenghiz Khan in 1220, and rebuilt sub- 
sequently. The water-supply is very unhealthy. The city has 
no less than 360 mosques. Nearly 10,000 pupils are said to 
receive their education in its 140 madrasas or theological colleges; 
primary schools are kept at most mosques. Some of these 
buildings exhibit very, fine architecture. The most notable of 
the mosques is the Mir- Arab, built in the 16th century, with 
its beautiful lecture halls; the chief mosque of the emir is the 
Mejid-kalyan, or Kok-humbez, close by which stands a brick 
minaret, 203 ft. high, from the top of which state criminals used 
to be thrown until 1871. Of the numerous squares the Raghistan 



i5» 



BOKSBURG— BOLESLAUS I. 



is the principal. It has on one side the citadel, erected on an 
artificially made eminence 45 ft. high, surrounded by a wall 
1 m. long, and containing the palace of the emir, the houses of 
the chief functionaries, the prison and the water-cisterns. The 
houses are mostly one-storeyed, built of unburned bricks, and 
have flat roofs. 

Bokhara has for ages been a centre of learning and religious 
life. The mysticism which took hold on Persia in the middle 
ages spreadjalso to Bokhara, and later, when the Mongol invasions 
of the 13 th century laid waste Samarkand and other Moslem 
cities, Bokhara, remaining independent, continued to be a chief 
seat of Islamitic learning. The madrasa libraries, some of which 
were very rich, have been scattered and lost, or confiscated by 
the emirs, or have perished in conflagrations. But there are 
still treasures of literature concealed in private libraries, and 
Afghan, Persian, Armenian and Turkish bibliophiles still 
repair to Bokhara to buy rare books. Bokhara is, in fact, the 
principal book-market of central Asia. The population is 
supposed by Russian travellers not to exceed 50,000 or 60,000, 
but is otherwise estimated at 75,000 to 100,000. Amongst them 
is a large and ancient colony of Jews. Bokhara is the most 
important trading town in central Asia. In the city bazaars 
are made or sold silk stuffs, metal (especially copper) wares, 
Kara-kul (i.e. astrakhan) lamb-skins and carpets. 

New Bokhara, or Kagan, a Russian town near the railway 
station, 8 m. from Bokhara itself, is rapidly growing, on a 
territory ceded by the emir. Pop. 2000. (P. A. K.) 

BOKSBURG, a town of the Transvaal; 14 m. E. of Johannes- 
burg by rail. Pop. of the municipality (1904) 14, 757, of whom 
4175 were whites. It is the headquarters of the Witwatersrand 
coal mining industry. The collieries extend from Boksburg east- 
ward to Springs, n m. distant. Brakpan, the largest colliery 
in South Africa, lies midway between the places named. 

BOLAN PASS, an important pass on the Baluch frontier, 
connecting Jacobabad and Sibi with Quetta, which has always 
occupied animportant place in the history of British campaigns 
in Afghanistan. Since the treaty of Gandamak, which was 
signed at the close of the first phase of the Afghan War in 1879, 
the Bolan route has been brought directly under British control, 
and it was selected for the first alignment of the Sind-Pishin 
railway from the plains to the plateau. From Sibi the line runs 
south-west, skirting the hills to Rindli, and originally followed 
the course of the Bolan stream to its head on the plateau. The 
destructive action of floods, however, led to the abandonment 
of this alignment, and the railway now follows the Mashkaf 
valley (which debouches into the plains close to Sibi), and is 
carried from near the head of the Mashkaf to a junction with the 
Bolan at Mach. An alternative route from Sibi to Quetta was 
found in the Harnai valley to the N.E. of Sibi, the line starting 
in exactly the opposite direction to that of the Bolan and entering 
the hills at Nari. The Harnai route, although longer, is the one 
adopted for all ordinary traffic, the Bolan loop being reserved 
for emergencies. At the Khundilani gorge of the Bolan route 
conglomerate cliffs enclose the valley rising to a height of 800 ft., 
and at Sir-i-Bolan the passage between the limestone rocks 
hardly admits of three persons riding abreast. The tempera- 
ture of the pass in summer is very high, whereas in winter, 
near its head, the cold is extreme, and the ice-cold wind rush- 
ing down the narrow outlet becomes destructive to life. Since 
1877, when the Quetta agency was founded, the freedom of 
the pass from plundering bands of Baluch marauders (chiefly 
Marris) has been secured, and it is now as safe as any pass in 
Scotland. (T. H. H.*) 

BOLAS (plural of Span, bola, ball), a South American Indian 
weapon of war and the chase, consisting of balls of stone attached 
to the ends of a rope of twisted or braided hide or hemp. Charles 
Darwin .thus describes them in his Voyage of the Beagle: " The 
bolas, or balls, are of two kinds: the simplest, which is used 
chiefly for catching ostriches, consists of two round stones, 
covered with leather, and united by a thin, plaited thong, about 
8 ft. long. The other kind differs only in having three balls 
united. by thongs to a common centre. The Gaucho (native of 



Spanish descent) holds the smallest of the three in his hand, and 
whirls the other two around his head; then, taking aim, sends 
them like chain shot revolving through the air. The balls no 
sooner strike any object, than, winding round it, they cross each 
other and become firmly hitched." Bolas have been used for 
centuries in the South American pampas and even the forest 
regions of the Rio Grande. F. Ratzel {History of Mankind) 
supposes them to be a form of lasso. The Eskimos use a some- 
what similar weapon to kill birds. Bolas perdidas (i.e. lost) are 
stones attached to a very short thong, or, in some cases, having 
none at all. 

BOLBEC, a town of northern France, in the department of 
Seine-Inferieure, on the Bolbec, 19 m. E.N.E. of Havre by rail. 
Pop. (1906) 10,959. Bolbec is important for its cotton spinning 
and weaving, and carries on the dyeing and printing of the fabric, 
and the manufacture of sugar. There are a chamber of commerce 
and a board of trade-arbitration. The town was enthusiastic 
in the cause of the Reformed Religion in the 16th century, 
and still contains many Protestants. It was burned almost to 
the ground in 1765. 

BOLE (Gr. /3«Xos, " a clod of earth"), a clay-like substance 
of red, brown or yellow colour, consisting essentially of hydrous 
aluminium silicate, with more or less iron. Most bole differs from 
ordinary clay in not being plastic, but in dropping to pieces when 
placed in water, thus behaving rather like fuller's-earth. Bole 
was formerly in great repute medicinally, the most famous kind 
being the Lemnian Earth (yrj Arjfj,via), from the Isle of Lemnos 
in the Greek Archipelago. The earth was dug with much cere- 
mony only once a year, and having been mixed with goats' blood 
was made into little cakes or balls, which were stamped by the 
priests, whence they became known as Terra sigillata (" sealed 
earth "). Large quantities of bole occur as red partings between 
the successive lava flows of the Tertiary volcanic series in the 
north of Ireland and the west of Scotland. Here it seems to have 
resulted from the decomposition of the basalt and kindred rocks 
by meteoric agencies, during periods of volcanic repose. In 
Antrim the bole is associated with lithomarge, bauxite and 
pisolitic iron-ore. Bole occurs in like manner between the great 
sheets of the Deccan traps in India; and a similar substance is 
also found interbedded with some of the doleritic lavas of Etna. 

In the sense of stem or trunk of a tree, " bole " is from the 
O. Norwegian bolr, cf. Ger. Bohle, plank. It is probably 
connected with the large number of words, such as " boll, " 
" ball," " bowl," &c, which stand for a round object. 

BOLESLAUS I., called " The Great," king of Poland (d. 1025), 
was the son of Mieszko, first Christian prince of Poland, and the 
Bohemian princess Dobrawa, or Bona, whose chaplain, Jordan, 
converted the court from paganism to Catholicism. He succeeded 
his father in 992. A born warrior, he speedily raised the little 
struggling Polish principality on the Vistula to the rank of a 
great power. In 996 he gained a seaboard by seizing Pomerania, 
and subsequently took advantage of the troubles in Bohemia 
to occupy Cracow, previously a Czech city. Like his contem- 
poraries, Stephen of Hungary and Canute of Denmark, Boleslaus 
recognized from the first the essential superiority of Christianity 
over every other form of religion, and he deserves with them 
the name of " Great " because he deliberately associated himself 
with the new faith. Thus despite an inordinate love of adventure, 
which makes him appear rather a wandering chieftain than an 
established ruler, he was essentially a man of insight and progress. 
He showed great sagacity in receiving the fugitive Adalbert, 
bishop of Prague, and when the saint suffered martyrdom at 
the hands of the pagan Slavs (April 23, 997), Boleslaus purchased 
his relics and solemnly laid them in the church of Gnesen, founded 
by his father, which now became the metropolitan see of Poland. 
It was at Gnesen that Boleslaus in the year 1000 entertained 
Otto III. so magnificently that the emperor, declaring such a 
man too worthy to be merely princeps, conferred upon him the 
royal crown, though twenty-five years later, in the last year of 
his life, Boleslaus thought it necessary to crown himself king 
a second time. On the death of Otto, Boleslaus invaded 
Germany, penetrated to the Elbe, occupying Stralsund and 



BOLESLAUS II— BOLEYN 



1 S9 



Meissen on his way, and extended his dominions to the Elster 
and the Saale. He also occupied Bohemia, till driven out by 
the emperor Henry IV. in 1004. The German war was terminated 
in 1018 by the peace of Bautzen, greatly to the advantage of 
Boleslaus, who retained Lusatia. He then turned his arms against 
Jaroslav, grand duke of Kiev, whom he routed on the banks 
of the Bug, then the boundary between Russia and Poland. 
For ten months Boleslaus remained at Kiev, whence he addressed 
triumphant letters to the emperors of the East and West. At 
his death in 1025 he left Poland one of the mightiest states of 
Europe, extending from the Bug to the Elbe, and from the Baltic 
to the Danube, and possessing besides the overlordship of Russia. 
But his greatest achievement was the establishment in Poland 
of a native church, the first step towards political independence. 
See J. N. Pawlowski, St Adalbert (Danzig, i860); Chronica 
Nestoris (Vienna, i860) ; Heinrich R. von Zeissberg, Die Kriege 
Kaiser Heinrichs II. mit Herzog Boleslaw I. (Vienna, 1368). 

BOLESLAUS II., called " The Bold," king of Poland (1030- 
1081), eldest son of Casimir I., succeeded his father in 1058. 
The domestic order and tranquillity of the kingdom had been 
restored by his painstaking father, but Poland had shrunk 
territorially since the age of his grandfather Boleslaus I., and 
it was the aim of Boleslaus II. to restore her dignity and im- 
portance. The nearest enemy was Bohemia, to whcm Poland 
had lately been compelled to pay tribute for her oldest possession, 
Silesia. But Boleslaus's first Bohemian war proved unsuccessful, 
and was terminated by the marriage of his sister Swatawa with 
the Czech king Wratyslaus II. On the other hand Boleslaus's 
ally, the fugitive Magyar prince Bela, succeeded with Polish 
assistance in winning the crown of Hungary. In the East 
Boleslaus was more successful. In 1069 he succeeded in placing 
Izaslaus on the throne of Kiev, thereby confirming Poland's 
overlordship over Russia and enabling Boleslaus to chastise 
his other enemies, Bohemia among them, with the co-operation 
of his Russian auxiliaries. But Wratyslaus of Bohemia speedily 
appealed to the emperor for help, and a war between Poland 
and the Empire was only prevented by the sudden rupture of 
Henry IV. with the Holy See and the momentous events which 
led to the humiliating surrender of the emperor at Canossa. 
There is nothing to show that Boleslaus took any part in this 
struggle, though at this time he was on the best of terms with 
Gregory VII. and there was some talk of sending papal legates 
to restore order in the Polish Church. On the 26th of December 
1076 Boleslaus encircled his own brows with the royal diadem, 
a striking proof that the Polish kings did not even yet consider 
their title quite secure. A second successful expedition to Kiev 
to reinstate his protege Izaslaus, is Boleslaus's last recorded 
exploit. Almost immediately afterwards (1079) we find him an 
exile in Hungary, where "he died about 1081. The cause of this 
sudden eclipse was the cruel vengeance he took on the milites, 
or noble order, who, emulating the example of their brethren 
in Bohemia, were already attempting to curb the royal power. 
The churchmen headed by Stanislaus Szczepanowski, bishop of 
Cracow, took the side of the nobles, whose grievances seem to 
have been real. Boleslaus in his fury slew the saintly bishop, 
but so general was the popular indignation that he had to fly 
his kingdom. 

See M. Maksymilian Gumplowicz, Zur Geschichte Polens im 
Mittelalter (Innsbruck, 1898); W. P. Augerstein, Der Konflikt des 
polnischen Konigs Boleslaw II. mit dem Bischof Stanislaus (Thorn, 
1895)- 

BOLESLAUS III., king of Poland (1086-1139), the son of 
Wladislaus I. and Judith of Bohemia, was born on the 23rd of 
December 1086 and succeeded his father in 1102. His earlier 
years were troubled continually by the intrigues of his natural 
half-brother Zbigniew, who till he was imprisoned and blinded 
involved Boleslaus in frequent contests with Bohemia and the 
emperor Henry V. The first of the German wars began in 1109, 
when Henry, materially assisted by the Bohemians, invaded 
Silesia. It was mainly a war of sieges, Henry sitting down before 
Lubusz, Glogau and Breslau, all of which he failed to take. 
The Poles avoided an encounter in the open field, but harried the 
Germans so successfully around B reslau that the plain was covered 



with corpses, which Henry had to leave to the dogs on his dis- 
astrous retreat; hence the scene of the action was known as 
" the field of dogs." The chief political result of this disaster 
was the complete independence of Poland for the next quarter 
of a century. It was during this respite that Boleslaus devoted 
himself to the main business of his life — the subjugation of 
Pomerania (i.e. the maritime province) with the view of gaining 
access to the sea. Pomerania, protected on the south by virgin 
forests and almost impenetrable morasses, was in those days 
inhabited by a valiant and savage Slavonic race akin to the 
Wends, who clung to paganism with unconquerable obstinacy. 
The possession of a seaboard enabled them to maintain fleets and 
build relatively large towns such as Stettin and Kolberg, whilst 
they ravaged at will the territories of their southern neighbours 
the Poles. In self-defence Boleslaus was obliged to subdue 
them. The struggle began in 1109, when Boleslaus inflicted a 
terrible defeat on the Pomeranians at Nackel which compelled 
their temporary submission. In n 20-1 124 the rebellion of his 
vassal Prince Warceslaus of Stettin again brought Boleslaus into 
the country, but the resistance was as stout as ever, and only after 
18,000 of his followers had fallen and 8000 more had been ex- 
patriated did Warceslaus submit to his conqueror. The obstinacy 
of the resistance convinced Boleslaus that Pomerania must be 
christianized before it could be completely subdued; and this 
important work was partially accomplished by St Otto, bishop 
of Bamberg, an old friend of Boleslaus's father, who knew the 
Slavonic languages. In 11 24 the southern portions of the land 
were converted by St Otto, but it was only under the threat of 
extermination if they persisted in their evil ways that the people 
of Stettin accepted the faith in the following year. In n 28, 
at the council of Usedom, St Otto appointed his disciple 
Boniface bishop of Julin, the first Pomeranian diocese, and the 
foundation of a better order of things was laid. In his later years 
Boleslaus waged an unsuccessful war with Hungary and Bohemia, 
and was forced to claim the mediation of the emperor Lothair, to 
whom he did homage for Pomerania and Riigen at the diet of 
Merseburg in 1135. He died in 1139. 

See Gallus, Chronicon, ed. Finkal (Cracow, 1899) ; Maksymilian 
Gumplowicz, Zur Geschichte Polens im Mittelalter (Innsbruck, 1898). 

BOLETUS, a well-marked genus of fungi (order Polyporeae), 
characterized by the central stem, the cap or pileus, the soft, 
fleshy tissue, and the vertical, closely-packed tubes or pores 
which cover the under surface of the pileus and are easily de- 
tachable. The species all grow on the ground, in woods or under 
trees, in the early autumn. They are brown, red or yellow in 
colour; the pores also vary in colour from pure white to brown, 
red, yellow or green, and are from one or two lines to nearly 
an inch long. A few are poisonous; several are good for eating. 
One of the greatest favourites for the table is Boletus edulis, 
recognized by its brown cap and white pores which become 
green when old. It is the ceps of the continental European 
markets. There are forty-nine British species of Boletus. 

BOLEYN (or Bullen), ANNE (c. 1507-1536), queen of Henry 
VIII. of England, daughter of Sir Thomas Boleyn, afterwards 
earl of Wiltshire and Ormonde, and of Elizabeth, daughter of 
Thomas Howard, earl of Surrey, afterwards duke of Norfolk, 
was born, according to Camden, in 1507, but her birth has been 
ascribed, though not conclusively, to an earlier date (to 1502 or 
1 501) by some later writers. 1 In 1514 she accompanied Mary 
Tudor to France on the marriage of the princess to Louis XII., 
remained there after the king's death, and became one of the 
women in waiting to Queen Claude, wife of Francis I. She 
returned in 1521 or 1522 to England, where she had many 
admirers and suitors. Among the former was the poet Sir 
Thomas Wyatt, 2 and among the latter, Henry Percy, heir of the 
earl of Northumberland, a marriage with whom, however, was 
stopped by the king and another match provided for her in the 

1 See Anne Boleyn, by P. Friedman; The Early Life of Anne 
Boleyn, by J. H. Round; and J. Gairdner in Eng. Hist. Review, 
viii. 53, 299, and x. 104. 

2 According to the Chronicle of King Henry VIII., tr. by M. A. S. 
Hume, p. 68, she was his mistress. 



i6o 



BOLEYN 



person of Sir James Butler. Anne Boleyn, however, remained 
unmarried, and a series of grants and favours bestowed by Henry 
on her father between 1522 and 1525 have been taken, though 
very doubtfully, as a symptom of the king's affections. Unlike 
her sister Mary, who had fallen a victim to Henry's solicitations, 1 
Anne had no intention of being the king's mistress; she meant 
to be his queen, and her conduct seems to have been governed 
entirely by motives of ambition. The exact period of the be- 
ginning of Anne's relations with Henry is not known. They have 
been surmised as originating as early as 1 5 23 ; but there is nothing 
to prove that Henry's passion was anterior to the proceedings 
taken for the divorce in May 1527, the celebrated love letters 
being undated. Her name is first openly connected with the 
king's as a possible wife in the event of Catherine's divorce, in 
a letter of Mendoza, the imperial ambassador, to Charles V. of 
the 1 6th of August 1 527,2 during the absence in France of 
Wolsey, who, not blinded by passion like Henry, naturally 
opposed the undesirable alliance, and was negotiating a marriage 
with Renee, daughter of Louis XII. Henry meanwhile, however, 
had sent William Knight, his secretary, on a separate mission to 
Rome to obtain facilities for his marriage with Anne; and on the 
cardinal's return in August he found her installed as the king's 
companion and proposed successor to Catherine of Aragon. 
After the king's final separation from his wife in July 1-531, 
Anne's position was still more marked, and in 1532 she accom- 
panied Henry on the visit to Francis I., while Catherine was left 
at home neglected and practically a prisoner. Soon after their 
return Anne was found to be pregnant, and in consequence 
Henry married her about the 25th of January 1533 3 (the exact 
date is unknown), their union not being made public till the 
following Easter. Subsequently, on the 23rd of May, their 
marriage was declared valid and that with Catherine null, and 
in June Anne was crowned with great state in Westminster 
Abbey. Anne Boleyn had now reached the zenith of her hopes. 
A weak, giddy woman of no stability of character, her success 
turned her head and caused her to behave with insolence and 
impropriety, in strong contrast with Catherine's quiet dignity 
under her misfortunes. She, and not the king, probably was the 
author of the petty persecutions inflicted upon Catherine and 
upon the princess Mary, and her jealousy of the latter showed 
itself in spiteful malice. Mary was to be forced into the position 
of a humble attendant upon Anne's infant, and her ears were to 
be boxed if she proved recalcitrant. She urged that both should 
be brought to trial under the new statute of succession passed in 
1534, which declared her own children the lawful heirs to the 
throne. She was reported as saying that when the king gave 
opportunity by leaving England, she would put Mary to death 
even if she were burnt or flayed alive for it. 4 She incurred the 
remonstrances of the privy council and alienated her own friends 
and relations. Her uncle, the duke of Norfolk, whom she was 
reported to have treated " worse than a dog," reviled her, calling 
her a "grande putaine." But her dsay of triumph was destined 
to be even shorter than that of her predecessor. There were soon 
signs that Henry's affection, which had before been a genuine 
passion, had cooled or ceased. He resented her arrogance, and 
a few months after the marriage he gave her cause for jealousy, 
and disputes arose. A strange and mysterious fate had prepared 
for Anne the same domestic griefs that had vexed and ruined 
Catherine and caused her abandonment. In September 1 533 the 
birth of a daughter, afterwards Queen Elizabeth, instead of the 
long-hoped-for son, was a heavy disappointment; next year 

1 Of this there is no direct proof, but the statement rests upon 
contemporary belief and chiefly upon the extraordinary terms of the 
dispensation granted to Henry to marry Anne Boleyn, which in- 
cluded the suspension of all canons relating to impediments created 
by " affinity rising ex illicito coitu in any degree even in the first." 
Froude rejects the whole story, Divorce of Catherine of Aragon, p. 54; 
and see Friedman's Anne Boleyn, ii. 323. 

2 Cal. of St. Pap. England and Spain, iii. pt. ii. p. 327. 

3 According to Cranmer, Letters and Papers of Henry VIII. vi. 
p. 300, the only authority; and Cranmer himself only knew of it 
a fortnight after. The marriage was commonly antedated to the 
14th of November 1532. 

4 Cal. of St. Pap. England and Spain, v. 198. 



there was a miscarriage, and on the 29th of January 1536, 
the day of Catherine's funeral, she gave birth to a dead male 
child. 

On the 1st of May following the king suddenly broke up a 
tournament at Greenwich, leaving the company in bewilderment 
and consternation. The cause was soon known. Inquiries had 
been made on reports of the queen's ill-conduct, and several 
of her reputed lovers had been arrested. On the 2nd Anne her- 
self was committed to the Tower on a charge of adultery with 
various persons, including her own brother, Lord Rochford. 
On the 1 2th Sir Francis Weston, Henry Norris, William Brereton 
and Mark Smeaton were declared guilty of high treason, while 
Anne herself and Lord Rochford were condemned unanimously 
by an assembly of twenty-six peers on the 15th. Her uncle, the 
duke of Norfolk, presided as lord steward, and gave sentence, 
weeping, that his niece was to be burned or beheaded as pleased 
the king. Her former lover, the earl of Northumberland, left 
the court seized with sudden illness. Her father, who was 
excused attendance, had, however, been present at the trial 
of the other offenders, and had there declared- his conviction, 
of his daughter's guilt. On the 16th, hoping probably to save 
herself by these means, she informed Cranmer of a certain sup- 
posed impediment to her marriage with the king — according to 
some accounts a previous marriage with Northumberland, though 
the latter solemnly and positively denied it — which was never 
disclosed, but which, having been considered by the archbishop 
and a committee of ecclesiastical lawyers, was pronounced, on 
the 17th, sufficient to invalidate her marriage. The same day 
all her reputed lovers were executed; and on the 19th she herself 
suffered death on Tower Green, her head being struck off with 
a sword by the executioner of Calais brought to England for the 
purpose. 6 She had regarded the prospect of death with courage 
and almost with levity, laughing heartily as she put her hands 
about her " little neck " and recalled the skill of the executioner. 
" I have seen many men " (wrote Sir William Kingston, governor 
of the Tower) "and also women executed, and all they have 
been in great sorrow, and to my knowledge this lady has much 
joy and pleasure in death." On the following day Henry was 
betrothed to Jane Seymour. 

Amidst the vituperations of the adherents of the papacy and 
the later Elizabethan eulogies, and in the absence of the records 
on which her sentence was pronounced, Anne Boleyn's guilt 
remains unproved. To Sir William Kingston she protested 
her entire innocence, and on the scaffold while expressing her 
submission she made no confession. 6 Smeaton alone of her 
supposed lovers made a full confession, and it is possible that his 
statement was drawn from him by threats of torture or hopes 
of pardon. Norris, according to one account, 7 also confessed, 
but subsequently declared that he had been betrayed into making 
his statement. The others were all said to have " confessed in 
a manner " on the scaffold, but much weight cannot be placed 
on these general confessions, which were, according to the 
custom of the time, a declaration of submission to the king's will 
and of general repentance rather than acknowledgment of the 
special crime. " I pray God save the king," Anne herself is 
reported to have said on the scaffold, " and send him long to 
reign over you, for a gentler nor a more merciful prince was there 
never; and to me he was ever a good, a gentle and sovereign 
lord." A principal witness for the charge of incest was Roch- 
ford's own wife, a woman of infamous character, afterwards 
executed for complicity in the intrigues of Catherine Howard. 
The discovery of Anne's misdeeds coincided in an extraordinary 
manner with Henry's disappointment in not obtaining by her 
a male heir, while the king's despotic power and the universal 
unpopularity of Anne both tended to hinder the administration 
of pure justice. Nevertheless, though unproved, Anne's guilt 
is more than probable. It is almost incredible that two grand 

6 Letters and Papers of Henry VIII. x. pp. 374, 381, 385. 

6 According to the most trustworthy accounts, but see Letters and 
Papers, x. p. 382. The well-known letter to Henry VIII. attributed 
to her is now recognized as an Elizabethan forgery. 

7 Archaeologia, xxiii. 64. 



BOLGARI— BOLINGBROKE 



161 



juries, a petty jury, and a tribunal consisting of nearly all the 
lay peers of England, with the evidence before them which we 
do not now possess, should have all unanimously passed a sentence 
of guilt contrary to the facts and their convictions, and that 
such a sentence should have been supported by Anne's own 
father and uncle. Every year since her marriage Anne had given 
birth to a child, and Henry had no reason to despair of more; 
while, if Henry's state of health was such as was reported, the 
desire for children, which Anne shared with him, may be urged 
as an argument for her guilt. Sir Francis Weston in a letter 
to his family almost acknowledges his guilt in praying for pardon, 
especially for offences against his wife; 1 Anne's own conduct 
and character almost prepare us for some catastrophe. Whether 
innocent or guilty, however, her fate caused no regrets and her 
misfortunes did not raise a single champion or defender. The 
sordid incidents of her rise, and the insolence with which she 
used her triumph, had alienated all hearts from the unhappy 
woman. Among the people she had always been intensely 
'disliked; the love of justice, and the fear of trade losses imminent 
upon a breach with Charles V., combined to render her unpopular. 
She appealed to the king's less refined instincts, and Henry's 
deterioration of character may be dated from his connexion with 
her. She is described as " not one of the handsomest women 
in the world; she is of a middling stature, swarthy complexion, 
long neck, wide mouth, bosom not much raised, and in fact 
has nothing but the English king's great appetite, and her eyes 
which are black and beautiful, and take great effect." 2 Cranmer 
admired her — " sitting in her hair " (i.e. with her hair falling 
over her shoulders, which seems to have been her custom on 
great occasions), " upon a horse litter, richly apparelled," at 
her coronation. 3 

Bibliography. — Art. in the Diet, of Nat. Biography and authori- 
ties cited; Henry VIII. by A. F. Pollard (1905); Anne Boleyn, by 
P. Friedman (1884); The Early Life of Anne Boleyn, by J. H. 
Round (1886) ; The Divorce of Catherine of Aragon, by J. A. Froude 
(1891); " Der Ursprung der Ehescheidung Konig Heinrichs VIII." 
and " Der Sturz des Cardinals Wolsey," by W. Busch (Historisches 
Taschenbuch, vi. Folge viii. 273 and ix. 41, 1889 and 1890); Lives, 
by Miss E. O. Benger (1821); and Miss A. Strickland, Lives of the 
Queens of England (1851), vol. ii.; Notices of Historic Persons Buried 
in the Tower of London, by D. C. Bell (1877); The Wives of Henry 
VIII. by M. A. S. Hume (1905); Excerpta Historica, by N. H. 
Nicolas (1831), p. 260; Spanish Chronicle of Henry VIII. tr. by 
M. A. S. Hume (1889); Records of the Reformation, by N. Pocock 
(1870) ; Harleian Miscellany (1808), iii. 47 (the love letters) ; Archaeo- 
logia, xxiii. 64 (memorial of G. Constantyne) ; Eng. Hist. Rev. 
v. 544, viii. 53, 299, x. 104; State Trials, i. 410; History of Henry 
VIII. by Lord Herbert of Cherbury; E. Hall's Chronicle: Original 
Letters, ed. by Sir H. Ellis, i. ser., ii. 37, 53 et seq., ii. ser., ii. 10; 
Extracts from the Life of Queen Anne Boleigne, by G. Wyat (1817); 
The Negotiations of Thomas Wolsey, by Sir W. Cavendish (164 1, rep. 
Harleian Misc. 1810 v.) ; C. Wriothesley's Chronicle (Camden Soc, 
1875-1877); Notes and Queries, 8 ser., viii. 141, 189, 313, 350; 
II Successo de la Morte de la Regina de Inghilterra (1536); The Maner 
of the Tryumphe of Caleys and Bullen, and the Noble Tryumphaunt 
Coronacyon of Queen Anne (1533, rep. 1884); State Papers Henry 
VIII.; Letters and Papers of Henry VIII., by Brewer and Gardiner, 
esp. the prefaces; Col. of State Pap. England and Spain, Venetian 
and Foreign ( 1 558-1 559), p. 525 (an account full of obvious errors) ; 
Cotton MSS. (Brit. Mus.), Otho C. 10; " Baga de secretis " in Rep. 
iii., App. ii. of Dep. Keeper of Public Records, p. 242; " Romische 
Dokumente,' : v., M. S. Ehses (Gorres-gesellschaft, Bd. ii., 1893). See also 
articles on Catherine of Aragon and Henry VIII. (P. C. Y.) 

BOLGARI, or Bolgary, a ruined town of Russia, in the gov- 
ernment of Kazan, 4 m. from the left bank of the Volga, in 55 N. 
lat. It is generally considered to have been the capital of the 
Bulgarians when they were established in that part of Europe 
(5th to 15th century). Ruins of the old walls and towers still 
survive, as well as numerous kurgans or burial-mounds, with 
inscriptions, some in Arabic (1222-1341), others in Armenian 
(years 557, 984 and 986), and yet others in Turkic. Upon being 
opened these tombs were found to contain weapons, implements, 
utensils, and silver and copper coins, bearing inscriptions, 

1 Letters and Papers, x. 358. 

1 " Sanuto Diaries," October 31, 1532, in Cal. of St. Pap. Venetian, 
iv. p. 365- 

' Original Letters, ed. by Sir H. Ellis, 1 ser. ii. 37, and Cal. of St. 
Pap. Venetian, iv. 351, 418. 

IV. 6 



some in ordinary Arabic, others in Kufic (a kind of epigraphic 
Arabic). These and other antiquities collected here (1722) are 
preserved in museums at Kazan, Moscow and St Petersburg. 
The ruins, which were practically discovered in the reign of 
Peter the Great, were visited and described by Pallas, Humboldt 
and others. The city of Bolgari was destroyed by the Mongols 
in 1238, and again by Tamerlane early in the following century, 
after which it served as the capital of the Khans (sovereign 
princes) of the Golden Horde of Mongols, and finally, in the second 
half of the 15th century it became a part of the principality 
of Kazan, and so eventually of Russia. The Arab geographer 
Ibn Haukal states that in his time, near the end of the 10th 
century, it was a place of 10,000 inhabitants. 

See Ibn Fadhlan, Nachrichten iiber die Wolga Bulgaren (Ger. trans, 
by Frahn, St Petersburg, 1832). 

BOLI, the chief town of a sanjak of the Kastamuni vilayet 
in Asia Minor, altitude 2500 ft., situated in a rich plain watered 
by the Boli Su, a tributary of the Filiyas Chai (Billaeus). Pop. 
(1894) 10,796 (Moslems, 9642; Greeks, 758; Armenians, 396). 
Cotton and leather are manufactured; the country around is 
fertile, and in the neighbourhood are large forests of oak, beech, 
elm, chestnut and pine, the timber of which is partly used locally 
and partly exported to Constantinople. Three miles east of 
Boli, at Eskihissar, are the ruins of Bithynium, the birthplace 
of Antinous, also called Anlinoopolis, and in Byzantine times 
Claudiopolis. In and around Boli are numerous marbles with 
Greek inscriptions, chiefly sepulchral, and architectural frag- 
ments. At Ilija, south of the town, are warm springs much prized 
for their medicinal properties. 

BOLINGBROKE, HENRY ST JOHN, Viscount (1678-1751), 
English statesman and writer, son of Sir Henry St John, Bart, 
(afterwards 1st Viscount St John, a member of a younger branch 
of the family of the earls of Bolingbroke and barons St John of 
Bletso), and of Lady Mary Rich, daughter of the 2nd earl of 
Warwick, was baptized on the 10th of October 1678, and was 
educated at Eton. He travelled abroad during 1698 and 1699 
and acquired an exceptional knowledge of French. The dissipa- 
tion and extravagance of his youth exceeded all limits and 
surprised his contemporaries. He spent weeks in riotous orgies 
and outdrank the most experienced drunkards. An informant 
of Goldsmith saw him once " run naked through the park in a 
state of intoxication." Throughput his career he desired, 
says Swift, his intimate friend, to be thought the Alcibiades 
or Petronius of his age, and to mix licentious orgies with the 
highest political responsibilities. 4 In 1700 he married Frances, 
daughter of Sir Henry Winchcombe, Bart., of Bucklebury, 
Berkshire, but matrimony while improving his fortune did not 
redeem his morals. 

He was returned to parliament in 1701 for the family borough 
of Woptton Bassett in Wiltshire. He declared himself a Tory, 
attached himself to Harley (afterwards Lord Oxford), then 
speaker, whom he now addressed as " dear master," and distin- 
guished himself by his eloquence in debate, eclipsing his school- 
fellow, Walpole, and gaining an extraordinary ascendancy over 
the House of Commons. In May he had charge of the bill for 
securing the Protestant succession; he took part in the impeach- 
ment of the Whig lords for their conduct concerning the Partition 
treaties, and opposed the oath abjuring the Pretender. In March 
1702 he was chosen commissioner for taking the public accounts. 
After Anne's accession he supported the bills in 1702 and 1704 
against occasional conformity, and took a leading part in the 
disputes which arose between the two Houses. In 1704 St John 
took office with Harley as secretary at war, thus being brought 
into intimate relations with Marlborough, by whom he was 
treated with paternal partiality. In 1 708 he quitted office with 
Harley on the failure of the latter's intrigue, and retired to the 
country till 1 7 10, when he became a privy councillor and secretary 
of state in Harley's new ministry, representing Berkshire in 
parliament. He supported the bill for requiring a real property 
qualification for a seat in parliament. In 17 n he founded the 

* Swift's Inquiry into the Behaviour of the Queen's Last Ministry; 
Mrs Delaney's Correspondence, 2 ser., iii. 168- 

II 



162 



BOLINGBROKE 



Brothers' Club, a society of Tory politicians and men of letters, 
and the same year witnessed the failure of the two expeditions 
to the West Indies and to Canada promoted by him. In 171 2 
he was the author of the bill taxing newspapers. But the great 
business of the new government was the making of the peace 
with France. The refusal of the Whigs to grant terms in 1706, 
and again in 1 700 when Louis XIV. offered to yield every point 
for which the allies professed to be fighting, showed that the 
war was not being continued for English national interests, and 
the ministry were supported by the queen, the parliament and 
the people in their design to terminate hostilities. But various 
obstacles arose from the diversity of aims among the allies; and 
St John was induced, contrary to the most solemn obligations, to 
enter into separate and secret negotiations with France for the 
security of English interests. In 'May 1712 St John ordered the 
duke of Ormonde, who had succeeded Marlborough in the com- 
mand, to refrain from any further engagement. These instruc- 
tions were communicated to the French, though not to the allies, 
Louis putting Dunkirk as security into possession of England, 
and the shameful spectacle was witnessed of the desertion by 
the English troops of their allies almost on the battlefield. 
Subsequently St John received the congratulations of the French 
minister, Torcy, on the occasion of the French victory over 
Prince Eugene at Denain. 

In August St John, who had on the 7th of July been created 
Viscount Bolingbroke and Baron St John of Lydiard Tregoze, 
went to France to conduct negotiations, and signed an armistice 
between England and France for four months on the 10th. Finally 
the treaty of Utrecht was signed on the 31st of March 17 13 by 
all the allies except the emperor. The first production of Addison's 
Cato was made by the Whigs the occasion of a great demonstra- 
tion of indignation against the peace, and by Bolingbroke for 
presenting the actor Booth with a purse of fifty guineas for 
"defending the cause of liberty against a perpetual dictator" 
(Marlborough). In the terms granted to England there was 
perhaps little to criticize. But the manner of the peacemaking, 
which had been carried on by a series of underhand conspiracies 
with the enemy instead of by open conferences with the allies, 
and was characterized throughout by a violation of the most 
solemn international assurances, left a deep and lasting stain 
upon the national honour and credit ; and not less dishonourable 
was the abandonment of the Catalans by the treaty. For all 
this Bolingbroke must be held primarily responsible. In June 
his commercial treaty with France, establishing free trade with 
that country, was rejected. Meanwhile the friendship between 
Bolingbroke and Harley, which formed the basis of the whole 
Tory administration, had been gradually dissolved. In March 
171 1, by Guiscard's attempt on his life, Harley got the wound 
which had been intended for St John, with all the credit. In 
May Harley obtained the earldom of Oxford and was made 
lord treasurer, while in July St John was greatly disappointed 
at receiving only his viscountcy instead of the earldom lately 
extinct in his family, and at being passed over for the Garter. 
In September 17 13 Swift came to London, and made a last but 
vain attempt to reconcile his two friends. But now a further 
cause of difference had arisen. The queen's health was visibly 
breaking, and the Tory ministers could only look forward to 
their own downfall on the accession of the elector of Hanover. 
Both Oxford 1 and Bolingbroke had< maintained for some time 
secret communications with James, and promised their help in 
restoring him at the queen's death. The aims of the former, 
prudent, procrastinating and vacillating by nature, never ex- 
tended probably beyond the propitiation of his Tory followers; 
and it is difficult to imagine that Bolingbroke could have really 
advocated the Pretender's recall, whose divine right he repudi- 
ated and whose religion and principles he despised. Neverthe- 
less, whatever his chief motive may have been, whether to dis- 
place Oxford as leader of the party, to strengthen his position 
and that of the faction in order to dictate terms to the future 
king, or to reinstate James, Bolingbroke, yielding to his more 
impetuous and adventurous disposition, went much further 
1 Berwick's Mem. (Petitot), vol. lxvi. 219. 



than Oxford. It is possible to suppose a connexion between 
his zeal for making peace with France and a desire to forward 
the Pretender's interests or win support from the Jacobites. 2 
During his diplomatic mission to France he had incurred blame 
for remaining at the opera while the Pretender was present, 3 
and according to the Mackintosh transcripts he had several 
secret interviews with him. Regular communications were kept 
up subsequently. In March 17 14 Herville, the French envoy 
in London, sent to Torcy, the French foreign minister in Paris, 
the substance of two long conversations with Bolingbroke in 
which the latter advised patience till after the accession of George, 
when a great reaction was to be expected in favour of the Pre- 
tender. At the same time he spoke of the treachery of Marl- 
borough and Berwick, and of one other, presumably Oxford, 
whom he refused to name, all of whom were in communication 
with Hanover. 4 Both Oxford and Bolingbroke warned James 
that he could have little chance of success unless he changed 
his religion, but the latter's refusal (March 13) does not appear 
to have stopped the communications. Bolingbroke gradually 
superseded Oxford in the leadership. Lady Masham, the queen's 
favourite, quarrelled with Oxford and identified herself with 
Bolingbroke's interests. The harsh treatment of the Hanoverian 
demands was inspired by him, and won favour with the queen, 
while Oxford's influence declined; and by his support of the 
Schism Bill in May 1714, a violent Tory measure forbidding all 
education by dissenters by making an episcopal licence obligatory 
for schoolmasters, he probably intended to compel Oxford to give 
up the game. Finally, a charge of corruption brought by Oxford 
in July against Bolingbroke and Lady Masham, in connexion 
with the commercial treaty with Spain, failed, and the lord 
treasurer was dismissed or retired on the 27 th of July. 

Bolingbroke was now supreme, and everything appeared 
tending inevitably to a Jacobite restoration. The Jacobite Sir 
William Windham had been made chancellor of the exchequer, 
important military posts were placed in the hands of the faction, 
and a new ministry of Jacobites was projected. But now the 
queen's sudden death on the 1st of August, and the appointment 
of Shrewsbury to the lord treasurership, instantly changed the 
whole scene and ruined Bolingbroke. " The earl, of Oxford was 
removed on Tuesday," he wote to Swift on the 3rd of August, 
" the queen died on Sunday! What a world is this and how 
does fortune banter us!" According to Herville, the French 
envoy, Bolingbroke declared to him that in six weeks he could 
have secured everything. Nevertheless the exact nature of 
his projects remains obscure. It is probable that his statement 
in his letter to Windham that " none of us had any very settled 
resolution " is true, though his declaration in the Patriot King 
that " there were no designs on foot ... to place the crown 
on the head of the Pretender" is a palpable falsehood. His 
great object was doubtless to gain supreme power and to keep 
it by any means, and by any betrayal that the circumstances 
demanded; and it is not without* significance perhaps that on 
the very day of Oxford's dismissal he gave a dinner to the Whig 
leaders, and on the day preceding the queen's death ordered 
overtures to be made to the elector. 6 

On the accession of George I. the illuminations and bonfire at 
Lord Bolingbroke's house in Golden Square were " particularly 
fine and remarkable," 6 but he was immediately dismissed 
from office. He retired to Bucklebury and is said to have now 
written the answer to the Secret History of the White Staff 
accusing him of Jacobitism. In March 1 7 1 5 he in vain attempted 
to defend the late ministry in the new parliament; and on the 
announcement of Walpole's intended attack upon the authors 
of the treaty of Utrecht he fled in disguise (March 28, 1715) 
to Paris, where he was well received, after having addressed 
a letter to Lord Lansdowne from Dover protesting his innocence 

2 Hist. MSS. Comm., Portland MSS. v. 235. 

3 Stuart MSS. (Roxburghe Club), ii. 383. 

4 HisL_ MSS. Comm., MSS. of H. M. the King, Stuart Papers, 
i. p. xlviii. 

6 Sichel's Bolingbroke, i. 340 ; Lockhart Papers, i. 460; Macpherson, 
ii. 529. 

6 Wentworth Papers, 408. 



BOLINGBROKE 



163 



and challenging " the most inveterate pf his enemies to produce 
any instance of his criminal correspondence." Bolingbroke 
in July entirely identified himself with the interests of the 
Pretender, whose secretary he became, and on the 10th of 
September he was attainted. But his counsel was neglected 
for that of ignorant refugees and Irish priests. The expedition of 
1715 was resolved upon against his advice. He drew up James's 
declaration, but the assurances he had inserted concerning the 
security of the Church of England were cancelled by the priests. 
He remained at Paris, and endeavoured to establish relations 
with the regent. On the return of James, as the result of petty 
intrigues and jealousies, Bolingbroke was dismissed from his 
office. He now renounced all further efforts on the Pretender's 
behalf. 1 Replying to Mary of Modena, who had sent a message 
deprecating his ill-will, he wished his arm might rot off if he ever 
used pen or sword in their service again ! 2 

He now turned to the English government in hopes of pardon. 
In March 1 7 16 he declared his final abandonment of the Pretender 
and promised to use his influence to secure the withdrawal of 
his friends; but he refused to betray any secrets or any in- 
dividuals. He wrote his Reflexions upon Exile, and in 171 7 his 
letter to Sir W. Windham in explanation of his position, generally 
considered one of his finest compositions, but not published 
till 1753 after his death. The same year he formed a liaison 
with Marie Claire Deschamps de Marcilly, widow of the marquis 
de Villette, whom he married in 1720 after the death in 17 18 
of Lady Bolingbroke, whom he had treated with cruel neglect. 
He bought and resided at the estate of La Source near Orleans, 
studied philosophy, criticized the chronology of the Bible, and 
was visited amongst others by Voltaire, who expressed un- 
bounded admiration for his learning and politeness. In 1723, 
through the medium of the king's mistress, the duchess of Kendal, 
he at last received his pardon, returned to London in June or 
July, and placed his services at the disposal of Walpole, by whom, 
however, his offers to procure the accession of several Tories to 
the administration were received very coldly. During the 
following winter he made himself useful in France in gaining 
information for the government. In 1725 an act was passed 
enabling him to hold real estate but without power of alienating 
it. 3 But this had been effected in consequence of a peremptory 
order of the king, against Walpole's wishes, who succeeded in 
maintaining his exclusion from the House of Lords. He now 
bought an estate at Dawley, near Uxbridge, where he renewed his 
intimacy with Pope, Swift and Voltaire, took part in Pope's 
literary squabbles, and wrote the philosophy for the Essay on 
Man. On the first occasion which offered itself, that of Pulteney's 
rupture with Walpole in 1726, he endeavoured to organize an 
opposition in conjunction with the former and Windham; and 
in 1727 began his celebrated series of letters to the Craftsman, 
attacking the Walpoles, signed an " Occasional Writer." He 
gained over the duchess of Kendal with a bribe of £11,000 from 
his wife's estates, and with Walpole's approval obtained an 
audience with George. His success was imminent, and it was 
thought his appointment as chief minister was assured. In 
Walpole's own words, " as St John had the duchess entirely 
on his side I need not add what must or might in time have been 
the consequence," and he prepared for his dismissal. But once 
more Bolingbroke's " fortune turned rotten at the very moment 
it grew ripe," 4 and his projects and hopes were ruined by the 
king's death in June. 6 Further papers from his pen signed 
" John Trot " appeared in the Craftsman in 1728, and in 1730 
followed Remarks on the History of England by Humphrey Old- 
castle, attacking the Walpoles' policy. The assault on the govern- 

1 Hist. MSS. Comm., Stuart Papers, i. 500; Berwick's Mem. 
(Petitot), vol. lxvi. 262. 

2 Coxe's Walpole, i. 200; Stuart Papers, ii. 511, and also 446,460. 

3 Hist. MSS. Comm., Onslow MSS. 515. 

* Bolingbroke to Swift, June 24th, 1727. He adds, " to hanker 
after a court is below either you or me." 

6 Sichel's Bolingbroke, ii. 267; Stanhope, ii. 163; Hist. MSS. 
Comm., Onslow MSS. 516, 8th Rep. Pt. III. App. p. 3. This 
remarkable incident is discredited by H. Walpole in Letters (ed. 
1903), iii. 269; but he was not always well informed concerning his 
father's career. 



ment prompted by Bolingbroke was continued in the House of 
Commons by Windham, and great efforts were made to estab- 
lish the alliance between the Tories and the Opposition Whigs. 
The Excise Bill in 1733 and the Septennial Bill in the following 
year offered opportunities for further attacks on the government, 
which Bolingbroke supported by a new series of papers in the 
Craftsman styled " A Dissertation on Parties "; but the whole 
movement collapsed after the new elections, which returned 
Walpole to power in 1735 with a large majority. 

Bolingbroke retired baffled and disappointed from the fray 
to France in June, residing principally at the chateau of Argeville 
near Fontainebleau. He now wrote his Letters on the Study of 
History (printed privately before his death and published in 
1752), and the True Use of Retirement. In 1738 he visited 
England, became one of the leading friends and advisers of 
Frederick, prince of Wales, who now headed the opposition, 
and wrote for the occasion The Patriot King, which together with 
a previous essay, The Spirit of Patriotism, and The Slate of 
Parties at the Accession of George I., were entrusted to Pope and 
not published. Having failed, however, to obtain any share 
in politics, he returned to France in 1739, and subsequently sold 
Dawley. In 1742 and 1743 he again visited England and 
quarrelled with Warburton. In 1744 he settled finally at Bat- 
tersea with his friend Hugh Hume, 3rd earl of Marchmont, 
and was present at Pope's death in May. The discovery that 
the poet had printed secretly 1500 copies of The Patriot King, 
caused him to publish a correct version in 1749, and stirred up 
a further altercation with Warburton, who defended his friend 
against Bolingbroke's bitter aspersions, the latter, whose con- 
duct was generally reprehended, publishing a Familiar Epistle 
to the most Impudent Man Living. In 1744 he had been very 
busy assisting in the negotiations for the establishment of the 
new " broad bottom " administration, and showed no sympathy 
for the Jacobite expedition in 1745. He recommended the tutor 
for Prince George, afterwards George III. About 1749 he wrote 
the Present State of the Nation, an unfinished pamphlet. Lord 
Chesterfield records the last words heard from him: " God who 
placed me here will do what He pleases with me hereafter and 
He knows best what to do." He died on the 12th of December 
1 7 5 1 , his wife having predeceased him in 1750. They were both 
buried in the parish church at Battersea, where a monument 
with medallions and inscriptions composed by Bolingbroke was 
erected to their memory. 

The writings and career of Bolingbroke make a far weaker 
impression upon posterity than they made on contemporaries. 
His genius and character were superficial; his abilities were 
exercised upon ephemeral objects, and not inspired by lasting 
or universal ideas. Bute and George III. indeed derived their 
political ideas from The Patriot King, but the influence which he 
is said to have exercised upon Voltaire, Gibbon and Burke is 
very problematical. Burke wrote his Vindication of Natural 
Society in imitation of Bolingbroke's style, but in refutation of 
his principles; and in the Reflections on the French Revolution 
he exclaims, " Who now reads Bolingbroke, who ever read him 
through?" Burke denies that Bolingbroke's words left "any 
permanent impression on his mind." Bolingbroke's conversation, 
described by Lord Chesterfield as " such a flowing happiness 
of expression that even his most familiar conversations if taken 
down in writing would have borne the press without the least 
correction," his delightful companionship, his wit, good looks, 
and social qualities which charmed during his lifetime and made 
firm friendships with men of the most opposite character, can 
now only be faintly imagined. His most brilliant gift was his 
eloquence, which according to Swift was acknowledged by men 
of all factions to be unrivalled. None of his great orations has 
survived, a loss regretted by Pitt more than that of the missing 
books of Livy and Tacitus, and no art perishes more completely 
with its possessor than that of oratory. His political works, in 
which the expression is often splendidly eloquent, spirited and 
dignified, are for the most part exceedingly rhetorical in style, 
while his philosophical essays were undertaken with the chief 
object of displaying his eloquence, and no characteristic renders 



164 



BOLIVAR 



writings less readable for posterity. They are both deficient in 
solidity and in permanent interest. The first deals with mere 
party questions without sincerity and without depth; and the 
'second, composed as an amusement in retirement without any 
serious preparation, in their attacks on metaphysics and theology 
and in their feeble deism present no originality and carry no 
conviction. Both kinds reflect in their Voltairian superficiality 
Bolingbroke's manner of life, which was throughout uninspired 
by any great ideas or principles and thoroughly false and super- 
ficial. Though a libertine and a free-thinker, he had championed 
the most bigoted and tyrannical high-church measures. His diplo- 
macy had been subordinated to party necessities. He had 
supported by turns and simultaneously Jacobite and Hanoverian 
interests. He had only conceived the idea of The Patriot King 
in the person of the worthless Frederick in order to stir up 
sedition, while his eulogies on retirement and study were pro- 
nounced from an enforced exile. He only attacked party 
government because he was excluded from it, and only railed 
at corruption because it was the corruption of his antagonists 
and not his own. His public life presents none of those acts of 
devotion and self-sacrifice which often redeem a career char- 
acterized by errors, follies and even crimes. 

One may deplore his unfortunate history and wasted genius, 
but it is impossible to regret his exclusion from the government 
of England. He was succeeded in the title as 2nd Viscount 
Bolingbroke, according to the special remainder, by his nephew 
Frederick, 3rd Viscount St John (a title granted to Bolingbroke's 
father in 17 16), from whom the title has descended. 

Bibliography. — Bolingbroke's collected works, including his chief 
political writings already mentioned and his philosophical essays 
Concerning the Nature, Extent and Reality of Human Knowledge, On 
the Folly and Presumption of Philosophers, On the Rise and Progress of 
Monotheism, and On Authority in Matters of Religion, were first pub- 
lished in Mallet's faulty edition in 1 754, — according to Johnson's well- 
known denunciation, " the blunderbuss charged against religion and 
morality," — and subsequently in 1778, 1809 and 1841. A Collection 
of Political Tracts by Bolingbroke was published in 1748. His 
Letters were published by G. Parke in 1798, and by Grimoard, 
Lettres historiques, politiques, philosophiques, &c, in 1808; for others 
see Pope's and Swift's Correspondence; W. Coxe's Walpole; Philli- 
more's Life of Lyttelton ; Hardwick State Papers, vol. ii. ; Marchmont 
Papers, ed. by Sir G. H. Rose (1831); Letters to Lord Chancellor 
Hardwicke in Add. MSS. Brit. Museum (see Index, 1894-1899), 
mostly transcribed by W. Sichel; Hist. MSS. Comm., MSS. of 
Marquis of Bath, Duke of Portland at Welbeck; while a further 
collection of his letters relating to the treaty of Utrecht is in the 
British Museum. For his attempts at verse see Walpole's Royal and 
Noble Authors (1806), iv. 209 et seq. See also bibliography of his 
works in Sichel, ii. 456, 249. 

A life of Bolingbroke appeared in his lifetime about 1740, entitled 
Authentic Memoirs (in the Grenville Library, Brit. Mus.), which 
recounted his escapades ; other contemporary accounts were published 
in 1752 and 1754, and a life by Goldsmith in 1770. Of the more 
modern biographies may be noted that in the Diet, of Nat. Biog. by 
Sir Leslie Stephen, 1897; by C. de Remusat in V Angleterre au i8me 
siecle (1856), vol. i. ; by T. Macknight (1863); by J. Churtori 1 
Collins (1886); by A. Hassall (1889); and by Walter Sichel (1901- 
1902), elaborate and brilliant, but unduly eulogistic. (P. C. Y.) 

BOLIVAR, SIMON (1783-1830), the hero of South American 
independence, was born in the city of Caracas, Venezuela, on 
the 24th of July 1783. His father was Juan Vicente Bolivar y 
Ponte, and his mother Maria Concepcion Palacios y Sojo, both 
descended from noble families in Venezuela. Bolivar was sent 
to Europe to prosecute his studies, and resided at Madrid for 
several years. Having completed his education, he spent some 
time in travelling, chiefly in the south of Europe, and visited 
Paris, where he was an eye-witness of some of the last scenes of 
the Revolution. Returning to Madrid, he married, in 1801, the 
daughter of Don N. Toro, uncle of the marquis of Toro in Caracas, 
and embarked with her for Venezuela, intending, it is said, to 
devote himself to the improvement of his large estate. But the 
premature death of his young wife, who fell a victim to yellow 
fever, drove him again to Europe. Returning home in 1809 
he passed through the United States, where, for the first time, 
he had an opportunity of observing the working of free institu- 
tions; and soon after his arrival in Venezuela he appears to have 
identified himself with the cause of independence which had 
already agitated the Spanish colonies for some years. Being one 



of the promoters of the insurrection at Caracas in April 18 10, 
he received a colonel's commission from the revolutionary junta, 
and was associated with Louis Lopez Mendez in a mission to the 
court of Great Britain. Venezuela declared its independence on 
the 5th of July 1811, and in the following year the war com- 
menced in earnest by the advance of Monteverde with the Spanish 
troops. Bolivar was entrusted with the command of the import- 
ant post of Puerto Cabello, but not being supported he had to 
evacuate the place; and owing to the inaction of Miranda the 
Spaniards recovered their hold over the country. 

Like others of the revolutionists Bolivar took to flight, and 
succeeded in reaching Curacao in safety. He did not, however, 
remain long in retirement, but in September 1812, hearing of 
important movements in New Granada, repaired to Cartagena, 
where he received a commission to operate against the Spanish 
troops on the Magdalena river. In this expedition he proved 
eminently successful, driving the Spaniards from post to post, 
until arriving at the confines of Venezuela he boldly determined 
to enter that province and try conclusions with General Monte- 
verde himself. His troops did not number more than 500 men; 
but, in spite of many discouragements, he forced his way to 
Merida and Truxillo, towns of some importance in the west of 
Venezuela, and succeeded in raising the population to his 
support. Forming his increased forces into two divisions, he 
committed the charge of one to his colleague Rivas, and push- 
ing on for Caracas the capital, issued his decree of " war to the 
death." A decisive battle ensued at Lastoguanes, where the 
Spanish troops under Monteverde sustained a crushing defeat. 
Caracas was entered in triumph on the 4th of August 1813, 
and Monteverde took refuge in Puerto Cabello. General Marino 
effected the liberation of the eastern district of Venezuela, and 
the patriots obtained entire possession of the country in January 
1814. This success was, however, of very brief duration. The 
royalists, effectually roused by the reverses they had sustained, 
concentrated all their means, and a number of sanguinary 
encounters ensued. Bolivar was eventually defeated by Boves 
near Cura, in the plains of La Puerta, and compelled to embark 
for Cumana with the shattered remains of his forces. Caracas was 
retaken by the Spaniards in July; and before the end of the year 
1 8 14 the royalists were again the undisputed masters of Venezuela. 
From Cumana Bolivar repaired to Cartagena, and thence to 
Tunja, where the revolutionary congress of New Granada was 
sitting. Here, notwithstanding his misfortunes and the efforts 
of his personal enemies, he was received and treated with great 
consideration. T ne congress appointed him to conduct an ex- 
pedition against Santa Fe de Bogota, where Don Cundinamarca 
had refused to acknowledge the new coalition of the provinces. 
In December 1814 he appeared before Bogota with a force of 
2000 men, and obliged the recalcitrant leaders to capitulate, — 
a service for which he received the thanks of congress. In 
the meanwhile Santa Martha had fallen into the hands of the 
royalists, and Bolivar was ordered to the relief of the place. In 
this, however, he was not successful, General Morillo having 
landed an overwhelming Spanish force. Hopeless of the attempt 
he resigned his commission and embarked for Kingston, Jamaica, 
in May 18 14. While residing there an attempt was made upon 
his life by a hired assassin, who, in mistake, murdered his 
secretary. 

From Kingston Bolivar went to Aux Cayes in Haiti, where he 
was furnished with a small force by President Petion. An 
expedition was organized, and landed on the mainland in May 

1816, but proved a failure. Nothing daunted, however, he ob- 
tained reinforcements at Aux Cayes, and in December landed 
first in Margarita, and then at Barcelona. Here a provisional 
government was formed, and troops were assembled to resist 
Morillo, who was then advancing at the head of a strong division. 
The hostile forces encountered each other on the 16th of February 

1817, when a desperate conflict ensued, which lasted during that 
and the two following days,and ended in the defeat of the royalists. 
Morillo retired in disorder, and being met on his retreat by J. A. 
Paez with his llaneros, suffered an additional and more complete 
overthrow. Being now recognized as commander-in-chief,Bolivar 



BOLIVAR 



.65 



proceeded in his career of victory, and before the close of the 
year had fixed his headquarters at Angostura on the Orinoco. 
At the opening of the congress which assembled in that city 
on the 1 5th February 18 19 he submitted an elaborate exposition 
of his views on government, and concluded by surrendering his 
authority into the hands of congress. Being, however, required 
to resume his power, and retain it until the independence of the 
country had been completely established, he reorganized his 
troops, and set out from Angostura, in order to cross the 
Cordilleras, effect a junction with General Santander, who com- 
manded the republican force in New Granada, and bring their 
united forces into action against the common enemy. This bold 
and original design was crowned with complete success. In 
July 1819 he entered Tunja, after a sharp action on the adjoining 
heights; and on the 7th of August he gained the victory of 
Boyaca, which gave him immediate possession of Bogota and all 
New Granada. 

His return to Angostura was a sort of national festival. He 
was hailed as the deliverer and father of his country, and all 
manner of distinctions and congratulations were heaped upon 
him. Availing himself, of the favourable moment, he obtained 
the enactment of the fundamental law of the 17th of December 
1819, by which the republics of Venezuela and New Granada 
were henceforth to be united in a single state, under his presi- 
dency, by the title of the Republic of Colombia. The seat of 
government was also transferred provisionally to Rosario de 
Cucuta, on the frontier of the two provinces, and Bolivar again 
took the field. Being now at the head of the most numerous 
and best appointed army the republicans had yet assembled, 
he gained important advantages over the Spaniards under 
Morillo, and on the 25th of November 1820 concluded at Truxillo 
an armistice of six months, probably in the hope that the Span- 
iards would come to terms, and that the further effusion of blood 
might be spared. If such were his views, however, they were 
disappointed. Morillo was recalled, and General Torre assumed 
the command. The armistice was allowed to expire, and a 
renewal of the contest became inevitable. Bolivar therefore 
resolved, if possible, to strike a decisive blow; and this accord- 
ingly he did at Carabobo, where, encountering Torre, he so 
completely routed the Spaniards that the shattered remains of 
their army were forced to take refuge in Puerto Cabello, where 
two years after they surrendered to Paez. The battle of Carabobo 
may be considered as having put an end to the war in Venezuela. 
On the 29th of June 1821 Bolivar entered Caracas, and by the 
close of the year the Spaniards were driven from every part of 
the province except Puerto Cabello. The next step was to 
secure, by permanent political institutions, the independence 
which had been so dearly purchased; and, accordingly, on the 
30th of August 182 1 the constitution of Colombia was adopted 
with general approbation, Bolivar himself being president, and 
Santander vice-president. 

There was, however, more work for him to do. The Spaniards, 
though expelled from Colombia, still held possession of the neigh- 
bouring provinces of Ecuador and Peru; and Bolivar determined 
to complete the liberation of the whole country. Placing him- 
self at the head of the army, he marched on Quito in Ecuador. 
A severe battle was fought at Pichincha, where, by the prowess 
of his colleague Sucre, the Spaniards were routed, and Quito 
was entered by the republicans in June 1822. Bolivar then 
marched upon Lima, which the royalists evacuated at his 
approach; and entering the capital in triumph, he was invested 
with absolute power as dictator, and authorized to call into 
action all the resources of the country. Owing, however, to the 
intrigues of the republican factions in Peru he was forced to 
withdraw to Truxillo, leaving the capital to the mercy of the 
Spaniards under Canterac, by whom it was immediately occu- 
pied. But this misfortune proved only temporary. By June 
1824 the liberating army was completely organized; and taking 
the field soon after, it routed the vanguard of the enemy. Im- 
proving his advantage, Bolivar pressed forward, and on the 6th 
of August defeated Canterac on the plains of Junin, after which 
he returned to Lima, leaving Sucre to follow the royalists in 



their retreat to Upper Peru — an exploit which the latter executed 
with equal ' ability and success, gaining a decisive victory at 
Ayacucho, and thus completing the dispersion of the Spanish 
force. The possessions of the Spaniards in Peru were now 
confined to the castles of Callao, which Rodil maintained for 
upwards of a year, in spite of all the means that could be em- 
ployed for their reduction. In June 1825 Bolivar visited Upper 
Peru, which, having detached itself from the government of 
Buenos Aires, was formed into a separate state, called Bolivia, 
in honour of the liberator. The first congress of the new 
republic assembled in August 1825, when Bolivar was declared 
perpetual protector, and requested to prepare for it a constitu- 
tion of government. 

His care was now directed to the administration of the affairs 
of the freed provinces. His endeavours to satisfy his country- 
men in this respect did not always meet with encouragement, and 
sometimes exposed him to slander. In December 1824 Bolivar 
convoked a constituent congress for the February following; 
but this body, taking into consideration the unsettled state of the 
country, thought it proper to invest him with dictatorial power 
for another year. His project of a constitution for Bolivia was 
presented to the congress of that state on the 25th of May 1826, 
accompanied with an address, in which he embodied his opinions 
respecting the form of government which he conceived most 
expedient for the newly established republics. This code, how- 
ever, did not give satisfaction. Its most extraordinary feature 
consisted in the provision for lodging the executive authority 
in the hands of a president for life, without responsibility and 
with power to nominate his successor, a proposal which alarmed 
the friends of liberty, and excited lively apprehensions amongst 
the republicans of Buenos Aires and Chile; whilst in Peru, 
Bolivar was accused of a design to unite into one state Colombia, 
Peru and Bolivia, and to render himself perpetual dictator of the 
confederacy. 

In the meanwhile the affairs of Colombia had taken a turn 
which demanded the presence of Bolivar in his own country. 
During his absence Santander had administered the government 
of the state ably and uprightly, and its independence had been 
recognized by other countries. But Paez, who commanded in 
Venezuela, having been accused of arbitrary conduct in the enrol- 
ment of the citizens of Caracas in the militia, refused obedience 
to the summons of the senate, and placed himself in a state of 
open rebellion against the government, being encouraged by a 
disaffected party in the northern deoartments who desired 
separation from the rest of the republic 

Accordingly, having entrusted the government to a council 
nominated by himself, with Santa Cruz at its head, Bolivar set 
out from Lima in September 1826, and hastening to Bogota, 
arrived there on the 14th of November. He immediately 
assumed the extraordinary powers which by the constitution 
the president was authorized to exercise in case of rebellion. 
After a short stay in the capital he pressed forward to stop the 
effusion of blood in Venezuela, where matters had gone much 
farther than he could have contemplated. On the 31st of 
December he reached Puerto Cabello, and the following day he 
issued a decree offering a general amnesty. He had then a 
friendly meeting with Paez and soon after entered Caracas, where 
he fixed his headquarters, in order to check the northern depart- 
ments, which had been the principal theatre of the disturbances. 
In the meanwhile Bolivar and Santander were re-elected to the 
respective offices of president and vice-president, and by law they 
should have qualified as such in January 1827. In February, ho w- 
ever,Bolivar formally resigned the presidency of therepublic,at the 
same time expressing a determination to refute the imputations 
of ambition which had been so freely cast upon him, by retiring 
into private life, and spending the remainder of his days on his 
patrimonial estate. Santander combated this proposal, urging 
him to resume his station as constitutional president, and declar- 
ing his own conviction that the troubles and agitations of the 
country could only be appeased by the authority and personal 
influence of the liberator himself. This view being confirmed 
by a resolution of congress, although it was not a unanimous 



66 



BOLIVAR— BOLIVIA 



one, Bolivar decided to resume his functions, and he repaired to 
Bogota to take the oaths. Before his arrival, however, he issued 
simultaneously three separate decrees — one granting a general 
amnesty, another convoking a national convention at Ocafia, 
and a third for establishing constitutional order throughout 
Colombia. His arrival was accelerated by the occurrence of 
events in Peru and the southern departments which struck at the 
very foundation of his power. Not long after his departure from 
Lima, the Bolivian code had been adopted as the constitution 
of Peru, and Bolivar had been declared president for life on the 
9th of December 1826, the anniversary of the battle of Ayacucho. 
At this time the Colombian auxiliary army was cantoned in Peru, 
and the third division, stationed at Lima, consisting of veteran 
troops under Lara and Sands, became distrustful of Bolivar's 
designs on the freedom of the republic. Accordingly, in about 
six weeks after the adoption of Bolivar's new constitution, a 
counter-revolution in the government of Peru was effected by 
this body of dissatisfied veterans, and the Peruvians, availing 
themselves of the opportunity, abjured the Bolivian code, de- 
posed the council appointed by the liberator, and proceeded 
to organize a provisional government for themselves. After this 
bloodless revolution the third division embarked at Callao on the 
17th of March 1827, and landed in the southern department of 
Colombia in the following month. Intelligence of these events 
reached Bolivar while in the north of Colombia, and he lost no 
time in preparing to march against the refractory troops, who 
formerly had placed such implicit confidence in him. But he 
was spared the necessity of coming to blows, for the leaders, 
finding the government in the hands of the national executive, 
had peaceably submitted to General Ovando. In the meanwhile 
Bolivar had accepted the presidency, and resumed the functions 
belonging to his official position. But although Colombia was, 
to all external appearance, restored to tranquillity, the nation 
was divided into two parties. Bolivar had, no doubt, regained 
the personal confidence of the officers and soldiers of the third 
division; but the republican party, with Santander at their 
head, continued to regard with undisguised apprehension his 
ascendancy over the army, suspecting him of a desire to imitate 
the career of Napoleon. In the meanwhile all parties looked 
anxiously to the convention of Ocafia, which was to assemble in 
March 1828, for a decided expression of the national will. The 
republicans hoped that the issue of its deliberations would be 
favourable to their views; whilst the military, on the other hand, 
did not conceal their conviction that a stronger and more per- 
manent form of government was essential to the public welfare. 
The latter view seems to have prevailed. In virtue of a decree, 
dated Bogota, the 27th of August 1828, Bolivar assumed the 
supreme power in Colombia, and continued to exercise it until 
his death, which took place at San Pedro, near Santa Marta, on 
the 17th of December 1830. 

Bolivar spent nine-tenths of a splendid patrimony in the 
service of his country; and although he had for a considerable 
period unlimited control over the revenues of three countries — 
Colombia, Peru and Bolivia — he died without a shilling of public 
money in his possession. He achieved the independence of three 
states, and called forth a new spirit in the southern portion of 
the New World. He purified the administration of justice; he 
encouraged the arts and sciences; he fostered national interests, 
and he induced other countries to recognize that independence 
which was in a great measure the fruit of his own exertions. 
His remains were removed in 1842 to Caracas, where a monu- 
ment was erected to his memory; a statue was put up in Bogota 
in 1846; in 1858 the Peruvians followed the example by erecting 
an equestrian statue of the liberator in Lima; and in 1884 a 
statue was erected in Central Park, New York. 

Twenty-two volumes of official documents bearing on Bolivar's 
career were officially published at Caracas in 1826-1833. There are 
lives by Larrazabal (New York, 1866) ; Rojas (Madrid, 1883) ; and 
Ducoudray-Holstein (Paris, 1831). Two volumes of his corre- 
spondence were published in New York in 1866. 

BOLlVAR, till 1908 a department of Colombia, bounded 
N. and W. by the Caribbean Sea, E. by the departments of 
Magdalena and Santander, S, by Antioquia and S.W. by Cauca. 



It has an area of 27,028 sq. m., composed in great part of low, 
alluvial plains, densely wooded, but slightly cultivated and 
unsuited for north European labour. The population, estimated 
at 323,097 in 1899, is composed largely of mixed races; in some 
localities the inhabitants of mixed race are estimated to constitute 
four-fifths of the population. The capital, Cartagena on the 
Caribbean coast, was once the principal commercial entrepdt of 
Colombia. Other important towns are Barranquilla and 
Mompox (8000), on the Magdalena river, and Corozal (9000) 
and Lorica (10,596 in 1902), near the' western coast. 

BOLfVAR, an inland state of Venezuela, lying S. of the 
Orinoco and Apure, with the Yuruari territory on the E., the 
Caroni river forming the boundary, and the Amazonas territory 
and Brazil on the S. Frequent political changes in Venezuela 
have led to various modifications in the size and outlines of this 
state, which comprises large areas of uninhabited territory. It 
is a country of extensive plains {llanos) covered in the rainy 
season with nutritious grass which disappears completely in the 
dry season, and of great forests and numerous rivers. Its 
population was given in 1894 as 135,232, but its area has been 
largely reduced since then. The capital is Ciudad Bolivar, 
formerly called Angostura, which is situated on the right bank 
of the Orinoco about 240 m. above its mouth; pop. 11,686. 
Vessels of light draught easily ascend the Orinoco to this point, 
and a considerable trade is carried on, the exports being cocoa, 
sugar, cotton, hides, jerked beef and various forest products. 

BOLIVIA, an inland republic of South America, once a part 
of the Spanish vice-royalty of Peru and known as the province 
of Charcas, or Upper Peru. It is the third largest political 
division of the continent, and extends, approximately, from 
9° 44' to 22° 50' S. lat., and from 58 to 70 W. long. It is 
bounded N. and E. by Brazil, S. by Paraguay and Argentina, 
and W. by Chile and Peru. Estimates of area vary widely and 
have been considerably confused by repeated losses of territory 
in boundary disputes with neighbouring states, and no figures 
can be given which may not be changed to some extent by 
further revisions. Official estimates are 640,226 and 703,633 
sq. m., but Supan {Die Bevolkerung der Erde, 1904) places it at 
515,156 sq. m. 

Boundaries. — The boundary line between Bolivia and Brazil 
has its origin in the limits between the Spanish and Portuguese 
colonies determined by the treaties of Madrid and San Ildefonso 
(1750 and 1777), which were modified by the treaties of 1867 
and 1903. Beginning at the outlet of Bahia Negra into the 
Paraguay river, lat. 28 08' 35" S., the line ascends the latter 
to a point on the west bank 9 kilometres below Fort Coimbra, 
thence inland 4 kilometres to a point in lat. 19 45' 36" S. and 
long. 58 04' 12-7" W., whence it follows an irregular course N. 
and E. of N. to Lakes Mandiore, Gaiba or Gahiba, and Uberaba, 
then up the San Matias river and N. along the Sierra Ricardo 
Franco to the headwaters of the Rio Verde, a tributary of the 
Guapore. This part of the boundary was turned inland from 
the Paraguay to include, within Brazilian jurisdiction, Fort 
Coimbra, Corumba and other settlements on the west bank, and 
was modified in 1903 by the recession of about n 58 sq. m. to 
Bolivia to provide better commercial facilities on the Paraguay. 
The line follows the Verde, Guapore, Mamore and Madeira 
rivers down to the mouth of the Abuna, in about lat. 9 44' S., 
as determined by the treaty of 1903. This is a part of the 
original colonial frontier, which extended down the Madeira to a 
point midway between the Beni and the Amazon, and then ran 
due W. to the Javary. The treaty of 1867 changed this starting- 
point to the mouth of the Beni, in lat. io° 20' S., and designated a 
straight line to the source of the Javary as the frontier, which 
gave to Brazil a large area of territory; but when the valuable rubber 
forests of the upper Purus became known the Brazilians invaded 
them and demanded another modification of the boundary line. 
This was finally settled in 1903 by the treaty of Petropolis, 
which provided that the line should ascend the Abuna river to 
lat. 10° 20' S., thence along that parallel W. to the Rapirran river 
which is followed to its principal source, thence due W. to the 
Ituxy river which is followed W. tq its source, thence to the 



GEOGRAPHY] 



BOLIVIA 



167 




source of Bahia Creek which is followed to the Acre or Aquiry 
river, thence up the latter to its source, whence if east of the 
69th meridian it runs direct to the nth parallel which will form 
the boundary line to the Peruvian frontier. This frontier gave 
about 60,000 sq. m. of territory to Brazil, for which the latter 
gave an indemnity of £2,000,000 and about 1158 sq. m. of 
territory on the Matto Grosso frontier. The boundary with 
Paraguay is unsettled, but an unratified treaty of the 23rd of 
November 1894 provides that the line shall start from a point on 
the Paraguay river 3 m. north of Fort Olimpo and run south-west 
in a straight line to an intersection with the Pilcomayo in long. 
6i° 28' W., where it unites with the Argentine boundary. The 
boundary with Chile was greatly modified by the results of the 
war of 1879-83, as determined by the treaties of 1884, 1886 and 
1895, Bolivia losing her department of the littoral on the Pacific 
and all access to the coast except by the grace of the conqueror. 
Provisions were made in 1895 for the cession of the port of 
Mejillones del Norte and a right of way across the province of 
Tarapaca, but Peru protested, and negotiations followed for the 
cession of Cobija, in the province of Antofagasta. These negotia- 
tions proved fruitless, and in 1904 Bolivia accepted a pecuniary 
indemnity in lieu of territory. The new boundary line starts 
from the summit of the Sapaleri (or Zapalegui), where the 



Emery Walker sc 



Argentine, Bolivian and Chilean boundaries converge, and runs 
west to Licancaur, thence north to the most southern source of 
Lake Ascotan which it follows to and across this lake in the 
direction of the Oyahua volcano, and thence in a straight line 
to the Tua volcano, on the frontier of the province of Tarapaca. 
From this point the line follows the summits of the Cordillera 
Silillica north to the Cerro Paquiza, on the Tacna frontier, and 
to the Nevado Pomarape, near the frontier of Peru. Thence it 
continues north to an intersection with the Desaguadero, in about 
16 45' S. lat., follows that river to the Winamarca lagoon and 
Lake Titicaca, and crosses the latter diagonally to Huaicho on 
the north shore. From this point the line crosses the Cordillera 
Real through the valley of the San Juan del Oro to Suches Lake, 
follows the Cololo and Apolobamba ranges to the headwaters of 
the Sina river, and thence down that stream to the Inambari. 
Thence the line either follows the latter to its confluence with the 
Madre de Dios, or the water-parting between that river and the 
Tambopata or Pando, to the valley of the Madre de Dios, from 
which point it runs dife north to 12 40' S. lat., and north-west to 
the new Brazilian frontier. The N.W. angle on the map repre- 
sents the Bolivian claim until the settlement of 1909, which gave 
the territory to Peru. 
Physiography. — Roughly calculated, two-fifths of the total area 



i68 



BOLIVIA 



[GEOGRAPHY 



of Bolivia is comprised within the Andean Cordilleras which cross 
its south-west corner and project east toward the Brazilian high- 
lands in the form of a great obtuse angle. The Cordilleras, divided 
into two great parallel chains, with flanking ranges and spurs to 
the east, reach their greatest breadth at this point and form 
the massif of the Andean system. It is made up of a number 
of parallel ranges enclosing great elevated plateaus broken by 
transverse ranges and deep ravines. North-east of Lake Titicaca 
there is a confused mass or knot (the Nudo de Apolobamba) 
of lofty intersecting ridges which include some of the highest 
peaks in South America. Below this mountainous area the 
ranges open out and enclose extensive plateaus. The western 
range, the Cordillera Occidental, a part of the boundary between 
Bolivia and the northern provinces of Chile, closely follows the 
coast outline and forms the western rampart of the great Bolivian 
tableland or alta-planicie, which extends from the Vilcanota 
knot in Peru, south to the Serrania de Lipez on the Argentine 
frontier, is 500 m. long, and about 80 m. broad, and contains 
about 40,000 sq. m. The northern part of this plateau is com- 
monly called the puna; the southern part, the " desert of 
Lipez," in character and appearance is part of the great Puna 
de Atacama. This plateau has an average elevation of about 
12,650 ft. near Lake Titicaca, but descends about 1000 ft. toward 
its southern extremity. It is a great lacustrine basin where once 
existed an inland sea having an outlet to the east through the 
La Paz gorge. The plateau is bleak and inhospitable in the 
north, barren and arid toward the south, containing great saline 
depressions covered with water in the rainy season, and broken 
by ridges and peaks, the highest being the Cerro de Tahua, 
17,454 ft. Overlooking the plateau from the west are the snow- 
clad peaks of Pomarape (20,505 ft.), Parinacota (20,918 ft.), 
Sajama (21,047), Huallatiri (21,654), Lirima (10,128), and the 
three volcanic peaks, Oyahua (19,226), San Pedro y Pablo 
(19,423) and Licancaur (19,685). The eastern rampart of this 
great plateau is formed by the Cordillera Oriental, which ex- 
tends north-west into Peru under the name of Carabaya, and 
south to the frontier in broken ranges, one of which trends south- 
east in the vicinity of Sucre. The main part of this great range, 
known as the Cordillera Real, and one of the most imposing 
mountain masses of the world, extends from the Peruvian border 
south-east to the 1 8th parallel and exhibits a series of snow- 
crowned peaks, notably the triple-crested Illampu or Sorata 
(21,490 ft.), Illimani (Conway, 21,204), Cacaaca (20,571) and 
Chachacomani (21,434). Of the ranges extending south from 
the Cordillera Real and branching out between the 18th and 19th 
parallels, the more prominent are the Frailes which forms the 
eastern rampart of the great central plateau and which is cele- 
brated for its mineral deposits, the Chichas which runs south from 
the vicinity of Potosi to the Argentine frontier, and the Livichuco 
which turns south-east and forms the watershed between the 
Cachimayo and Pilcomayo. The more prominent peaks in and 
between these ranges are the Asanaque (16,857), Michaga 
(17,389), Cuzco (17,930), Potosi (15,381), Chorolque (18,480) 
and Tuluma (15,584). At the southern extremity of the great 
plateau is the transverse Serrania de Lipez, the culminating 
crest of which stands 16,404 ft. above sea-level. The eastern 
rampart of the Bolivian highlands comprises two distinct 
chains — the Sierra de Cochabamba on the north-east and the 
Sierra de Misiones on the east. Between these and the Cordillera 
Oriental is an apparently confused mass of broken, intersecting 
ranges, which on closer examination are found to conform more 
or less closely to the two outside ranges. These have been 
deeply cut by rivers, especially on the north-east, where the rain- 
fall is heavier. The region enclosed by these ranges is extremely 
rugged in character, but it is esteemed highly for its fertile 
valleys and its fine climate, and is called the " Bolivian Switzer- 
land." Lying wholly within the tropics, these mountain masses 
form one of the most interesting as well' as one of the most 
imposing and difficult regions of the world. At their feet and in 
their lower valleys the heat is intense and the vegetation is 
tropical. Above these are cool, temperate slopes and valleys, 
and high above these, bleak, wind-swept passes and snowclad 



peaks. West of the Cordillera Oriental, where special conditions 
prevail, a great desert plateau stretches entirely across one corner 
of the republic. Apart from the Andean system there is a group 
of low, broken, gneiss ranges stretching along the east side of 
Bolivia among the upper affluents of the Mamore and Guapore, 
which appear to belong to the older Brazilian orographic system, 
from which they have been separated by the erosive action of 
water. They are known as the Sierras de Chiquitos, and are 
geologically interesting because of their proximity to the eastern 
projection of the Andes. Their culminating point is Cerro 
Cochii, 3894 ft. above sea-level, but for the most part they are 
but little more than ranges of low wooded hills, having in general 
a north-west and south-east direction between the 1 5th and 19th 
parallels. 

The popular conception of Bolivia is that of an extremely 
rugged mountainous country, although fully three-fifths of it, 
including the Chiquitos region, is composed of low alluvial 
plains, great swamps and flooded bottomlands, and gently 
undulating forest regions. In the extreme south are the Bolivian 
Chaco and the llanos (open grassy plains) of Manzo, while above 
these in eastern Chuquisaca and southern Santa Cruz are exten- 
sive swamps and low-lying plains, subject toperiodical inundations 
and of little value for agricultural and pastoral purposes. There 
are considerable areas in this part of Bolivia, however, which 
lie above the floods and afford rich grazing lands. The great 
drawback to this region is defective drainage; the streams have 
too sluggish a current to carry off the water in the rainy season. 
Between the Chiquitos sierras and the Andes are the Llanos de 
Chiquitos, which have a higher general elevation and a more 
diversified surface. North of this elevation, which formed the 
southern shore of the ancient Mojos Lake, are the llanos of 
Guarayos and Mojos, occupying an extensive region traversed 
by the Guapore, San Miguel, Guapa^, Mamore, Yacuma, Beni 
and Madre de Dios rivers and their Numerous tributaries. It 
was once covered by the great Mojos Lake, and still contains 
large undrained areas, like that of LakeRojoagua (or Roguaguado). 
It contains rich agricultural districts and extensive open plains 
where cattle-raising has been successfully followed since the 
days of the Jesuit missions in that region. The lower slopes of 
the Andes, especially toward the north-west, where the country 
is traversed by the Beni and Madre de Dios, are covered with 
heavy forests. This is one of the richest districts of Bolivia and 
is capable of sustaining a large population. 

The river-systems of Bolivia fall naturally into three distinct 
regions — the Amazon, La Plata and Central Plateau. The first 
includes the rivers flowing directly and indirectly into the 
Madeira, one of the great tributaries of the Amazon, together 
with some small tributaries of the Acre and Purus in the north, 
all of which form a drainage basin covering more than one-half 
of the republic. The two principal rivers of this system are the 
Mamore and Beni, which unite in lat. io° 20' S. to form the 
Madeira. The Mamore, the upper part of which is called the 
Chimor6, rises on the north-east slopes of the Sierra de Cocha- 
bamba a little south of the 17th parallel, and follows a northerly 
serpentine course to its confluence with the Beni, the greater 
part of which course is between the 65th and 66th meridians. 
The river has a length of about 600 m., fully three-fourths of 
which, from Chimore (925 ft. above sea level) to the rapids near 
its mouth, passes across a level plain and is navigable. The 
principalBolivian tributary of the Mamore, the Guapay or Grande, 
which is larger and longer than the former above their confluence 
and should be considered the main stream, rises in the Cordillera 
Oriental east of Lake Pampa Aullaguas, and flows east to the 
north extremity of the Sierra de Misiones, where it emerges upon 
the Bolivian lowlands. Turning to the north in a magnificent 
curve, it passes around the south-east extremity of the Sierra de 
Cochabamba, skirts the Llanos de Chiquitos, and, turning to the 
north-west, unites with the Mamore at Junta de los Rios in about 
1 5° 20' S. lat. and 64° 40' W. long. It has a tortuous course 
of over 700 m., which is described as not navigable. The 
principal tributaries of the Guapay are the Mizque, Piray 01 
Sara and Yapacani, the last rising on the east slopes of the 



GEOGRAPHY] 



BOLIVIA 



169 



Cordillera Real, flowing east by Cochabamba to the sierras of 
that name where it breaks through with a great bend to the north. 
The other large Bolivian tributaries of the Mamore, all rising on 
the north-east flanks of the Andes, are the Chapare, Secure, 
Manique or Apere and Yacuma, the last draining a region of 
lakes and swamps north of the Sierra Chamaya. The Beni and 
its great affluent, the Madre de Dios, though of smaller volume 
and extent than the Mamore, are of much greater economic 
importance, owing to their navigability, the fertility of the 
region they drain, and the great forests along their banks. 
North of the Beni, the Abuna flows into the Madeira. Several 
of its south tributaries belong to Bolivia. The Guapore, or 
Itenez, an affluent of the Mamore, is the third large river of 
this Bolivian drainage basin, but it rises in Brazil, on the 
south slopes of the Sierra dos Parecis, where it flows in a great 
bend to the south and then west of north to the Bolivian 
frontier in 14 S. lat. From this point to its junction with the 
Mamore, a little north of the 12th parallel, it flows in a north- 
westerly direction and forms the boundary line between the two 
republics. Its Brazilian tributaries are comparatively unimport- 
ant, but from Bolivia it receives the Baures and the San Miguel, 
both rising in the Sierras de Chiquitos and flowing north-west 
across the llanos to the Guapore. The Baures has one large 
tributary, the Blanco, and the Itonama (San Miguel) has its 
origin in Lake Concepcion, lying among the west ranges of the 
Chiquitos mountains 952 ft. above sea-level. 

The south-east drainage basin, which is smaller and economic- 
ally less important than that of the Madeira, discharges into the 
Paraguay and extends from the Sierras de Chiquitos south to 
the Argentine frontier, and from the Cordillera Oriental east 
to the Paraguay. It possesses only one large river in Bolivia, 
the Pilcomayo, which rises on the east slopes of the Cordillera 
Oriental opposite the south end of Lake Pampa Aullaguas and 
flows east and south-east through the sierra region to the Bolivian 
Chaco. It flows through a nearly level country with so sluggish 
a current that its channels are greatly obstructed. Nothing 
definite is known of its tributaries in the Chaco, but in the sierra 
region it possesses a number of small tributaries, the largest of 
which are the Cachimayo, Mataca and Pilaya or Camblaya, the 
latter formed by the Cotagaita and San Juan. The Bermejo, 
which is an Argentine river, receives one large tributary from 
the Bolivian uplands, the Tarija or Rio Grande, which drains 
a small district south-east of the Santa Victoria sierra. The 
Bolivian tributaries of the upper Paraguay are small and un- 
important. The Otuquis, the most southern of the group, is 
formed by the San Rafael and Tucabaca, which drain both 
slopes of the Cerro Cochii range; but is lost in some great 
marshes 50 m. from the Paraguay. Another considerable stream 
of this region, which is lost in the great marshy districts of the 
Bolivian plain, is the Parapiti, which rises on the eastern slopes 
of the Sierra de Misiones and flows north-east through a low 
plain for about 150 m. until lost. 

The third drainage basin is that of the great central plateau, 
or alta-planicie. This is one of the most elevated lacustrine 
basins in the world, and though it once drained eastward, now 
has no surface outlet. Lake Titicaca receives the waters of 
several short streams from the neighbouring heights and dis- 
charges through the Desaguadero, a sluggish river flowing south 
for 184 m. with a gradually diminishing depth to Lake Pampa 
Aullaguas or Poopo. The Desaguadero is navigable for small 
craft, and has two or three small tributaries from the west. Two 
small streams empty into Lake Pampa Aullaguas, which has a 
small outlet in the Lacahahuira flowing west for 60 m. to the 
Cienegas de (salt-swamps of) Coipasa. The drainage of this 
extensive district seems to be wholly absorbed by the dry soil 
of the desert and by evaporation. In the extreme south the Rio 
Grande de Lipez is absorbed in the same way. 

Few of the Bolivian lakes are at all well known. The great 
lacustrine basin between the Beni and the Mamore contains 
several lakes and lagoons, two of them of large size. These are 
Lake Rogagua whose waters find their way into the Beni through 
Rio Negro, and the Roguaguado lagoon and tiarshes which 



cover a large area of territory near the Mamore. The latter has 
an elevation little, if any, above the level of the Mamore, which 
apparently drains this region, and .its area has been estimated 
at about 580 sq. m. Lake Concepcion, in the Chiquitos moun- 
tains, belongs to this same hydrographic area. In the south-east 
there are several large shallow lakes whose character and size 
change with the season. They fill slight depressions and are 
caused by defective drainage. Near the Paraguay there are 
several of these lakes, partly caused by obstructed outlets, such 
as Bahia Negra, Caceres, Mandiore, Gaiba and Uberaba, some 
of them of sufficient depth to be navigable by small craft. Above 
the latter are the great Xarayes swamps, sometimes described 
as a lake. This region, like that of the north, is subject to 
periodical inundations in the summer months (November-March 
or even May), when extensive areas of level country are flooded 
and traffic is possible only by the use of boats. The two principal 
lakes of the plateau region are Titicaca and Pampa Aullaguas or 
Poopo. The former lies near the north end of the great Bolivian 
alta-planicie, 12,644 ft- above sea-level, being one of the most 
elevated lakes of the world. It is indented with numerous bays 
and coves; its greatest length is 138 m., and its greatest breadth 
69 m. According to a survey made by Dr M. Neveau-Lemaire 
{La Geographie, ix. p. 409, Paris, 1904), its water surface, exclud- 
ing islands and peninsulas, is 1969 sq. m., and its greatest depth 
is 892 ft. The level of the lake rises about 5 in. in summer; the 
loss in winter is even greater. The lake belongs to both Bolivia 
and Peru, and is navigated by steamers running between Bolivian 
ports and the Peruvian railway port of Puno. The outlet of the 
lake is through the Desaguadero river. It has several islands, 
the largest of which bears the same name and contains highly 
interesting archaeological monuments of a prehistoric civilization 
usually attributed to the Incas. Lake Pampa Aullaguas or 
Poopo is about 180 m. south-east of Titicaca, and is fed princi- 
pally by its outflow. It lies 505 ft. below the level of Titicaca, 
which gives an average fall for the Desaguadero of very nearly 
2 1 ft. per mile. The Pampa Aullaguas has an estimated area of 
386 sq. m., and has one large inhabited island. The lake is 
shallow and the district about it is sparsely populated. Its 
outlet is through the Lacahahuira river into the Coipasa swamp, 
and it is estimated that the outflow is much less than the inflow, 
showing a considerable loss by evaporation and earth absorption. 

Having no sea-coast, Bolivia has no seaport except what may 
be granted in usufruct by Chile. 

Geology. — The eastern ranges of the Bolivian Andes are formed of 
Palaeozoic rocks with granitic and other intrusions; the Western 
Cordillera consists chiefly of Jurassic and Cretaceous beds, together 
with the lavas and ashes of the great volcanoes; while the inter- 
vening plateau is covered by freshwater and terrestrial deposits 
through which rise ridges of Palaeozoic rock and of a series of red 
sandstones and gypsiferous marls of somewhat uncertain age (prob- 
ably, in part at least, Cretaceous). The Palaeozoic beds have yielded 
fossils of Cambrian, Ordovician, Devonian and Carboniferous age. 
In southern Bolivia Cambrian and Ordovician beds form the greater 
part of the eastern Andes, but farther north the Devonian and 
Carboniferous are extensively developed, especially in the north- 
eastern ranges. The hills, known as the Chiquitos, which rise from 
the plains of eastern Bolivia, are composed of ancient sedimentary 
rocks of unknown age. The Palaeozoic beds are directly overlaid 
by a series of red sandstones and gypsiferous marls, similar to the 
formation petrolifera of Argentina and Brazil. At the base there is 
frequently a conglomerate or tuff of porphyritic rocks. Marine 
fossils found by Gustav Steinmann in the middle of the series are 
said to indicate an age not earlier than the Jurassic, and Steinmann 
refers them to the Lower Cretaceous. It is, however, not improbable 
that the series may represent more than one geological system. No 
later marine deposits have been found either in the eastern Andes 
or in the plains of Bolivia, but freshwater beds of Tertiary and later 
date occupy a wide area. The recent deposits, which cover so large 
a part of the depression between the Eastern and the Western 
Cordillera, appear to be partly of torrential origin, like the talus-fans 
at the foot of mountain ranges in other dry regions; but Lakes 
Titicaca and Pampa Aullaguas (Poopo) were undoubtedly at one 
time rather more extensive than they are to-day. The volcanoes of 
Bolivia lie almost entirely in the Western Cordillera — the great 
summits of the eastern range, such as Illimani and Sorata, being 
formed of Palaeozoic rocks with granitic and other intrusions. 
The gold, silver and tin of Bolivia occur chiefly in the Palaeozoic 
rocks of the eastern ranges. The copper belongs mostly to the red 
sandstone series. 



170 



BOLIVIA 



[FAUNA AND FLORA 



Climate. — Bolivia lies wholly within the torrid zone, and 
variations in temperature are therefore due to elevation, moun- 
tain barriers and prevailing winds. The country possesses 
every gradation of temperature, from that of the tropical low- 
lands to the Arctic cold of the snow-capped peaks directly above. 
This vertical arrangement of climatic zones is modified to some 
extent (less than in Argentina) by varying rainfall conditions, 
which are governed by the high mountain ranges crossing one 
corner of the republic, and also by the prevailing winds. The 
trade winds give to S. Bolivia a wet and dry season similar to 
that of N. Argentina. Farther north, and east of the Cordillera 
Oriental, rains fall throughout the year, though the_ summer 
months (November-March) are usually described as the rainy 
season. On the west side of the Cordillera, which extracts the 
moisture from the prevailing easterly winds, the elevated plateaus 
have a limited rainfall in the north, which diminishes toward the 
south untO the surface becomes absolutely barren. Brief and 
furious rain-storms sometimes sweep the northern plateau, but 
these are not frequent and occur during a short season only. 
Electrical wind storms are frequent in these high altitudes. 

Bolivia has a wide range of temperature between places of the 
same latitude. The natives designate the Bolivian climatic zones as 
yungas, valle or medio yungas, cabezera de valle, puna and puna brava. 
The yungas comprises all the lowlands and the mountain valleys 
up to an elevation of 5000 ft. The temperature is tropical, winter 
is unknown and the atmosphere is exceedingly humid. The mean 
temperature, according to official estimates, is 70 F., but this prob- 
ably represents the average between the higher elevations and the 
low country. The valle zone includes the deep valleys from 5000 to 
9500 ft. , has a warm climate with moderate variations in temperature 
and no cold weather, is sub-tropical in character and productions, 
and is sometimes described as a region of perpetual summer. The 
cabezera de valle, as the name indicates, includes the heads of the 
deep valleys above the valle zone, with elevations ranging from 
9500 to 11,000 ft.; its climate is temperate, is divided into regular 
seasons, and is favourable to the production of cereals and vegetables. 
The puna, which lies between 11,000 and 12,500 ft., includes the 
great central plateau of Bolivia. It has but two seasons, a cold 
summer or autumn and winter. The air is cold and dry, and the 
warmer season is too short for the production of anything but 
potatoes and barley. The mean temperature is officially estimated 
as 54° F. The puna brava extends from 12,500 ft. up to the snow 
limit (about 17,500 ft.), and covers a bleak, inhospitable territory, 
inhabited only by shepherds and miners. Above this is the region 
of eternal snow, an Arctic zone within the tropics. In general, the 
sub-tropical (valle) and temperate (cabezera de valle) regions of 
Bolivia are healthy and agreeable, have a plentiful rainfall, moderate 
temperature in the shade, and varied and abundant products. 
There is a high rate of mortality among the natives, due to un- 
sanitary habits and diet, and not to the climate. In the tropical 
yungas the ground is covered with decaying vegetation, and malaria 
and fevers are common. There are localities in the open country 
and on exposed elevations where healthy conditions prevail, but the 
greater part of this region is considered unhealthy. The prevailing 
winds are easterly, bringing moisture across Brazil from the Atlantic, 
but eastern Bolivia is also exposed to hot, oppressive winds from the 
north, and to violent cold winds (surazos) from the Argentine plains, 
which have been known to cause a fall of temperature of 36 ° within 
a few hours. According to the Sinopsis Estadistica y Geogrdfica de 
la Republica de Bolivia (La Paz, 1903), the average mean temperature 
and the annual rainfall in eastern Bolivia are as follows: 10° S. lat., 
90-8° F. and 31-5 in. rainfall; 15° S. lat., 86° F. and 30-7 in. rainfall; 
20° S. lat., 81° F. and 30 in. rainfall; and 25° S. lat., 76^8° F. and 
29-3 in. rainfall. 

Fauna. — The indigenous fauna of Bolivia corresponds closely 
to that of the neighbouring districts of Argentina, Brazil and 
Peru. Numerous species of monkeys inhabit the forests of the 
tropical region, together with the puma, jaguar, wildcat, coati, 
tapir or anta, sloth, ant-bear, paca (Coelogenys paca) and capy- 
biara. A rare species of bear, the Ursus ornatus (spectacled bear) 
is found among the wooded Andean foothills. The chinchilla 
(C. laniger), also found in northern Argentina and Chile, inhabits 
the colder plateau regions and is prized for its fur. The plateau 
species of the viscacha (Lagidium cuvieri) and the widely 
distributed South American otter (Lutra paranensis) are also 
hunted for their skins. The peccary, which prefers a partially open 
country, ranges from, the Chaco to the densely wooded districts 
of the north. There are two or three species of deer, the most 
common being the large marsh deer of the Chaco; but the deer 
are not numerous. The armadillo, opossum, ferret and skunk 



are widely distributed. The amphibia are well represented 
throughout the lower tropical districts. Alligators are found in 
the tributaries of the Paraguay and their lagoons, lizards and 
turtles are numerous, and the batrachians are represented by 
several species. Snakes are also numerous, including rattle- 
snakes and the great boa-constrictors of the Amazon region. 

The most interesting of all the Bolivian animals, however, are 
the guanaco (Auchenia huanaco) and its congeners, the llama 
(A. llama), alpaca (A pacos) and vicuna (A. vicugna), belonging 
to the Camelidae, with the structure and habits of the African 
camel, but smaller, having no hump, and inhabiting a mountain- 
ous and not a level sandy region. They are able to go without 
food and drink for long periods, and inhabit the arid and semi- 
arid plateaus of the Andes and the steppes of Patagonia. The 
guanaco is supposed to be the original type, is the largest of the 
four, and has the greatest range from Peru to Tierra del Fuego. 
The llama and alpaca were domesticated long before the dis- 
covery of America, but the guanaco and vicuna are found in a 
wild state only. The llama is used as a pack animal in Bolivia 
and Peru, and its coarse wool is used in the making of garments 
for the natives. The alpaca is highly prized for its fine wool, 
which is a staple export from Bolivia, but the animal is reared 
with difficulty and the product cannot be largely increased. 
The vicuna also is celebrated for its wool, which the natives 
weave into beautiful and costly ponchos (blanket cloaks) and 
other wearing apparel. The guanaco is hunted for its skin, 
which, when dressed, makes an attractive rug or robe. The 
slaughter of the guanaco and vicuna is rapidly diminishing 
their number. The rearing of llamas and alpacas is a recognized 
industry in the Bolivian highlands and is wholly in the hands of 
the Indians, who alone seem to understand the habits and 
peculiarities of these interesting animals. 

Of birds and insects the genera and species are very numerous 
and interesting. The high sierras are frequented by condors 
and eagles of the largest size, and the whole country by the 
common vulture, while the American ostrich (Rhea americanus) 
and a species of large stork ( the bata or jaburu, Mycteria ameri- 
cana; maximum height, 8 ft.; spread of wings, 8 ft. 6 in.) inhabit 
the tropical plains and valleys. Waterfowl are numerous and 
the forests of the warm valleys are filled with song-birds and 
birds of beautiful plumage. Many species of humming-birds 
are found even far up in the mountains, and great numbers of 
parrots, araras and toucans, beautiful of feather but harsh of 
voice, enliven the forests of the lowlands. 

Like other South American states, Bolivia benefited greatly 
from the introduction of European animals. Horses, cattle, 
sheep, goats, swine and poultry were introduced, and are now 
sources of food and wealth to a large part of the population. 
Mules are used to a large extent as pack animals, but they are 
imported from Argentina. Silkworms have been bred with 
success in some departments, and the cochineal insect is found 
wherever the conditions are favourable for the cactus. 

Flora. — Owing to the diversities in altitude the flora of Bolivia 
represents every climatic zone, from the scanty Arctic vegetation 
of the lofty Cordilleras to the luxuriant tropical forests of the 
Amazon basin. Between these extremes the diversity in vege- 
table life is as great as that of climate and soil. The flora of 
Bolivia has been studied less than the flora of the neighbouring 
republics, however, because of the inaccessibility of these inland 
regions. Among the more important productions, the potato, 
oca (Oxalis tuber osa), quinoa (Chenopodium quinoa) and some 
coarse grasses characterize the puna region, while barley, an 
exotic, is widely grown for fodder. Indian corn was cultivated 
in the temperate and warm regions long before the advent of 
Europeans, who introduced wheat, rye, oats, beans, pease and 
the fruits and vegetables of the Old World, for each of which a 
favourable soil and climate was easily found. In the sub-tropical 
and tropical zones the indigenous plants are the sweet potato, 
cassava (Manihot utilissima and M. aipi), peanuts, pine- 
apple, guava, chirimoya (Anona cherimolia), pawpaw (Carica 
papaya), ipecacuanha (Cephaelis), sarsaparilla, vanilla, false 
jalap (Mirabilis jalapa), copaiba, tolu (Myroxylon toluiferum) , 



POPULATION] 



BOLIVIA 



171 



rubber-producing trees, dyewoods, cotton and a great number of 
beautiful hardwoods, such as jacaranda, mahogany, rosewood, 
quebracho, colo, cedar, walnut, &c. Among the fruits many of the 
most common are exotics, as the orange, lemon, lime, fig, date, 
grape, &c, while others, as the banana, caju or cashew (Ana- 
cardium occidentale) and aguacate avocado or alligator pear, have 
a disputed origin. Coca, one of the most important plants of 
the country, is cultivated on the eastern slopes of the Andes 
at an altitude of 5°°° to 6000 ft., where the temperature is 
uniform and frosts are unknown. Quina or calisaya is a natural 
product of the eastern Andes, and is found at an altitude of 3000 
to 9000 ft. above sea-level. The calisaya trees of Bolivia rank 
among the best, and their bark forms an important item in her 
foreign trade. The destructive methods of collecting the bark 
are steadily diminishing the natural sources of supply, and 
experiments in cinchona cultivation were undertaken during the 
last quarter of the 19th century, with fair prospects of success. 
The most important of the indigenous forest products, however, 
is rubber, derived principally from the Hevea guayanensis (var. 
brasiliensis) , growing along the river courses in the yungas 
regions of the north, though maniqoba rubber is also obtained 
from Manihot Glaziovii on the drier uplands. Among the 
exotics, sugar-cane, rice and tobacco are cultivated in the warm 
districts. 

Population. — The population of Bolivia is composed of Indians, 
Caucasians of European origin, and a mixture of the two races, 
generally described as mestizos. There is also a very small 
percentage of Africans, descendants of the negro slaves introduced 
in colonial times. A roughly-taken census of 1900 gives the 
total population as 1,816,271, including the Litoral department, 
now belonging to Chile (49,8 20) , and estimates the- number of wild 
Indians of the forest regions at 91,000. Of this total, 50-7 % 
were classed as Indians, 12-8 % as whites, 26^8 % as mestizos, 
0-3 % as negroes, and 9-4 % as unknown. In 1904 an official esti- 
mate made the population 2,181,415, also including 
the Litoral (59,784), but of course all census returns 
and estimates in such a country are subject to 
many allowances. The Indian population (920,86c) 
is largely composed of the so-called civilized tribes 
of the Andes, which once formed part of the 
nationality ruled by the Incas, and of those of the 
Mojos and Chiquitos regions, which were organized 
into industrial communities by the Jesuits in the 
17th century. The former, which are chiefly 
Aymaras south of the latitude of Lake Titicaca, 
attained a considerable degree of civilization 
before the discovery of America and have been in 
closer contact with Europeans than the other tribes 
of Bolivia. It is doubtful, however, whether 
their condition has been improved under these influences. 
The Mojos and Chiquitos tribes, also, have been less pros- 
perous since the expulsion of the Jesuits, but they have 
remained together in organized communities, and have 
followed the industries and preserved the religion taught them 
as well as circumstances permitted. Both these groups of 
Indians are peaceable and industrious, and form an important 
labouring element. They are addicted to the excessive use 
of chica (a native beer made from Indian corn), and have 
little or no ambition to improve their condition, but this 
may be attributed in part to their profound ignorance and to 
the state of peonage in which they are held. Inhabiting the 
southern part of the Bolivian plain are the Chiriguanos, a 
detached tribe of the Guarani race which drifted westward to 
the vicinity of the Andes long ago. They are of a superior 
physical and mental type, and have made noteworthy progress 
toward civilization. They are agriculturists and stock-raisers 
and have the reputation of being peaceable and industrious. 
The remaining native tribes under the supervision of the state 
have made little progress, and their number is said to be decreasing 
(notwithstanding the favourable climatic conditions under which 
most of them live) because of unsanitary and intemperate habits, 
and for other causes not well understood, one being the custom 



noticed by early travellers among some of the tribes of the La 
Plata region of avoiding the rearing of children. (See Southey's 
History of Brazil, iii. pp. 402, 673.) Of the wild Indians very 
little is known in regard to either numbers or customs. 

The white population (231,088) is descended in great part 
from the early Spanish adventurers who entered the country in 
search of mineral wealth. To these have been added a small 
number of Spanish Americans from neighbouring republics and 
some Portuguese Americans from Brazil. There has been no 
direct immigration from Europe, though Europeans of various 
nationalities have found their way into the country and settled 
there as miners or traders. The percentage of whites therefore 
does not increase as in Argentina and Brazil, and cannot until 
means are found to promote European immigration. 

The mestizos (486,018) are less numerous than the Indians, but 
outnumber the whites by more than two to one. It has been said 
of the mestizos elsewhere that they inherit the vices of both races 
and the virtues of neither. Yet, with a decreasing Indian 
population, and with a white population wanting in energy, 
barely able to hold its own and comprising only one-eighth of 
the total, the future of Bolivia mainly depends on them. As a 
rule they are ignorant, unprogressive and apathetic, intensely 
superstitious, cruel and intemperate, though individual strong 
characters have been produced. It may be that education and 
experience will develop the mestizos into a vigorous progressive 
nationality, but the first century of self-government can hardly 
be said to have given much promise of such a result. 

Divisions and Towns. — The republic is divided into eight 
departments and one territory, and these are subdivided into 
54 provinces, 415 cantons, 232 vice-cantons, 18 missions and 
one colony. The names, areas and populations of the depart- 
ments, with their capitals, according to the census of 1900, to 
which corrections must be made on account of the loss of territory 
to Brazil in 1 903 , are as follows : — 



Department. 


Area sq. m. 
from Official 
. Sources. 


Population 
1900. 1 


Capitals. 


Population 
1900. 


La Paz .... 
El Beni .... 

Cochabamba . 
Santa Cruz . 

Chuquisaca . 

Tarija 

Nat. Territory 


53-777 

102,111 
19,127 
23,3 2 8 

141,368 

48,801 

26,418 

33,036 

192,260 


445.6i6 

32,180 

86,081 

328,163 

209,592 

325,615 

204,434 

102,887 

31,883 


La Paz 

Trinidad 
Oruro 

Cochabamba 
Santa Cruz de 

la Sierra 
Potosi 
Sucre 
Tarija 


54,713 . 
2,556 
13,575 
21,886 

15,874 

. 20,910 

20,967 

6,980 




640,226 


1,766,451 







The total area according to Gotha computations, with correc- 
tions for loss of territory to Brazil in 1903, is 515,156 sq. m. 

There are no populous towns other than the provincial capitals 
above enumerated. Four of these capitals — Sucre or Chuquisaca, 
La Paz, Cochabamba and Oruro — have served as the national 
capital, and Sucre was chosen, but after the revolution of 1898 
the capital was at La Paz, which is the commercial metropolis 
and is more accessible than Sucre. Among the smaller towns 
prominent because of an industry or commercial position, may 
be mentioned the Huanchaca mining centre of Pulacayo (pop. 
6512), where 3200 men are employed in the mines and surface 
works of this great silver mining company; Uyuni (pop. 1587), 
the junction of the Pulacayo branch with the Antofagasta and 
Oruro railway, and also the converging point for several important 
highways and projected railways; and Tupiza (pop. 1644), a 
commercial and mining centre near the Argentine frontier, and 
the terminus of the Argentine railway extension into Bolivia. 
All these towns are in the department of Potosi. Viacha (pop. 
1670), a small station on the railway from Guaqui to Alto de La 
Paz, 14 m. from the latter, is the starting point of an important 
projected railway to Oruro. In the department of Cochabamba, 

1 The figures for population include a 5 % addition for omissions, 
sundry corrections and the estimated number of wild Indians. 



172 



BOLIVIA 



[INDUSTRIES 



Tarata (4681) and Totora (3501) are two important trading 
centres, and in the department of Santa Cruz, Ascensi6n (pop. 
4784) is a large mission station in the Chiquitos hills. 

Communications. — Under a treaty with Brazil in 1903 and with 
Chile in 1904 (ratified 1905) provisions were made for railway 
construction in Bolivia to bring this isolated region into more 
effective communication with the outside world. Brazil agreed 
to construct a railway around the falls of the Madeira (about 
180 m. long) to give north-eastern Bolivia access to the Amazon, 
and paid down £2,000,000 in cash which Bolivia was to expend 
on railway construction within her own territory. Chile also 
agreed to construct a railway from Arica to La Paz, 295 m. (the 
Bolivian section becoming the property of Bolivia fifteen years 
after completion), and to pay the interest (not over 5%) which 
Bolivia might guarantee on the capital invested in certain in- 
terior railways if constructed within thirty years, providing these 
interest payments should not exceed £100,000 a year, nor exceed 
£1,600,000 in the aggregate. Argentina had already undertaken 
to extend her northern railway from Jujuy to the Bolivian 
frontier town of Tupiza, and the Peruvian Corporation had 
constructed for the Bolivian government a short line (54 m. long) 
from Guaqui, on Lake Titicaca, to Alto de La Paz. which is 
connected with the city of La Paz, 1493 ft. below, by an electric 
line 5 m. long. This line gives La Paz access to the Peruvian 
port of Mollendo, 496 m. distant, and promises in time to give 
it railway communication with Cuzco. Rivalry for the control 
of her trade, therefore, promises to give Bolivia the railways 
needed for the development of her resources. Up to 1903 the 
only railways in Bolivia were the Antofagasta and Oruro line, 
with a total length of 574 m., of which 350 m. are within Bolivian 
territory, a private branch of that line (26 m. long) running to 
the Pulacayo mines, and the line (54 m. long) from Guaqui to 
Alto de La Paz — a total of only 430 m. As a result of her war 
with Chile in 1878-81, the railways (282 m. long) of her Litoral 
department passed under Chilean control. Lines were in 1907 
projected from La Paz to the navigable waters of the Beni, from 
La Paz to Cochabamba, from Viacha to Oruro, from Uyuni to 
Potosi and Sucre, from Uyuni to Tupiza, and from Arica to La 
Paz via Corocoro. The central northern line of the Argentine 
government was completed to the Bolivian frontier in 1908, and 
this line was designed to extend to Tupiza. The undertaking 
of the Arica-La Paz line by the Chilean government, also, was 
an important step towards the improvement of the economic 
situation in Bolivia. Both these lines offer the country new 
outlets for its products. 

Public highways have been constructed between the large 
cities and to some points on the frontiers, and subsidized stage 
coaches are run on some of them. The roads are rough and at 
times almost impassable, however, and the river crossings 
difficult and dangerous. The large cities are connected with one 
another by telegraph lines and are in communication with the 
outside world through Argentina, Chile and Peru. Telegraph ser- 
vice dates from 1880, and in 1904 there were 3115 m. in operation, 
of which 1936 belonged to the state and 1179 to private corpora- 
tions. The latter includes the lines belonging to the Antofagasta 
and Oruro railway, which are partly within Chilean territory. 
Bolivia is a member of the International Postal Union, and has 
parcel and money order conventions with some foreign countries. 
Special agreements have been made, also, with Argentina, Chile 
and Peru for the transmission of the Bolivian foreign mails. 

The loss of her maritime department has left Bolivia with no 
other ports than those of Lake Titicaca (especially Guaqui, or 
Huaqui, which trades with the Peruvian port of Puno), and those 
of the Madeira and Paraguay rivers and their affluents. As 
none of these can be reached without transhipment in foreign 
territory, the cost of transport is increased, and her neighbours 
are enabled to exclude Bolivia from direct commercial intercourse 
with other nations. An exception formerly existed at Puerto 
Acre, on the Acre river, to which ocean-going steamers could 
ascend from Para, but Brazil first closed the Puriis and Acre 
rivers to foreign vessels seeking this port, and then under a 
treaty of 1903 acquired possession of the port and adjacent 



territory. Since then Bolivia's outlet to the Amazon is restricted 
to the Madeira river, the navigation of which is interrupted by a 
series of falls before Bolivian territory is reached. The Bolivian 
port of entry for this trade, Villa Bella, is situated above the 
falls of the Madeira at the confluence of the Beni and Mamor6, 
and is reached from the lower river by a long and costly portage. 
It is also shut off from the navigable rivers above by the falls 
of the Beni and Mamore. The railway to be built by Brazil 
will remedy this unfavourable situation, will afford a better 
outlet for north-eastern Bolivia, and should promote a more 
rapid development of that region, which is covered with an 
admirable system of navigable rivers above the falls of the Beni 
and Mamore. Connected with the upper Paraguay are Puerto 
Pacheco on Bahia Negra, Puerto Suarez (about 1600 m. from 
Buenos Aires by river), on Lake Caceres, through which passes 
the bulk of Bolivian trade in that direction, and Puerto Quijarro, 
on Lake Gaiba, a projected port said to be more accessible than 
any other in this region. Whenever the trade of southern Bolivia 
becomes important enough to warrant the expense of opening a 
navigable channel in the Pilcomayo, direct river communica- 
tion with Buenos Aires and Montevideo will be possible. 

Industries. — Stock-raising was one of the earliest industries 
of the country after that of mining. Horses, formerly success- 
fully raised in certain parts of the north, have not flourished 
there since the introduction of a peste from Brazil, but some are 
now raised in La Paz and other departments of the temperate 
region. The Jesuit founders of the Mojos missions took cattle 
with them when they entered that region to labour among the 
Indians, with the result that the Mojos and Chiquitos llanos 
were soon well stocked, and have since afforded an unfailing 
supply of beef for the neighbouring inland markets. Their 
inaccessibility and the costs of transportation have prevented 
a development of the industry and a consequent improvement 
in stock, but the persistency of the industry under conditions 
so unfavourable is evidence that the soil and climate are suited 
to its requirements. Farther south the llanos of Chuquisaca 
and Tarija also sustain large herds of cattle on the more elevated 
districts, and on the well-watered plains of the Chaco. There are 
small districts in La Paz, Potosi and Cochabamba, also, where 
cattle are raised. Apart from the cattle driven into the mining 
districts for consumption, a number of saladeros are employed 
in preparing (usually salting and sun-drying) beef for the home 
markets. The hides are exported. Goats are raised in the warm 
and temperate regions, and sheep for their wool in the latter. 
On the higher and colder plateaus much attention is given to 
the breeding of llamas and alpacas. Another industry of a 
different character is that of breeding the fur-bearing chinchilla 
(C. laniger), which is a native of the higher plateaus. The 
Bolivian government has prohibited the exportation of the live 
animals and is encouraging their production. 

The agricultural resources of the republic are varied and of 
great value, but their development has been slow and hesitating. 
The cultivation of cereals, fruits and vegetables in the temperate 
and warm valleys of the Andes followed closely the mining 
settlements. Sugar-cane also was introduced at an early date, 
but as the demand for sugar was limited the product was devoted 
chiefly to the manufacture of rum, which is the principal object 
of cane cultivation in Bolivia to-day. The climatic conditions 
are highly favourable for this product in eastern Bolivia, but 
it is heavily taxed and is restricted to a small home market. 
Rice is another exotic grown in the tropical districts of eastern 
Bolivia, but the quantity produced is far from sufficient to meet 
local requirements. Tobacco of a fair quality is produced in 
the warm regions of the east, including the yungas valleys of 
La Paz and Cochabamba; cacao of a superior grade is grown 
in the department of Beni, where large orchards were planted 
at the missions, and also in the warm Andean valleys of La Paz 
and Cochabamba; and coffee of the best flavour is grown in 
some of the warmer districts of the eastern Andes. The two 
indigenous products which receive most attention, perhaps, are 
those of quinoa and coca. Quinoa is grown in large quantities, 
and is a staple article of food among the natives. Coca is highly 



GOVERNMENT] 



BOLIVIA 



173 



esteemed by the natives, who masticate the leaf, and is also an 
article of export for medicinal purposes. It is extensively culti- 
vated in the departments of Cochabamba and La Paz, especially 
in the province of Yungas. 

In the exploitation of her forest products, however, are to be 
found the industries that yield the greatest immediate profit to 
Bolivia. The most prominent and profitable of these is that of 
rubber-collecting, which was begun in Bolivia between 1880 and 
1890, and which reached a registered annual output of nearly 
3500 metric tons just before Bolivia's best rubber forests were 
transferred to Brazil in 1903. There still remain extensive areas 
of forest on the Beni and Madre de Dios in which the rubber- 
producing Hevea is to be found. Although representing less 
value in the aggregate, the collecting of cinchona bark is one of 
the oldest forest industries of Bolivia, which is said still to have 
large areas of virgin forest to draw upon. The Bolivian pro- 
duct is of the best because of the high percentage of quinine 
sulphate which it yields. The industry is destructive in method, 
and the area of cinchona forests is steadily diminishing. Many 
other Bolivian plants are commercially valuable, and organized 
industry and trade in them will certainly be profitable. 

The industrial activities of the Bolivian people are still of a 
very primitive character. An act was passed in 1894 authorizing 
the government to offer premiums and grant advantageous 
concessions for the development of manufacturing industries, 
especially in sugar production, but conditions have not been 
favourable and the results have been disappointing. Spinning 
and weaving are carried on among the people as a household 
occupation, and fabrics are made of an exceptionally substantial 
character. It is not uncommon to see the natives busily twirling 
their rude spindles as they follow their troops of pack animals 
over rough mountain roads, and the yarn produced is woven 
into cloth in their own houses on rough Spanish looms of colonial 
patterns. Not only is coarse cloth for their own garments made 
in this manner from the fleece of the llama, but cotton and 
woollen goods of a serviceable character are manufactured, and 
still finer fabrics are woven from the wool of the alpaca and 
vicuna, sometimes mixed with silk or lamb's wool. The Indian 
women are expert weavers, and their handiwork often commands 
high prices. In the Mojos and Chiquitos districts the natives 
were taught by the Jesuit missionaries to weave an excellent 
cotton cloth, and the industry still exists. Cashmere, baize, 
waterproof ponchos of fine wool and silk, and many other fabrics 
are made by the Indians of the Andean departments. They are 
skilled in the use of dyes, and the Indian women pride themselves 
on a large number of finely-woven, brilliantly-coloured petticoats. 
Tanning and saddlery are carried on by the natives with primitive 
methods, but with excellent results. They are skilful in the 
preparation of lap robes and rugs from the skins of the alpaca 
and vicuna. The home markets are supplied, by native industry, 
with cigars and cigarettes, soap, candles, hats, gloves, starch, 
cheese and pottery. Sugar is still made in the old way, and there 
is a small production of wine and silk in certain districts. No 
country is better supplied with water power, and electric lighting 
and electric power plants have been established at La Paz. 

Commerce. — The foreign trade of Bolivia is comparatively 
unimportant, but the statistical returns are incomplete and un- 
satisfactory; the imports of 1904 aggregated only £1,734,551 
in value, and the exports only £1,851,758. The imports con- 
sisted of cottons, woollens, live-stock, provisions, hardware and 
machinery, wines, spirits and clothing. The principal exports 
were (in 1903) silver and its ores (£636,743), tin and its ores 
(£i,o39, 2 98), copper ores (£157,609), bismuth (£16,354), other 
minerals(£20, 94 8), rubber (£260,559), coca (£28, 907), and cinchona 
(£9 Z 97) — total exports, £2,453,638. These figures, however, 
do not correctly represent the aggregates of Bolivian trade, as 
her imports and exports passing through Antofagasta, Arica 
and Mollendo are to a large extent credited to Chile and Peru. 
The import trade of Bolivia is restricted by the poverty of the 
people. The geographical position limits the exports to mineral, 
forest and some pastoral products, owing to cost of transportation 
and the tariffs of neighbouring countries. 



Government. — The government of Bolivia is a " unitarian " or 
centralized republic, representative in form, but autocratic in 
some important particulars. The constitution in force (1908) 
was adopted on the 28th of October 1880, and is a model in form 
and profession. The executive branch of the government is 
presided over by a president and two vice-presidents, who are 
elected by direct popular vote for a period of four years, and are 
not eligible for re-election for the next succeeding term. The 
president is assisted by a cabinet of five ministers of state, viz.: 
foreign relations and worship; finance and industry; interior 
and fomento; justice and public instruction; war and coloniza- 
tion. Every executive act must be countersigned by a minister 
of state, who is held responsible for its character and enforcement, 
and may be prosecuted before the supreme court for its illegality 
and effects. The legislative branch is represented by a national 
congress of two houses — a Senate and Chamber of Deputies. 
The Senate is composed of 16 members, two from each depart- 
ment, who are elected by direct popular vote for a period of six 
years, one-third retiring every two years. The Chamber oi 
Deputies is composed of 72 members, who are elected for a period 
of four years, one-half retiring every two years. In impeachment 
trials the Chamber prosecutes and the Senate sits as a court, as 
in the United States. One of the duties of the Chamber is to 
elect the justices of the supreme court. Congress meets annually 
and its sessions are for sixty days, which may be extended to 
ninety days. The chambers have separate and concurrent powers 
defined by the constitution. The right of suffrage is exercised by 
all male citizens, twenty-one years of age, or over, if single, and 
eighteen years, or over, if married, who can read and write, and 
own real estate or have an income of 200 bolivianos a year, 
said income not to be compensation for services as a servant. 
The electoral body is therefore small, and is under the control of a 
political oligarchy which practically rules the country, no matter 
which party is in power. 

The Bolivian judiciary consists of a national supreme court, 
eight superior district courts, lower district courts, and juzgados 
de instruction for the investigation and preparation of cases. 
The corregidores and alcaldes also exercise the functions of a 
justice of the peace in the cantons and rural districts. The 
supreme court is composed of seven justices elected by the 
Chamber of Deputies from lists of three names for each seat sent 
in by the Senate. A justice can be removed only by impeach- 
ment proceedings before the Senate. 

The supreme administration in each department is vested in a 
prefect appointed by and responsible solely to the president. 
As the prefect has the appointment of subordinate department 
officials, including the alcaldes, the authority of the national 
executive reaches every hamlet in the republic, and may easily 
become autocratic. There are no legislative assemblies in the 
departments, and their government rests with the national 
executive and congress. Subordinate to the prefects are the sub- 
prefects in the provinces, the corregidores in the cantons and 
the alcaldes in the rural districts — all appointed officials. The 
national territory adjacent to Brazil and Peru is governed by two 
delegados nacionales, appointees of the president. The depart- 
ment capitals are provided with municipal councils which have 
jurisdiction over certain local affairs, and over the construction 
and maintenance of some of the highways. 

Army. — The military forces of the republic in 1905 included 
2890 regulars and an enrolled force of 80,000 men, divided into a 
first reserve of 30,000, a second reserve of 40,000, and 10,000 
territorial guards. The enrolled force is, however, both un- 
organized and unarmed. The strength of the army is fixed in 
each year's budget. That for 1903 consisted of 2933 officers and 
men, of which 275 were commissioned and 558 non-commissioned 
officers, 181 musicians, and only 1906 rank and file. A conscrip- 
tion law of 1894 provides for a compulsory military service 
between the ages of twenty- one and fifty years, with two 
years' actual service in the regulars for those between twenty- 
one and twenty-five, but the law is practically a dead letter. 
There is a military school with 60 cadets, and an arsenal at 
La Paz. 



174 



BOLIVIA 



[GOVERNMENT 



Education. — Although Bolivia has a free and compulsory 
school system, education and the provision for education have 
made little progress. Only a small percentage of the people 
can read and write. Although Spanish is the language of 
the dominant minority, Quichua, Aymara. and Guarani are the 
languages of the natives, who form a majority of the population. 
A considerable percentage of the Indians do not understand 
Spanish at all, and they even resist every effort to force it upon 
them. Even the cholos (mestizos) are more familiar with the 
native idioms than with Spanish, as is the case in some parts of 
Argentina and Paraguay. According to official estimates for 
1901, the total number of primary schools in the republic was 733, 
with 938 teachers and 41,587 pupils — the total cost of their 
maintenance being estimated at 585,365 bolivianos, or only 14-07 
bolivianos per pupil (about £1:4:6). The school enrolment 
was only one in 43-7 of population, compared with one in 10 for 
Argentina. The schools are largely under the control of the 
municipalities, though nearly half of them are maintained by the 
national government, by the Church and by private means. 
There were in the same year 13 institutions of secondary and 
14 of superior instruction. The latter include so-called uni- 
versities at Sucre (Chuquisaca), La Paz, Cochabamba, Tarija, 
Potosi, Santa Cruz and Oruro — all of which give instruction in 
law, the first three in medicine and the first four in theology. 
The university at Sucre, which dates from colonial times, and 
that at La Paz, are the only ones on the list sufficiently well 
equipped to merit the title. Secondary instruction is under the 
control of the universities, and public instruction in general is 
under the direction of a cabinet minister. All educational 
matters, however, are practically under the supervision of the 
Church. The total appropriation for educational purposes in 
1901 was 756,943 bolivianos, or £66,232:63. There are a military 
academy at La Paz, an agricultural school at Umala in the depart- 
ment of La Paz, a mining and civil engineering school at Oruro, 
commercial schools at Sucre and Trinidad, and several mission 
schools under the direction of religious orders. 

Religion. — The constitution of Bolivia, art. 2, defines the 
attitude of the republic toward the Church in the following 
words: — " The state recognizes and supports the Roman 
Apostolic Catholic religion, the public exercise of any other 
worship being prohibited, except in -the colonies where _ it is 
tolerated." This toleration is tacitly extended to res'ident 
foreigners belonging to other religious sects. The census of 1900 
enumerated the Roman Catholic population at 1,609,365, and 
that of other creeds at 24,245, which gives the former 985 and the 
latter 1 5 in every thousand. The domesticated Indians profess 
the Roman Catholic faith, but it is tinged with the superstitions of 
their ancestors. They hold the clergy in great fear and reverence, 
however, and are deeply influenced by the forms and ceremonies 
of the church, which have changed little since the first Spanish 
settlements. Bolivia is divided into an archbishopric and three 
bishoprics. The first includes the departments of Chuquisaca, 
Oruro, Potosi, Tarija and the Chilean province of Antofagasta, 
with its seat at Sucre, and is known as the archbishopric of La 
Plata. The sees of the three bishoprics are La Paz, Cochabamba 
and Santa Cruz. Mission work among the Indians is entrusted to 
the Propaganda Fide, which has five colleges and a large number 
of missions, and receives a small subvention from the state. It is 
estimated that these missions have charge of fully 20,000 Indians. 
The annual appropriation for the Church is about £17,150. The 
religious orders, which have never been suppressed in Bolivia, 
maintain several convents. 

Finance. — No itemized returns of receipts and expenditures 
are ever published, and the estimates presented to congress by 
the cabinet ministers furnish the only source from which infor- 
mation can be drawn. The expenditures are not large, and 
taxation is not considered heavy. The estimated revenues and 
expenditures for 1904 and 1905 at 21 pence per boliviano, 
were as follows: 1904, revenue £632,773 : 15s., expenditure 
£748,571 : ics.; 1905, revenue £693,763 : 17 : 6, expenditure 
£828,937 : 19 : 9. The revenues are derived principally from 
duties and fees on imports, excise taxes on spirits, wines, tobacco 



and sugar, general, mining taxes and export duties on minerals 
(except silver), export duties on rubber and coca, taxes on the 
profits of stock companies, fees for licences and patents, stamp 
taxes, and postal and telegraph revenues. Nominally, the 
import duties are moderate, so much so that Bolivia is sometimes 
called a " free-trade country," but this is a misnomer, for in 
addition to the schedule rates of 10 to 40% ad valorem on im- 
ports, there are a consular fee of i§% for the registration of 
invoices exceeding 200 bolivianos, a consumption tax of 10 
centavos per quintal (46 kilogrammes), fees for viseing certi- 
ficates to accompany merchandise in transit, special "octroi" 
taxes on certain kinds of merchandise controlled by monopolies 
(spirits, tobacco, &c), and the import and consumption taxes 
levied by the departments and municipalities. The expenditures 
are chiefly for official salaries, subsidies, public works, church 
and mission support, justice, public instruction, military ex- 
penses, and interest on the public debt. The appropriations for 
1905 were as follows: war, 2,081,119 bolivianos; finance and 
industry, 1,462,259; government and fomento, 2,021,428; 
justice and public instruction, 1,878,941. 

The acknowledged public debt of the country is comparatively 
small. At the close of the war with Chile there was an in- 
demnity debt due to citizens of that republic of 6,550,830 
bolivianos, which had been nearly liquidated in 1904 when Chile 
took over the unpaid balance. This was Bolivia's only foreign 
debt. In 1905 her internal debt, including 1,998,500 bolivianos 
of treasury bills, amounted to 6,243,270 bolivianos (£546,286). 
The government in 1903 authorized the issue of treasury notes 
for the department of Beni and the National Territory to the 
amount of one million bolivianos (£87,500), for the redemption 
of which 10% of the customs receipts of the two districts is set 
apart. The paper currency of the republic consists of bank-notes 
issued by four private banks, and is therefore no part of the 
public debt. The amount in circulation on the 30th of June 
1903 was officially estimated at 9,144,254 bolivianos (£800,122), 
issued on a par with silver. The coinage of the country is of 
silver, nickel and copper. The silver coins are of the denomina- 
tions of 1 boliviano, or 100 centavos, 50, 20, 10 and 5 centavos, 
and the issue of these coins from the Potosi mint is said to be 
about 1,500,000 bolivianos a year. The silver mining com- 
panies are required by law to send to the mint 20% of their 
product. The silver boliviano, however, is rarely seen in circu- 
lation because of the cheaper paper currency. To check the 
exportation of silver coin, the fractional denominations have 
been slightly debased. The nickel coins are of 5 and 10 centavos, 
and the copper 1 and 2 centavos. 

The departmental revenues, which are derived from excise and 
land taxes, mining grants, tithes, inheritance taxes, tolls, stamp 
taxes, subsidies from the national treasury and other small 
taxes, were estimated at 2,296,172 bolivianos in 1903, and the 
expenditures at 2,295,791 bolivianos. The expenditures were 
chiefly for justice, police, public works, public instruction and 
the Church. The municipal revenues aggregated 2,317,670 
bolivianos in 1902, and the expenditures 61,510 bolivianos in 
excess of that sum. These revenues are derived from a lighting 
tax, leases and ground rents, cemetery fees, consumption and 
market taxes, licences, tolls, taxes on hides and skins, personal 
and various minor taxes. There is a multiplication of taxes 
in trade which recalls the old colonial alcabala tax, and it serves 
to restrict commerce and augment the cost of goods in much the 
same way, if not to the same degree. 

Authorities. — M. V. Ballivian, Apuntes sobre la industria de 
goma elastica, &c. (La Paz, 1896); Noticia Politica, Geogrdfica, 
Industrial, y Estadistica de Bolivia (La Paz, 1900) ; Breves Indica- 
ciones para el Inmigrante y el Viajero a Bolivia (La Paz, 1898); 
Monografias de la Industria Minera en Bolivia, three parts (La Paz, 
1899-1900) ; Relaciones Geogrdficas de Bolivia existentes en el Archivo 
de la Oficina Nacional de Inmigracion, &c. (La Paz, 1898); M. V. 
Ballivian and Eduardo Idiaquez, Diccionario Geogrdfico de la Re- 
publica de Bolivia (La Paz, 1900) ; Andre Bresson, Sept annees 
d' explorations, de voyages et de sejours dans I'Amerique australe 
(Paris, 1886); Enrique Bolland, Exploraciones practicadas en el 
Alto Paraguay y en la Laguna Gaiba (Buenos Aires, 1901); G. E. 
Church, The Route to Bolivia via the River Amazon (London, 1877); 



HISTORY] 



BOLIVIA 



i'/5 



G. E. Church, " Bolivia by the Rio de la Plata Route," Geogr. Jour. 
xix. pp. 64-73 (London, 1902) ; C. B. Cisneros and R. E. Garcia, 
Geografia Comercial de la America del Sur (Lima, 1898); Sir W. M. 
Conway, Climbing and Exploration in the Bolivian Andes (London, 
1903) ; M. Dalence, Bosquejo estadistico de Bolivia (Chuquisaca, 
1878) ; J. L. Moreno, Nociones de geografia de Bolivia (Sucre, 1889) ; 
Edward D. Mathews, Up the Amazon and Madeira Rivers, through 
Bolivia and Peru (London, 1879); Carlos Matzenauer, Bolivia in 
historischer, geographischer und cultureller Hinsicht (Vienna, 1897); 
M. F. Soldan, Narracion de Guerra de Chile contra Peru y Bolivia 
(La Paz, 1884) ; C. M. Pepper, Panama to Patagonia (Chicago, 1906) ; 
A. Petrocokino, Along the Andes, in Bolivia, Peru, and Ecuador 
(London, 1903) ; Cornte C. d'Ursel, Sud Amerique: Seiours et 
voyages au Bresil, en Bolivie, &c. (Paris, 1879); Charles Wiener, 
Perou et Bolivie (Paris, 1880); Bolivia, Geographical Sketch, Natural 
Resources, S^c, Intern. Bur. of the American Republics (Washington, 
1904) ; Boletin de la Oficina Nacional de Inmigracion, Estadistica y 
Propaganda Geogrdfica (La Paz) ; Sinopsis estadistica y geogrdfica de 
la Republica de Bolivia (3 vols., La Paz, 1902-1904) ; G. de Crequi- 
Montfort, " Exploration en Bolivie," in La Geographie, ix. pp. 79-86 
(Paris, 1904); M. Neveau-Lemaire, " Le Titicaca et le Poopo," &c, 
in La Geographie, ix. pp. 409-430 (Paris, 1904) ; British Foreign 
Office Diplomatic and Consular Reports (London) ; United States 
Consular Reports ; Stanford's Compendium of Geography and Travel, 
vol. i., South and Central America (London, 1904). For Geology 
see A. d'Orbigny, Voyage dans I' Amerique meridionale, vol. iii. pt. 
iii. (Paris, 1842) ; D. Forbes, " On the Geology of Bolivia and Peru," 
Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc. vol. xvii. (London, 1861), pp. 7-62, pis. 
i.-iii. ; A. Ulrich, "Palaeozoische Versteinerungen aus Bolivien," 
Neues Jahrb. f. Min. Band viii. (1893), pp. 5-1 16, pis. i.-v. ; G. 
Steinmann, &c, " Geologie des sudostlichen Boliviens," Centralb.f. 
Min., Jahrg. (1904), pp. 1-4. (A. J. L.) 

History 

The country now forming the republic of Bolivia, named after 
the great liberator Simon Bolivar (q.v.), was in early days simply 
a portion of the empire of the Incas of Peru (q.v.). After the 
conquest of Peru by the Spaniards in the 1 6th century the natives 
were subjected to much tyranny and oppression, though it must 
in fairness be said that much of it was carried out in defiance 
of the efforts and the wishes of the Spanish home government, 
whose legislative efforts to protect the Indians from serfdom and 
ill-usage met with scant respect at the hands of the distant 
settlers and mine-owners, who bid defiance to the humane and 
protective regulations of the council of the Indies, and treated 
the unhappy natives little better than beasts of burden. The 
statement, moreover, that some eight millions of Indians perished 
through forced labour in the mines is a gross exaggeration. The 
annual diminution in the number of the Indian population was 
undoubtedly very great, but it was due far more to the result of 
European epidemics and to indulgence in alcohol than to hard 
work. The abortive insurrection of 1780-82, led by the Inca 
Tupac Amaru, was never a general rising, and was directed rather 
against Creole tyranny than against Spanish rule. The heavy 
losses sustained by the Indians during that outbreak, and their 
dislike and distrust of the colonial Spaniard, account for the 
comparative indifference with which they viewed the rise and 
progress of the 18 14 colonial revolt against Spain, which gave 
the South American states their independence. 

We are only concerned here with the War of Independence so 
far as it affected Upper Peru, the Bolivia of later days. When 
the patriots of Buenos Aires had succeeded in liberating 
Ya" 0t nd- f rom tne dominion of Spain the interior provinces of 
eace. the Rio de la Plata, they turned their arms against 

their enemies who held Upper Peru. An almost un- 
interrupted warfare followed, from July 1809 till August 1825, 
with alternate successes on the side of the Spanish or royalist 
and the South American or patriot forces, — the scene of action 
lying chiefly between the Argentine provinces of Salta and Jujuy 
and the shores of Lake Titicaca. The first movement of the 
war was the successful invasion of Upper Peru by the army of 
Buenos Aires, under General Balcarce, which, after twice defeat- 
ing the Spanish troops, was able to celebrate the first anni- 
versary of independence near Lake Titicaca, in May 1811. Soon, 
however, the patriot army, owing to the dissolute conduct and 
negligence of its leaders, became disorganized, and was attacked 
and defeated, in June 181 1, by the Spanish army under General 
Goyeneche, and driven back into Jujuy. Four years of warfare, 



in which victory was alternately with the Spaniards and the 
patriots, was terminated in 1815 by the total rout of the latter 
in a battle which took place between Potosi and Oruro. To this 
succeeded a revolt of the Indians of the southern provinces of 
Peru, and the object being the independence of the whole 
country, it was joined by numerous Creoles. This insurrection 
was, however, speedily put down by the royalists. In 1816 the 
Spanish general Laserna, having been appointed commander-in- 
chief of Upper Peru, made an attempt to invade the Argentine 
provinces, intending to march on Buenos Aires, but he was 
completely foiled in this by the activity of the irregular gaucho 
troops of Salta and Jujuy, and was forced to retire. During this 
time and in the six succeeding years a guerrilla warfare was 
maintained by the patriots of Upper Peru, who had taken refuge 
in the mountains, chiefly of the province of Yungas, and who 
frequently harassed the royalist troops. In June 1823 the 
expedition of General Santa Cruz, prepared with great zeal and 
activity at Lima, marched in two divisions upon Upper Peru, and 
in the following months of July and August the whole country 
between La Paz and Oruro was occupied by his forces; but 
later, the indecision and want of judgment displayed by Santa 
Cruz allowed a retreat to be made before a smaller royalist army, 
and a severe storm converted their retreat into a precipitate 
flight, only a remnant of the expedition again reaching Lima. 
In 1824, after the great battle of Ayacucho in Lower Peru, 
General Sucre, whose valour had contributed so much to the 
patriot success of that day, marched with a part of the victorious 
army into Upper Peru. On the news of the victory a universal 
rising of the patriots took place, and before Sucre had reached 
Oruro and Puno, in February 1825, La Paz was already in their 
possession, and the royalist garrisons of several towns had gone 
over to their side. The Spanish general Olaneta, with a diminished 
army of 2000 men, was confined to the province of Potosi, where 
he held out till March 1825, when he was mortally wounded in 
an action with some of his own revolted troops. 

General Sucre was now invested with the supreme command 
in Upper Peru, until the requisite measures could be taken to 
establish in that country a regular and constitutional government. 
Deputies from the various provinces to the number of fifty-four 
were assembled at Chuquisaca, the capital, to decide upon the 
question proposed to them on the part of the government of 
the Argentine provinces, whether they would or would not remain 
separate from that country. In August 1825 they decided this 
question, declaring it to be the national will that Upper 
Peru should in future constitute a distinct and inde- 
pendent nation. This assembly continued theirsession, 
although the primary object of their meeting had thus been 
accomplished, and afterwards gave the name of Bolivia to the 
country, — issuing at the same time a formal declaration of 
independence. 

The first general assembly of deputies of Bolivia dissolved 
itself on the 6th of October 1825, and a new congress was sum- 
moned and formally installed at Chuquisaca on the 25th of May 
1826, to take into consideration the constitution prepared by 
Bolivar for the new republic. A favourable report was made 
to that body by a committee appointed to examine it, on which 
it was approved by the congress, and declared to be the constitu- 
tion of the republic; and as such, it was sworn to by the people. 
General Sucre was chosen president for life, according to the 
constitution, but only accepted the appointment for the space 
of two years, and on the express condition that 2000 Colombian 
troops should be permitted to remain with him. 

The independence of the country, so dearly bought, did not, 
however, secure for it a peaceful future. Repeated risings 
occurred, till in the end of 1827 General Sucre and his Colombian 
troops were driven from La Paz. A new congress was formed 
at Chuquisaca in April 1828, which modified the constitution 
given by Bolivar, and chose Marshal Santa Cruz for president; but 
only a year later a revolution, led by General Blanco, threw the 
country into disorder and for a time overturned the govern- 
ment. Quiet being again restored in 1831, Santa Cruz pro- 
mulgated the code of laws which bore his name, and brought the 



Bolivia 
a nation. 



176 



BOLIVIA 



[HISTORY 



financial affairs of the country into some order; he also con- 
cluded a treaty of commerce with Peru, and for several years 
Bolivia remained in peace. In 1835, when a struggle for the 
chief power had made two factions in the neighbouring republic 
of Peru, Santa Cruz was induced to take a part in the contest; 
he marched into that country, and after defeating General 
Gamarra, the leader of one of the opposing parties, completed 
the pacification of Peru in the spring of 1836, named himself 
its protector, and had in view a confederation of the two countries. 
At this juncture the government of Chile interfered actively, 
and espousing the cause of Gamarra, sent troops into Peru. 
Three years of fighting ensued till in a battle at Jungay in June 
1839 Santa Cruz was defeated and exiled, Gamarra became 
president of Peru, and General Velasco provisional chief in Bolivia. 
The Santa Cruz party, however, remained strong in Bolivia, 
and soon revolted successfully against the new head of the 
government, ultimately installing General Ballivian in the 
chief power. Taking advantage of the disturbed condition of 
Bolivia, Gamarra made an attempt to annex the rich province 
of La Paz, invading it in August 1841 and besieging the capital; 
but in a battle with Ballivian his army was totally routed, and 
Gamarra himself was killed. The Bolivian general was now in 
turn to invade Peru, when Chile again interfered to prevent him. 
Ballivian remained in the presidency till 1848, when he retired 
to Valparaiso, and in the end of that year General Belzu, after 
leading a successful military revolution, took the chief power, 
and during his presidency endeavoured to promote agriculture, 
industry and trade. General Jorge Cordova succeeded him, 
but had not been long in office when a new revolt in September 
1857, originating with the garrison of Oruro, spread over the 
land, and compelled him to quit the country. His place was 
taken by Dr Jose Maria Linares, the originator of the revolution, 
who, taking into his own hands all the powers of government, 
and acting with the greatest severity, caused himself to be 
proclaimed dictator in March 1858. Fresh disturbances led 
to the deposition of Linares in 1861, when Dr Maria de Acha was 
chosen president. In 1862 a treaty of peace and commerce with 
the United States was ratified, and in the following year a 
similar treaty was concluded with Belgium; but new causes of 
disagreement with Chile had arisen in the discovery of rich beds 
of guano on the eastern coast-land of the desert of Atacama, 
which threatened warfare, and were only set at rest by the 
treaty of August 1866, in which the 24th parallel of latitude 
was adopted as the boundary between the two republics. A new 
military revolution, led by Maria Melgarejo, broke out in 1865, 
and in February of that year the troops of President Acha were, 
defeated in a battle near Potosi, when Melgarejo took the 
dominion of the country. After defeating two revolutions, in 
1865 and 1866, the new president declared a political amnesty, 
and in 1869, after imposing a revised constitution on the country, 
he became its dictator. 

In January 187 1 President Melgarejo was in his turn deposed 
and driven from the country by a revolution headed by Colonel 

Augustin Morales. The latter, becoming president, 
history. was himself murdered in November 1872 and was 

succeeded by Colonel Adolfo Ballivian, who died in 
1874. Under this president Bolivia entered upon a secret agree- 
ment with Peru which was destined to have grave consequences 
for both countries. To understand the reasons that urged 
Bolivia to take this step it is necessary to go back to the above- 
mentioned treaty of 1866 between Chile and Bolivia. By this 
instrument Bolivia, besides conceding the 24th parallel as the 
boundary of Chilean territory, agreed that Chile should have a 
half share of the customs and full facilities for trading on the 
coast that lay between the 23rd and 24th parallels, Chile at that 
time being largely interested in the trade of that region. It was 
also agreed that Chile should be allowed to mine and export the 
products of this district without tax or hindrance on the part of 
Bolivia. In 1870, in further consideration of the sum of $10,000, 
Bolivia granted to an Anglo-Chilean company the right of work- 
ing certain nitrate deposits north of the 24th parallel. The great 
wealth which was passing into Chilean hands owing to these 



compacts created no little discontent in Bolivia, nor was Peru 
any better pleased with the hold that Chilean capital was estab- 
lishing in the rich district of Tarapaca. On 6th February 1873 
Bolivia entered upon a secret agreement with Peru, the ostensible 
object of which was the preservation of their territorial integrity 
and their mutual defence against exterior aggression. There can 
be no doubt that the aggression contemplated as possible by 
both countries was a further encroachment on the part of Chile. 

Upon the death of Adolfo Ballivian, immediately after the 
conclusion of this treaty with Peru, Dr Tomas Frias succeeded 
to the presidency. He signed yet another treaty with Chile, by 
which the latter agreed to withdraw her claim to half the duties 
levied in Bolivian ports on condition that all Chilean industries 
established in Bolivian territory should be free from duty for 
twenty-five years. This treaty was never ratified, and four years 
later General Hilarion Daza, who had succeeded Dr Frias as 
president in 1876, demanded as the price of Bolivia's consent 
that a tax of 10 cents per quintal should be paid on all nitrates 
exported from the country, further declaring that, unless this 
levy was paid, nitrates in the hands of the exporters would be 
seized by the Bolivian government. As an answer to these de- 
mands, and in order to protect the property of Chilean subjects, 
the Chilean fleet was sent to blockade the ports of Antofagasta, 
Cobija and Tocapilla. On the 14th February 1879 the Chilean 
colonel Sotomayor occupied Antofagasta, and on 1st March, 
a fortnight later, the Bolivian government declared war. 

An offer on the part of Peru to act as mediator met with no 
favour from Chile. The existence of the secret treaty, well 
known to the Chilean government, rendered the intervention of 
Peru more than questionable, and the law passed by the latter 
in 1875, which practically created a monopoly of the Tarapaca 
nitrate beds to the serious prejudice of Chilean enterprise, offered 
no guarantee of her good faith. Chile replied by curtly demanding 
the annulment of the secret treaty and an assurance of Peruvian 
neutrality. Both demands being refused, she declared war upon 
Peru. 

The superiority of the Chileans at sea, though checked for 
some time by the heroic gallantry of the Peruvians, soon enabled 
them to land a sufficient number of troops to meet the allied 
forces which had concentrated at Arica and other points in the 
south. The Bolivian ports were already in Chilean hands, and 
a sea attack upon Pisagua surprised and routed the troops under 
the Peruvian general Buendia and opened the way into the 
southern territory of Peru. General Daza, who should have co- 
operated with Buendia, turned back, on receiving news of the 
Peruvian defeat, and led the Bolivian troops to Tacna in a hasty 
and somewhat disorderly retreat. The fall of San Francisco 
followed, and Iquique, which was evacuated by the allies with- 
out a struggle, was occupied. Severe fighting took place before 
Tarapaca surrendered, but the end of 1879 saw the Chileans in 
complete possession of the province. 

Meanwhile a double revolution took place in Peru and Bolivia. 
In the former country General Prado was deposed and Colonel 
Pierola proclaimed dictator. The Bolivians followed the example 
of their allies. The troops at Tacna, indignant at the inglorious 
part they had been condemned to play by the incompetence or 
cowardice of their president, deprived him of their command and 
elected Colonel Camacho to lead them. At the same time a 
revolution in La Paz proclaimed General Narciso Campero presi- 
dent, and he was elected to that post in the following June by 
the ordinary procedure of the constitution. During 1880 the 
war was chiefly maintained at sea between Chile and Peru, 
Bolivia taking little or no part in the struggle. In January of 
1881 were fought the battles of Chorillos and Miraflores, attended 
by heavy slaughter and savage excesses on the part of the Chilean 
troops. They were followed almost immediately by the surrender 
of Lima and Callao, which left the Chileans practically masters 
of Peru. In the interior, however, where the Peruvian admiral 
Montero had formed a provisional government, the war still 
lingered, and in September 1882 a conference took place between 
the latter and President Campero, at which it was decided that 
they should hold out for better terms. But the Peruvians 



BOLKHOV— BOLLANDISTS 



177 



wearied of the useless struggle. On the 20th of October 1883 
they concluded a treaty of peace with Chile; the troops at Are- 
quipa, under Admiral Montero, surrendered that town, and 
Montero himself, coldly received in Bolivia, whither he had fled 
for refuge, withdrew from the country to Europe. On the 9th 
of November the Chilean army of occupation was concentrated 
at Arequipa, while what remained of the Bolivian army lay at 
Oruro. Negotiations were opened, and on nth December a 
peace was signed between Chile and Bolivia. By this treaty 
Bolivia ceded to Chile the whole of its sea-coast, including the 
port of Cobija. 

On the 1 8th of May 1895 a treaty was signed at Santiago 
between Chile and Bolivia, " with a view to strengthening the 
bonds of friendship which unite the two countries," and, " in 
accord with the higher necessity that the future development 
and commercial prosperity of Bolivia require her free access to 
the sea." By this treaty Chile declared that if, in consequence 
of the plebiscite (to take place under the treaty of Ancon with 
Peru), or by virtue of direct arrangement, she should "acquire 
dominion and permanent sovereignty over the territories of 
Tacna and Arica, she undertakes to transfer them to Bolivia 
in the same form and to the same extent as she may acquire 
them "; the republic of Bolivia paying as an indemnity for that 
transfer $5,000,000 silver. If this cession should be effected, 
Chile should advance her own frontier north of Camerones to 
Vitor, from the sea up to the frontier which actually separates 
that district from Bolivia. Chile also pledged herself to use her 
utmost endeavour, either separately or jointly with Bolivia, to 
obtain possession of Tacna and Arica. If she failed, she bound 
herself to cede to Bolivia the roadstead (caleta) of Vitor, or 
another analogous one, and $5,000,000 silver. Supplementary 
protocols to this treaty stipulated that the port to be ceded must 
" fully satisfy the present and future requirements " of the 
commerce of Bolivia. 

On the 23rd of May 1895 further treaties of peace and com- 
merce were signed with Chile, but the provisions with regard 
to the cession of a seaport to Bolivia still remained unfulfilled. 
During those ten years of recovery on the part of Bolivia from 
the effects of the war, the presidency was held by Dr Pacheco, 
who succeeded Campero, and held office for the full term; by 
Dr Aniceto Arce, who held it until 1892, and by Dr Mariano 
Baptista, his successor. In 1896 Dr Severo Alonso became 
president, and during his tenure of office diplomatic relations 
were resumed with Great Britain, Sefior Aramayo being sent 
to London as minister plenipotentiary in July 1897. As an 
outcome of his mission an extradition treaty was concluded with 
Great Britain in March 1898. 

In December an attempt was made to pass a law creating 
Sucre the perpetual capital of the republic. Until this Sucre 
had taken its turn with La Paz, Cochabamba and Oruro. La 
Paz rose in open revolt. On the 1 7th of January of the following 
year a battle was fought some 40 m. from La Paz between the 
insurgents and the government forces, in which the latter were 
defeated with the loss of a colonel and forty-three men. Colonel 
Pando, the insurgent leader, having gained a strong following, 
marched upon Oruro, and entered that town on nth April 1899, 
after completely defeating the government troops. Dr Severo 
Alonso took refuge in Chilean territory; and Colonel Pando 
formed a provisional government. He had no difficulty in 
obtaining his election to the presidency without opposition. He 
entered upon office on the 26th of October, and proved himself 
to be a strong and capable chief magistrate. He had to deal 
with two difficult settlements as to boundaries with Chile and 
Brazil, and to take steps for improving the means of communica- 
tion in the country, by this means reviving its mining and other 
industries. The dispute with Brazil over the rich Acre rubber- 
producing territory was accentuated by the majority of those 
engaged in the rubber industry being Brazilians, who resented 
the attempts of Bolivian officials to exercise authority in the 
district. This led to a declaration of independence on the part 
of the state of Acre, and the despatch of a body of Bolivian 
troops in 1900 to restore order. There was no desire, however, 



on the part of President Pando to involve himself in hostilities 
with Brazil, and in a spirit of concession the dispute was settled 
amicably by diplomatic means, and a treaty signed in November 
1903. A new boundary line was drawn, and a portion of the 
Acre province ceded to Brazil in consideration of a cash indemnity 
of $10,000,000. 

The long-standing dispute with Chile with regard to its occupa- 
tion of the former Bolivian provinces of Tacna and Arica under 
the Parto de Tregna of the 4th of April 1884 was more difficult 
to arrange satisfactorily. In 1895 there had been some prospect 
of Chile conceding an outlet on the sea in exchange for a recogni- 
tion of the Chilean ownership of Tacna and Arica. The discovery, 
however, of secret negotiations between Bolivia and Argentina 
caused Chile to change its conciliatory attitude. Bolivia was 
in no position to venture upon hostilities or to compel the 
Chileans to make concessions, and the final settlement of the 
boundary dispute between Argentina and Chile deprived the 
Bclivians of the hope of obtaining the support of the Argentines. 
President Pando and his successor, Ismail Montes, who became 
president in 1904, saw that it was necessary to yield, and to make 
the best terms they could. A treaty was accordingly ratified 
in 1905, which was in many ways advantageous to Bolivia, 
though the republic was compelled to cede to Chile the maritime 
provinces occupied by the latter power since the war of 188 1, 
and to do without a seaport. The government of Chile undertook 
to construct a railway at its own cost from Arica to the Bolivian 
capital, La Paz, and to give the Bolivians free transit through 
Chilean territory to certain towns on the coast. Chile further 
agreed to pay Bolivia a cash indemnity and lend certain pecuniary 
assistance to the construction of other railways necessary for 
the opening out of the country. 

See C. Wiener, Bolivie et Perou (Paris, 1880); E. Mossbach, 
Bolivia (Leipzig, 1875); Theodore Child, The South American 
Republics (New York, 1891); Vicente de Ballivian y Rizas, Archive 
Boliviano. Cottecion de documentes relativos a la historia de Bolivia 
(Paris, 1872); Ramon Sotomayor Valdes, Estudio historico de 
Bolivia bajo la administracion del General don Jose Maria Achd con 
una introducion que contiene el compendio de la Guerra de la inde- 
pendent i de los gobiernos de dicha Republica hasta 1861 (Santiago 
de Chile, 1874). (W. Hd.; G. E.) 

BOLKHOV, a town of Russia, in the government of Orel, and 
35 m. N. of the city of Orel. Pop. (1897) 20,703. It is prettily 
situated amongst orchards and possesses a cathedral. There 
is a lively trade in hemp, hemp-seed oil, hemp goods and cattle, 
and there are hemp-mills, soap-works and tanneries. The 
much-venerated monastery, Optina Pustyn, is close by. 

BOLL, a botanical term for a fruit-pod, particularly of the 
cotton plant. The word is in O. Eng. holla, which is also repre- 
sented in " bowl," a round vessel for liquids, a variant due to 
" bowl," ball, which is from the Fr. boule. " Boll " is also used, 
chiefly in Scotland and the north of England, as a measure of 
weight for flour=i4o lb, and of capacity for grain: 16 pecks 
= 1 boll. 

BOLLANDISTS, the Belgian Jesuits who publish the Acta 
Sanctorum, the great collection of biographies and legends of the 
saints, arranged by days, in the order of the calendar. The 
original idea was conceived by a Jesuit father, Heribert Rosweyde 
(see Hagiology), and was explained by him in a sort of pro- 
spectus, which he issued in 1607 under the title of Fasti sanctorum 
quorum vitae in Belgicis Bibliothecis manuscriptae. His intention 
was to publish in eighteen volumes the lives of the saints com- 
piled from the MSS., at the same time adding sober notes. At 
the time of his death (1629) he had collected a large amount of 
material, but had not been able actually to begin the work. A 
Jesuit father, John Bolland, was appointed to carry on the pro- 
ject, and was sent to Antwerp. He continued to amass material, 
and extended the scope of the work. In 1643 the two volumes 
for January appeared. The three volumes for February ap- 
peared in 1658, the three for March in 1668, the three for April in 
1675, and so on. In 1635 Henschenius (Godfried Henschen) was 
associated with Bolland, ana collaborated in the work until 1681. 
From 1659 to i7i4Papebroch (Daniel van Papenbroeck) collabor- 
ated. This was the most brilliant period in the history of the 



178 



BOLOGNA, G. DA— BOLOGNA 



Acta Sanctorum. The freedom of Papebroch's criticism made 
him many enemies, and he had often to defend himself against 
their attacks. The work was continued — with some inequalities, 
but always in the same spirit — until the suppression of the Society 
of Jesus in 1773. The last volume published was vol. iii. of 
October, which appeared in 1770. 

On the dispersion of the Jesuits the Bollandists were authorized 
to continue their work, and remained at Antwerp until 1778, 
when they were transferred to Brussels, to the monastery of 
canons regular of Coudenberg. Here they published vol. iv. of 
October in 1780, and vol. v. of October in 1786, when the 
monastery of Coudenberg was suppressed. In 1788 the work 
of the Bollandists ceased. The remains of their library were 
acquired by the Premonstratensians of Tongerloo, who en- 
deavoured to continue the work, and in their abbey vol. vi. of 
October appeared in 1794. 

After the re-establishment of the Society of Jesus in Belgium 
the work was again taken up in 1837, at the suggestion of 
the Academie Royale of Belgium and with the support of the 
Belgian government, and the Bollandists were installed at the 
college of St Michael in Brussels. In 1845 appeared vol. vii. of 
October, the first of the new series, which reached vol. xiii. of 
October in 1883. In this series the Jesuit fathers Joseph van der 
Moere, Joseph van Hecke, Benjamin Bossue, Victor and Remi de 
Buck, Ant. Tinnebroeck, Edu. Carpentier and Henr. Matagne 
collaborated. Father John Martinov of Theazan was entrusted 
with the editing of the Annus Graeco-Siavicus, which appeared in 
the beginning of vol. xi. of October in 1864. 

In 1882 the activities of the Bollandists were exerted in a new 
direction, with a view to bringing the work more into line with 
the progress of historical methods. A quarterly review was 
established under the title of Analecta Bollandiana by the Jesuit 
fathers C. de Smedt, G. van Hooff and J. de Backer. This 
reached its 25th volume in 1906, and was edited by the 
Bollandists de Smedt, F. van Ontroy, H. Delehaye, A. Porcelet 
and P. Peeters. This review contains studies in preparation for 
the continuation and remoulding of the Acta Sanctorum, inedited 
texts, dissertations, and, since 1892, a Bulletin des publications 
hagiographiques, containing criticisms of recent works on hagio- 
graphic questions. In addition to this review, the Bollandists 
undertook the analysis of the hagiographic MSS. in the principal 
libraries. Besides numerous library catalogues published in the 
Analecta {e.g. those of Chartres, Namur, Ghent, Messina, Venice, 
etc.), separate volumes were devoted to the Latin MSS. in the 
Bibliotheque Royale at Brussels (2vols., 1886-1889), to the Latin 
and Greek MSS. in the Bibliotheque Nationale at Paris (5 vols., 
1889-1896), to the Greek MSS. in the Vatican (1899), and to the 
Latin MSS. in the libraries of Rome (1905 seq.). They also 
prepared inventories of the hagiographic texts hitherto published, 
and of these there have appeared the Bibliotheca hagiographica 
graeca (1895), the Bibliotheca hagiographica latina (1899) and the 
Bibliotheca hagiographica Orientalis. These indispensable works 
delayed the publication of the principal collection,- but tended to 
give it a more solid basis and a strictly scientific stamp. In 1887 
appeared vol. i. for November; in 1894, vol. ii., preceded by the 
Martyrologium Hieronymianum by J. B. de Rossi and the abbe 
Louis Duchesne; in 1902, the Propylaeum ad Acta Sanctorum 
Novembris, comprising the Synaxarium ecclesiae Constantino- 
politanae. 

There are three editions of the Ada Sanctorum: the original 
edition (Antwerp, Tongerloo and Brussels, 63 vols., 1643-1902); 
the Venice edition, stopping at vol. v. of September (1734-1770) ; 
and the Paris edition, stopping at vol. xiii. of October (61 vols., 
T863-1883). In addition to these, there is a volume of tables, 
edited by the abbe Rigollot. 

See Acta Sanctorum apologeticis libris . . . vindicala (Antwerp, 
1755); L. P. Gachard, Memoire historique sur les Bollandistes 
(Brussels, 1835); van Hecke, " De ratione operis Bollandiani " 
(Acta Sanctorum Octobris, vii.) ; and Cardinal J. B. Pitra, Etudes sur 
la collection des Actes des Saints (Paris, 1880). (H. De.) 

BOLOGNA, GIOVANNI DA (1524-1608) [Ital. for his real name, 
Jean Bologne or Boullongne], French sculptor, was born at 
Douai in 1 5 24. His early training as a sculptor was conducted at 



Antwerp, but at the age of twenty-five he went to Italy and he 
settled in 1553 in Florence, where his best works still remain. 
His two most celebrated productions are the single bronze 
figure of Mercury, poised on one foot, resting on the head of a 
zephyr, as if in the act of springing into the air (in the Bargello 
gallery), and the marble group known as the Rape of the Sabines, 
which was executed for Francesco de' Medici and received this 
name, Lanzi informs us, after it was finished. It is now in the 
Loggia de Lanzi of the ducal piazza. Giovanni was also em- 
ployed at Genoa, where he executed various excellent works, 
chiefly in bronze. Most of his pieces are characterized by great 
spirit and elegance. His great fountain at Bologna (1563-1567) 
is remarkable for beauty of proportion. Noteworthy also are his 
two fountains in the Boboli gardens, one completed in 1576 and 
the other in 1585. He also cast the fine bronze equestrian statue 
of Cosimo de' Medici at Florence and the very richly decorated 
west door of Pisa cathedral. One of Bologna's best works, a group 
of two nude figures fighting, is now lost. A fine copy in lead was 
at one time in the front quadrangle of Brasenose College, Oxford. 
In 1 88 1 it was sold for old lead by the principal and fellows of the 
college, and was melted down by the plumber who bought it. 
See La Vie et I'ceuvre de Jean Bologne, par Abel Desjardins, d'aprte 
les manuscrits — recueillis par Foucques de Vagnonville (1883, numerous 
illustrations; list of works). 

BOLOGNA, a city and archiepiscopal see of Emilia, Italy, the 
capital of the province of Bologna, and headquarters of the VI. 
army corps. It is situated at the edge of the plain of Emilia, 
180 ft. above sea-level at the base of the Apennines, 82 m. due N. 
of Florence by rail, 63 m. by road and 50 m. direct, and 134 m. 
S.E. of Milan by rail. Pop. (1901) town, 102,122; commune) 
iS3>5 01 - The more or less rectangular Roman city, orientated 
on the points of the compass, with its streets arranged at right 
angles, can be easily distinguished from the outer city, which 
received its fortifications in 1 206 (see G. Gozzadini, Studi 
archeologico-topografici sulla citta di Bologna, Bologna, 1868). 
The streets leading to the gates of the latter radiate from the 
outskirts, and not from the centre, of the former. Some of the 
oldest churches, however, lie outside the limits of the Roman 
city (of which no buildings remain above ground) such as 
S. Stefano, S. Giovanni in Monte and SS. Vitale ed Agricola. 
The first consists of a group of no less than seven different 
buildings, of different dates; the earliest of which, the former 
cathedral of SS. Pietro e Paolo, was constructed about the middle 
of the 4th century, in part with the debris of Roman buildings; 
while S. Sepolcro, a circular church with ornamentation in brick 
and an imitation of opus reticulatum, should probably be 
attributed to the 6th or 7th centuries. The present cathedral 
(S. Pietro), erected in 910, is now almost entirely in the baroque 
style. The largest church in the town, however, is that of 
S. Petronio, the patron saint of Bologna, which was begun in 
1390; only the nave and aisles as far as the transepts were, 
however, completed, but even this is a fine fragment, in the 
Gothic style, measuring 384 ft. long, and 157 wide, whereas the 
projected length of the whole (a cruciform basilica) was over 
700 ft., with a breadth across the transepts of 460 ft., and a dome 
500 ft. high over the crossing (see F. Cavazza in Rassegna d' Arte, 
1905, 161). The church of S. Domenico, which contains the body 
of the saint, who died here in 1221, is unfinished externally, 
while the interior was remodelled in the 18th century. There are 
many other churches of interest, among them S. Francesco, 
perhaps the finest medieval building in Bologna, begun in 1246 
and finished in 1260; it has a fine brick campanile of the end 
of the 14th century. It was restored to sacred uses in 1887, and 
has been carefully liberated from later alterations (U. Berti in 
Rassegna d' Arte, 1901, 55). The church of Corpus Dominii has 
fine 15th-century terra cottas on the facade (F. Malaguzzi Valeri 
in Archivio Storico dell' Arte, ser. ii. vol. ii. (Rome, 1896), 72). 
The centre of the town is formed by the Piazza Vittorio Emanuele 
(formerly Piazza Maggiore), and the Piazza del Nettuno, which 
lie at right angles to one another. Here are the church of 
S. Petronio, the massive Palazzo Comunale, dating from 1245, 
the Palazzo del Podesta, completed in the same year, and the 



BOLSENA— BOLSOVER 



179 



fine bronze statue of Neptune by Giovanni da Bologna (Jean 
Bologne of Douai). 

The famous university of Bologna was founded in the nth 
century (its foundation by Theodosius the Great in a.d. 425 
is legendary), and acquired a European reputation as a school 
of jurisprudence under Pepo, the first known teacher at Bologna 
of Roman law (about 1076), and his successor Irnerius and their 
followers the glossators. The students numbered between three 
and five thousand in the 12th to the 15th century, and in 1262, 
it is said, nearly ten thousand (among them were both Dante 
and Petrarch). Anatomy was taught here in the 14th century. 
But despite its fame, the university, though an autonomous 
corporation, does not seem to have had any fixed residence: 
the professors lectured in their own houses, or later in rooms 
hired or lent by the civic authorities. It was only in 1520 that 
the professors of law were given apartments in a building belong- 
ing to the church of S. Petronio; and in 1562, by order of Pius IV., 
the university itself was constructed close by, by Carlo Borromeo, 
then cardinal legate. The reason of this measure was no doubt 
partly disciplinary, Bologna itself having in 1506 passed under 
the dominion of the papacy. Shortly after this, in 1564, Tasso 
was a student there, and was tried for writing a satirical poem. 
One of the most famous professors was Marcello Malpighi, a 
great anatomist of the 17th century. The building has served 
as the communal library since 1838. Its courtyard contains the 
arms of those students who were elected as representatives of 
their respective nations or faculties. The university has since 
1803 been established in the (16th century) Palazzo Poggi. 
Between 1815 and 1848 the number of students sank to 
about a hundred in some years, chiefly owing to the political 
persecutions of the government: in 1859 the number had risen 
t° 355. It now possesses four faculties and is attended by some 
1700 students. Among its professors women have more than 
once been numbered. 

The Museo Civico is one of the most important museums in 
Italy, containing especially fine collections of antiquities from 
Bologna and its neighbourhood. The picture gallery is equally 
important in its way, affording a survey both of the earlier 
Bolognese paintings and of the works of the Bolognese eclectics 
of the 16th and 17th centuries, the Caracci, Guido Reni, Domeni- 
chino, Guercino, &c. The primitive masters are not of great 
excellence, but the works of the masters of the 15th century, 
especially those of Francesco Francia (1430-1517) and Lorenzo 
Costa of Ferrara (1460-1535), are of considerable merit. The 
great treasure of the collection is, however, Raphael's S. Cecilia, 
painted for the church of S. Giovanni in Monte, about 151 5. 

The two leaning towers, the Torre Asinelli and the Torre 
Garisenda, dating from 1100 and 11 10 respectively, are among 
the most remarkable structures in Bologna: they are square 
brick towers, the former being 320 ft. in height and 4 ft. out of 
the perpendicular, the latter (unfinished) 163 ft. high and 10 ft. 
out of the perpendicular. The town contains many fine private 
palaces, dating from the 13th century onwards. The streets 
are as a rule arcaded, and this characteristic has been preserved 
in modern additions, which have on the whole been made with 
considerable taste, as have also the numerous restorations of 
medieval buildings. A fine view may be had from the Madonna 
di S. Luca, on the south-west of the town (938 ft.). 

Among the specialities of Bologna may be noted the salami 
or mortadella (Bologna sausage), tortellini (a kind of macaroni) 
and liqueurs. 

Bologna is an important railway centre, just as the ancient 
Bononia was a meeting-point of important roads. Here the 
main line from Milan divides, one portion going on parallel to 
the line of the ancient Via Aemilia (which it has followed from 
Piacenza downwards) to Rimini, Ancona and Brindisi, and the 
other through the Apennines to Florence and thence to Rome. 
Another line runs to Ferrara and Padua, another (eventually 
to be prolonged to Verona) to S. Felice sul Panaro, and a third 
toBudrio and Portomaggiore (a station on the line from Ferrara 
to Ravenna). Steam tramways run to Vignola, Pieve di Cento 
and Malalbergo. 



Bologna was only for a short while subject to the Lombards, 
remaining generally under the rule of the exarchate of Ravenna, 
until this in 756 was given by Pippin to the papacy. It was 
sacked by the Hungarians in 902, but otherwise its history is 
little known, and it is uncertain when it acquired its freedom 
and its motto Libertas. But the first " constitution " of the 
commune of Bologna dates from about 11 23, and at that time 
we find it «, free and independent city. From the 12th to the 
14th century it was very frequently at war, and strongly sup- 
ported the Guelph cause against Frederick II. and against the 
neighbouring cities of Romagna and Emilia; indeed, in 1249 
the Bolognese took Enzio, the emperor's son, prisoner, and kept 
him in confinement for the rest of his life. But the struggles 
between Guelphs and Ghibellines in Bologna itself soon followed, 
and the commune was so weakened that in 1337 Taddeo de' 
Pepoli made himself master of the town, and in 1350 his son 
sold it to Giovanni Visconti of Milan. Ten years later it was 
given to the papacy, but soon revolted and recovered its liberty. 
In 1401 Giovanni Bentivoglio made himself lord of Bologna, 
but was killed in a rebellion of 1402. It then returned to the 
Visconti, and after various struggles with the papacy was again 
secured in 1438 by the Bentivoglio, who held it till 1506, when 
Pope Julius II. drove them out, and brought Bologna once more 
under the papacy, under the sway of which it remained (except 
in the Napoleonic period between 1796 and 181 5 and during the 
revolutions of 1821 and 1831) until in i860 it became part of the 
kingdom of Italy. 

Among the most illustrious natives of Bologna may be noted 
Luigi Galvani (173 7-1 798), the discoverer of galvanism, and 
Prospero Lambertini (Pope Benedict XIV.). 

See C. Ricci'Guida diBologna (3rd ed., Bologna, 1900). (T. As.) 

BOLSENA (anc. Volsinii), 1 a town of the province of Rome, 
Italy, 12 m. W.S.W. of Orvieto by road, situated on the north- 
east bank of the lake of Bolsena. Pop. (1901) 3286. The town 
is dominated" by a picturesque medieval castle, and contains 
the church of S. Christina (martyred by drowning in the lake, 
according to the legend, in 278) which dates from the nth 
century and contains some frescoes, perhaps of the school of 
Giotto. It has a fine Renaissance facade, constructed about 
1500 by Cardinal Giovanni de' Medici (afterwards Pope Leo X.), 
and some good terra cottas by the Delia Robbia. Beneath the 
church are catacombs, with the tomb of the saint, discovered 
in 1880 (E. Stevenson in Notizie degli Scavi, 1880, 262; G. B. de 
Rossi in Bullettino d' Archeologia Cristiana, 1880, 109). At one 
of the altars in this crypt occurred the miracle of Bolsena in 1 263. 
A Bohemian priest, sceptical of the doctrine of transubstantia- 
tion, was convinced of its truth by the appearance of drops of 
blood on the host he was consecrating. In commemoration of 
this Pope Urban IV. instituted the festival of Corpus Christi, 
and ordered the erection of the cathedral of Orvieto. The 
miracle forms the subject of a celebrated fresco by Raphael in 
the Vatican. 

The Lake of Bolsena (anc. Lacus V olsiniensis) , 1000 ft. above 
sea-level, 71 sq. m. in area, and 480 ft. deep, is almost circular, 
and was the central point of a large volcanic district, though it is 
probably not itself an extinct crater. Its sides show fine basaltic 
formation in places. It abounds in fish, but its banks are some- 
what deserted and not free from malaria. It contains two 
islands, Bisentina and Martana, the former containing a church 
constructed by Vignola, the latter remains of the castle where 
Amalasuntha, the daughter of Theodoric, was imprisoned and 
strangled. (T. As.) 

BOLSOVER, an urban district in the north-eastern parlia- 
mentary division of Derbyshire, England, si m - E. of Chester- 
field, on branch lines of the Midland and the Great Central 
railways. Pop. (1901) 6844. It lies at a considerable height 
on a sharp slope above a stream tributary to the river 
Rother. The castle round which the town grew up was founded 

1 According to the theory now generally adopted, the Etruscan 
Volsinii occupied the site of Orvieto, which was hence called Urbs 
vetus in late classical and medieval times, while the Roman Volsinii 
was transferred to Bolaena (see Volsinii). 



i8o 



BOLSWARD— BOLTON 



shortly after the Conquest by William Peveril, but the existing 
building, a fine castellated residence, was erected on its site in 
1613. The town itself was fortified, and traces of early works 
remain. The church of St Mary is of Norman and later date; it 
contains some interesting early stone-carving, and monuments 
to the family of Cavendish, who acquired the castle in the 16th 
century. Coal-mining and quarrying are carried on in the 
neighbourhood of Bolsover. , 

BOLSWARD, a town in the province of Friesland, Holland, 
65 m. W.N.W. of Sneek. A steam-tramway connects it with 
Sneek, Makkum, Harlingen and Franeker. Pop. (1900) 6517. 
The Great church, or St Martin's (1446-1466) is a large building 
containing some good carving, a fine organ and the tombs of 
many Frisian nobles. The so-called Small church, dating from 
about 1280, also contains fine carving and tombstones; and 
is the remnant of a Franciscan convent which once existed 
here. Bolsward also possesses a beautiful renaissance town-hall 
(1614-1618) and various educational and charitable institutions, 
including a music and a drawing school. It has an active trade 
in agricultural produce, and some spinning-mills and tile and 
pottery works. The town is mentioned in 725, when it was 
situated on the Middle Sea. When this receded, a canal was cut 
to the Zuider Zee, and in 1422 it was made a Hansa town. 

The medieval constitution of Bolsward, though in its govern- 
ment by eight scabini, with judicial, and four councillors with 
administrative functions, it followed the ordinary type of Dutch 
cities, was in some ways peculiar. The family of Jongema had 
certain hereditary rights in the administration, which, though 
not mentioned in the town charter of 1455, were defined in that 
of 1464. According to this the head of the family sat for two 
years with the scabini and the third year with the councillors, 
and had the right to administer an oath to one of each body. 
More singular was the influential position assigned, in civic 
legislation and administration, to the clergy, to whom in con- 
junction with the councillors, there was even, in certain cases, 
an appeal from the judgment of the scabini. 

See C. Hegel, Stadte u. Gilden der germanischen Volker im Mittel- 
alter (Leipzig, 1891). 

BOLT, an O. Eng. word (compare Ger. Boh, an arrow), for a 
" quarrel " or cross-bow shaft, or the pin which fastened a door. 
From the swift flight of an arrow comes the verb " to bolt," as 
applied to a horse, &c, and such expressions as " bolt upright," 
meaning straight upright; also the American use of " bolt" for 
refusing to support a candidate nominated by one's own party. 
In the sense of a straight pin for a fastening, the word has come 
to mean various sorts of appliances. From the sense of " fasten- 
ing together " is derived the use of the word " bolt " as a definite 
length (in a roll) of a fabric (40 ft. of canvas, &c). 

From another " bolt " or " boult," to sift (through O. Fr. 
buleter, from the Med. Lat. buretare or buletare), come such 
expressions as in Shakespeare's Winter's Tale l "The fann'd- 
snow, That's bolted by the northern blasts twice o'er," or such 
a figurative use as in Burke's " The report of the committee was 
examined and sifted and bolted to the bran." From this sense 
comes that of to moot, or discuss, as in Milton's Cotnus, " I hate 
when vice can bolt her arguments." 

BOLTON, DUKES OF. The title of duke of Bolton was held in 
the family of Powlett or Paulet from 1689 to 1794. Charles 
Powlett, the 1st duke (c. 1625-1699), who became 6th marquess 
of Winchester on his father's death in 1675, had been member 
of parliament for Winchester and then for Hampshire from 1660 
to 1675. Having supported the claim of William and Mary to 
the English throne in 1688, he was restored to the privy council 
and to the office of lord-lieutenant of Hampshire, and was 
created duke of Bolton in April 1689. An eccentric man, hostile 
to Halifax and afterwards to Marlborough, he is said to have 
travelled during 1687 with four coaches and 100 horsemen, 
sleeping during the day and giving entertainments at night. 
He died in February 1699, and was succeeded by his elder son, 
Charles, 2nd duke of Bolton (1 661-17 2 2), who had also been a 
member of parliament for Hampshire and a supporter of William 
of Orange. He was lord-lieutenant of Hampshire and of Dorset, 



a commissioner to arrange the union of England and Scotland; 
and was twice a lord justice of the kingdom. He was also lord 
chamberlain of the royal household; governor of the Isle of 
Wight; and for two short periods was lord-lieutenant of Ireland. 
His third wife was Henrietta (d. 1730), a natural daughter of 
James, duke of Monmouth. According to Swift this duke was 
" a great booby." His eldest son, Charles, 3rd duke of Bolton 
(1685-1754), was a member of parliament from 1705 to 1717, 
when he was made a peer as Baron Pawlet of Basing. He filled 
many of the public offices which had been held by his father, 
and also attained high rank in the British army. Having 
displeased Sir Robert Walpole he was deprived of several of his 
offices in 1733; but some of them were afterwards restored to 
him, and he raised a regiment for service against the Jacobites 
in 1745. He was a famous gallant, and married for his second 
wife the singer, Lavinia Fenton (d. 1760), a lady who had 
previously been his mistress. He died in August 1754, and was 
succeeded as 4th duke by his brother Harry (c. 1690-17 59), 
who had been a member of parliament for forty years, and who 
followed the late duke as lord-lieutenant of Hampshire. The 
4th duke's son, Charles (c. 1718-1765), who became 5th duke 
in October 1759, committed suicide in London in July 1765, 
and was succeeded by his brother Harry (c. 1719-1794), an 
admiral in the navy, on whose death without sons, in December 
1794, the dukedom became extinct. The other family titles 
descended to a kinsman, George Paulet (1 722-1800), who thus 
became 12th marquess of Winchester. In 1778 Thomas Orde 
(1746-1807) married Jean Mary (d. 1814), a natural daughter 
of the 5th duke of Bolton, and this lady inherited Bolton Castle 
and other properties on the death of the 6th duke. Having 
taken the additional name of Powlett, Orde was created Baron 
Bolton in 1797, and the barony has descended to his heirs. 

BOLTON (or Boulton), EDMUND (i575?-i6 3 3?), English 
historian and poet, was born by his own account in 1575. He 
was brought up a Roman Catholic, and was educated at Trinity 
Hall, Cambridge, afterwards residing in London at the Inner 
Temple. In 1600 he contributed to England's Helicon. He was a 
retainer of the duke of Buckingham, and through his influence he 
secured a small place at the court of James I. Bolton formulated 
a scheme for the establishment of an English academy, but the 
project fell through after the death of the king, who had regarded 
it favourably. He wrote a Life of King Henry II. for Speed's 
Chronicle, but his Catholic sympathies betrayed themselves in 
his treatment of Thomas Becket, and a life by Dr John Barcham 
was substituted (Wood, Ath. Oxon. ed. Bliss, iii. 36). The most 
important of his numerous works are Hypercrilica (1618?), a 
short critical treatise valuable for its notices of contemporary 
authors, reprinted in Joseph Haslewood's Ancient Critical Essays 
(vol. ii., 1815); Nero Caesar, or Monarchic Depraved (1624), 
with special note of British affairs. Bolton was still living in 
1633, but the date of his death is unknown. 

BOLTON (Bolton-le-Moors), a municipal, county and parlia- 
mentary borough of Lancashire, England, 196 m. N.W. by N. 
from London and 11 m. N.W. from Manchester. Pop. (1891) 
146,487; (1901) 168,215. Area, 15,279 acres. It has stations 
on the London & North- Western and the Lancashire & Yorkshire 
railways, with running powers for the Midland railway. It is 
divided by the Croal, a small tributary of the Irwell, into Great 
and Little Bolton, and as the full name implies, is surrounded 
by high moorland. Although of early origin, its appearance, 
like that of other great manufacturing towns of the vicinity, 
is wholly modern. It owes not a little to the attractions of its 
site. The only remnants of antiquity are two houses of the 16th 
century in Little Bolton, of which one is a specially good example 
of Tudor work. The site of the church of St Peter has long been 
occupied by a parish church (there was one in the 12th century, 
if not earlier), but the existing building dates only from 1870. 
There may also be mentioned a large number of other places of 
worship, a town hall with fine classical facade and tower, market 
hall, museums of natural history and of art and industry, an 
exchange, *)£embly rooms, and various benevolent institutions. 
Several free libraries are maintained. Lever's grammar school, 



BOLTON ABBEY— BOMB 



181 



founded in 1641, had Robert Ainsworth, the Latin lexicographer, 
and John Lempriere, author of the classical dictionary, among 
its masters. There are municipal technical schools. A large 
public park, opened in 1866, was laid out as a relief work for 
unemployed operatives during the cotton famine of the earlier 
part of the decade. On the moors to the north-west, and includ- 
ing Rivington Pike (1192 ft.), is another public park, and there 
are various smaller pleasure grounds. A large number of cotton 
mills furnish the chief source of industry; printing, dyeing and 
bleaching of cotton and calico, spinning and weaving machine 
making, iron and steel works, and collieries in the neighbourhood, 
are also important. The speciality, however, is fine spinning, a 
process assisted by the damp climate. The parliamentary 
borough, created in 1832 and returning two members, falls within 
the Westhoughton division of the county. Before 1838, when 
Bolton was incorporated, the town was governed by a borough- 
reeve and two constables appointed at the annual court-leet. 
The county borough was created in 1888. The corporation 
consists of a mayor, 24 aldermen and 72 councillors. 

The earliest form of the name is Bodleton or Botheltun, and 
the most important of the later forms are Bodeltown, Botheltun- 
le-Moors, Bowelton, Boltune, Bolton-super-Moras, Bolton-in-ye- 
Moors, Bolton-le-Moors. The manor was granted by William I. 
to Roger de Poictou, and passed through the families of Ferrers 
and Pilkington to the Harringtons of Hornby Castle, who lost 
it with their other estates for their adherence to Richard III. 
In 1485 Henry VII. granted it to the first earl of Derby. The 
manor is now held by different lords, but the earls of Derby still 
have a fourth part. The manor of Little Bolton seems to have 
been, at least from Henry III.'s reign, distinct from that of Great 
Bolton, and was held till the 17th century by the Botheltons or 
Boltons. 

From early days Bolton was famous for its woollen manu- 
factures. In Richard I.'s reign an aulneger, whose duty it was 
to measure and stamp all bundles of woollen goods, was 
appointed, and it is clear, therefore, that the place was already 
a centre of the woollen cloth trade. In 1 3 3 7 the industry received 
an impulse from the settlement of a party of Flemish clothiers, 
and extended so greatly that when it was found necessary in 1 566 
to appoint by act of parliament deputies to assist the aulnegers, 
Bolton is named as one of the places where these deputies were 
to be employed. Leland in his Itinerary (1558) recorded the 
fact that Bolton made cottons, which were in reality woollen 
goods. Real cotton goods were not made in Lancashire till 1641, 
when Bolton is named as the chief seat of the manufacture of 
fustians, vermilions and dimities. After the revocation of the 
edict of Nantes the settlement of some French refugees further 
stimulated this industry. It was here that velvets were first 
made about 1756, by Jeremiah Clarke, and muslins and cotton 
quiltlngs in 1763. The cotton trade received an astonishing 
impetus from the inventions of Sir Richard Arkwright (1770), 
and Samuel Crompton (1780), both of whom were born in the 
parish. Soon after the introduction of machinery, spinning 
factories were erected, and the first built in Bolton is said to have 
been set up in 1780. The number rapidly increased, and in 1851 
there were 66 cotton mills with 860,000 throstle spindles at 
work. The cognate industry of bleaching has been carried on 
since early in the r8th century, and large ironworks grew up in 
the latter half of the 19th century. In 1791 a canal was con- 
structed from Manchester to Bolton, and by an act of parliament 
(1792) Bolton Moor was enclosed. 

During the Civil War Bolton sided with the parliament, and 
in February 1643 and March 1644 the royalist forces assaulted 
the town, but were on both occasions repulsed. On the 28th of 
May 1644, however, it was attacked by Prince Rupert and Lord 
Derby, and stormed with great slaughter. On the 15th of 
October 1651 Lord Derby, who had been taken prisoner after the 
battle of Worcester, was brought here and executed the same 
day. 

Up to the beginning of the 19th century the market day was 
Monday, but the customary Saturday market gradually super- 
seded this old chartered market. In 1251 William de Ferrers 



obtained from the crown a charter for a weekly market and a 
yearly fair, but gradually this annual fair was replaced by four 
others chiefly for horses and cattle. The New Year and Whit- 
suntide Show fairs only arose during the 19th century. 

BOLTON ABBEY, a village in the West Riding of Yorkshire, 
England, 22 m. N.W. from Leeds and si from Ilkley by the 
Midland railway. It takes its name, inaccurately, from the great 
foundation of Bolton Priory, the ruins of which are among the 
most exquisitely situated in England. They stand near the right 
bank of the upper Wharfe, the valley of which is beautifully 
wooded and closely enclosed by hills. The earliest part of the 
church is of transitional Norman date; the nave, which is 
perfect, is Early English and Decorated. The transepts and 
choir are ruined, and the remains of domestic buildings are 
slight. The manor of Bolton Abbey with the rest of the district 
of Craven was granted by William the Conqueror to Robert de 
Romili, who evidently held it in 1086, although there is no 
mention made of it in the Domesday survey. William de 
Meschines and Cicely de Romili, his wife, heiress of Robert, 
founded and endowed a priory at Embsay or Emmesay, near 
Skipton, in 1 1 20, but it was moved here in 1 1 5 1 by their daughter, 
Alice de Romili, wife of William FitzDuncan, who gave the 
manor to the monks in exchange for other lands. After the 
dissolution of the monasteries the manor was sold in 1542 to 
Henry Clifford, 2nd earl of Cumberland, whose descendants, 
the dukes of Devonshire, now hold it. 

See J. D. Whitaker, LL.D., F.S.A., History of the District of 
Craven (ed. Morant, 1878); Dugdale's Monasticon Anglicanum. 

BOLZANO, BERNHARD (1781-1848), Austrian priest and 
philosopher, was born at Prague or. the 5th of October 1781. 
He distinguished himself at an early age, and on his ordina- 
tion to the priesthood (1805) was appointed professor of the 
philosophy of religion in Prague University. His lectures, in 
which he endeavoured to show that Catholic theology is in 
complete harmony with reason, were received with eager interest 
by the younger generation of thinkers. But his views met with 
much opposition; and it was only through the protection of 
the archbishop, Prince Salm-Salm, that he was enabled to 
retain his chair. In 1820 he was accused of being connected with 
some of the students' revolutionary societies, and was compelled 
to resign. Several doctrines extracted from his works were 
condemned at Rome, and he was suspended from his priestly 
functions, spending the rest of his life in literary work. He died 
at Prague on the 18th of December 1848. The most important 
of his numerous works are the Wissenschaftslehre, oder Versuch 
einer neuen Darstellung der Logik, advocating a scientific method 
in the study of logic (4 vols., Sulzbach, 1837); the Lehrbuch der 
Religionswissenschaft (4 vols., Sulzbach, 1834), a philosophic 
representation of all the dogmas of Roman Catholic theology; 
and Athanasia, oder Grilnde fiir die Unsterblichkeit der Seele 
(2nd ed., Mainz, 1838). In philosophy he followed Reinhard 
in ethics and the monadology of Leibnitz, though he was also 
influenced by Kant. 

See Lebensbeschreibung des Dr Bolzano (an autobiography, 1836) ; 
Wisshaupt, Skizzen aus dem Leben Dr Bolzanos (1850); Palagy, 
Kant und Bolzano (Halle, 1902). 

BOM A (properly Mboma), a port on the north bank of the 
river Congo about 60 m. from its mouth, the administrative 
capital of Belgian Congo. Pop. about 5000. It was one of the 
places at which the European traders on the west coast of Africa 
established stations in the 16th and 17th centuries. It became 
the entrepot for the commerce of the lower Congo and a well- 
known mart for slaves. The trade was chiefly in the hands of 
Dutch merchants, but British, French and Portuguese firms 
also had factories there. No European power exercised sover- 
eignty, though shadowy claims were from time to time put 
forward by Portugal (see Africa, § 5). In 1884 the natives 
of Boma granted a protectorate of their country to the Inter- 
national Association of the Congo. 

See H. M. Stanley, The Congo and the Founding of its Free State 
(London, 1885). 

BOMB, a term formerly used for an explosive shell (see Am- 
munition) fired by artillery. The word is derived from the 



182 



BOMBARD— BOMBARDON 



Gr. ^o^jSos, a hammering, buzzing noise, cf. " bombard " (q.v.). 
At the present day it is most frequently used of a shattering or 
incendiary grenade, or of an explosive vessel actuated by clock- 
work or trip mechanism, employed to destroy life or property. 
In naval warfare, before the introduction of the shell gun, ex- 
plosive projectiles were carried principally by special vessels 
known as bomb-vessels, bombards or, colloquially, bombs. 

In geology, the name " bomb " is given to certain masses of 
lava which have been hurled forth from a volcanic vent by 
explosive action. In shape they are spheroidal, ellipsoidal or 
discoidal; in structure they may be solid, hollow or more or 
less cavernous; whilst in size they vary from that of a walnut 
to masses weighing several tons. It is generally held that the 
form is partly due to rotation of the mass during its aerial flight, 
and in some cases the bomb becomes twisted by a gyratory 
movement. According, however, to Dr H. J. Johns ton-La vis, 
many of the so-called bombs of Vesuvius are not projectiles, but 
merely globular masses formed in a stream of lava; and in like 
manner Professor J. D. Dana showed that what were regarded as 
bombs in Hawaii are in many cases merely lava-balls that have 
not been hurled through the air. Certain masses of pumice 
ejected from Vulcano have been called by Johnston-Lavis 
" bread-crust bombs," since they present a coating of obsidian 
which has been bent and cracked in a way suggestive of the 
crust of a roll. It is probable that here the acid magna was 
expelled in a very viscous condition, and the crust which formed 
on cooling was burst by the steam from the occluded water. 
Some of the bombs thrown out during recent eruptions of Etna 
consist of white granular quartz, encased in a black scoriaceous 
crust, the quartz representing an altered sandstone. The 
bombs of granular olivine, found in some of the tuffs in 
the Eifel, are represented in most geological collections (see 
Volcano). 

BOMBARD (derived through Med. Lat. and Fr. forms from 
Gr. fiopfitiv, to make a humming noise), a term applied in 
the middle ages to a sort of cannon, used chiefly in sieges, and 
throwing heavy stone balls; hence the later use as a verb (see 
Bombardment). The name, in various forms, was also given 
to a medieval musical instrument (" bombard," " bumhart," 
" pumhart," " pommer "), the forerunner of the bass oboe 
or schalmey. At the present day a small primitive oboe called 
bombarde, with eight holes but no keys, is used among the Breton 
peasants. 

BOMBARDIER, originally an artilleryman in charge of a 
bombard; now a non-commissioned officer in the artillery of 
the British army, ranking below a corporal. 

BOMBARDMENT, an attack by artillery fire directed against 
fortifications, troops in position or towns and buildings. In its 
strict sense the term is only applied to the bombardment of 
defenceless or undefended objects, houses, public buildings, &c, 
the object of the assailant being to dishearten his opponent, and 
specially to force the civil population and authorities of a 
besieged place to persuade the military commandant to capitulate 
before the actual defences of the place have been reduced to 
impotence. It is, therefore, obvious that mere bombardment 
can only achieve its object when the amount of suffering inflicted 
upon non-combatants is sufficient to break down their resolution, 
and when the commandant permits himself, to be influenced 
or coerced by the sufferers. A threat of bombardment will 
sometimes induce a place to surrender, but instances of its 
fulfilment being followed by success are rare; and, in general, 
with a determined commandant, bombardments fail of their 
object. Further, an intentionally terrific fire at a large target, 
unlike the slow, steady and minutely accurate " artillery 
attacks " directed upon the fortifications, requires the expendi- 
ture of large quantities of ammunition, and wears out the guns 
of the attack. Bombardments are, however, frequently resorted 
to in order to test the temper of the garrison and the civil popu- 
lation, a notable instance being that of Strassburg in 1870. 
The term is often loosely employed to describe artillery attacks 
upon forts or fortified positions in preparation for assaults by 
infantry. 



BOMBARDON, or Bass Tuba, the name given to the bass and 
contrabass of the brass wind in military bands, called in the 
orchestra bass tuba. 

The name of bombardon is unquestionably derived from bom- 
bardone, the Italian for contrabass pommer (bombard), which, 
before the invention of the fagotto, formed the bass of medieval 
orchestras; it is also used for a bass reed stop of 16 ft. tone on the 
organ. The bombardon was the very first bass wind instrument 
fitted with valves, and it was at first known as the corno basso, 
clavicor or bass horn (not to be confounded with the bass horn 
with keys, which on being perfected became the ophicleide). 
The name was attached more to the position of the wind instru- 
ments as bass than to the individual instrument. The original 
corno basso was a brass instrument of narrow bore with the 
pistons set horizontally. The valve-ophicleide in F of German 
make had a wider bore and three vertical pistons, but it was 
only a "half instrument," measuring about 12 ft. A. Kalk- 
brenner, in his life of W. Wieprecht (1882), states that in the 
Jager military bands of Prussia the corno basso (keyed bass 
horn) was introduced as bass in 1829, and the bombardon (or 
valve-ophicleide) in 183 1; in the Guards these instruments were 
superseded in 1835 by the bass tuba invented by Wieprecht and 
J. G. Moritz. 

The modern bombardon is made in two forms: the upright 
model, used in stationary band music; and the circular model, 
known as the helicon, worn round the body with the large bell 
resting on the left shoulder, after the style of the Roman cornu 
(see Horn), which is a more convenient way of carrying this 
heavy instrument when marching. The bombardon, and the 
euphonium, of which it is the bass, are the outcome of the 
application of valves to the bugle family whereby the saxhorns 
were also produced. The radical difference between the saxhorns 
and the tubas (including the bombardon) is that the latter have 
a sufficiently wide conical bore to allow of the production of 
fundamental sounds in a rich, full quality of immense power. 
This difference, first recognized in Germany and Austria, has 
given rise in those countries to the classification of the brass 
wind as " half " and " whole " instruments (Halbe and Ganze 
Instrumente). When the brass wind instruments with conical 
bore and cup-shaped mouthpiece first came into use, it was a 
well-understood principle that the tube of each instrument must 
theoretically be made twice as long as an organ pipe giving the 
same note; for example, the French horn sounding the 8ft. C 
of an 8 ft. organ pipe, must have a tube 16 ft. long; C then 
becomes the second harmonic of the series for the 16 ft. tube, 
the first or fundamental being unobtainable. After the intro- 
duction of pistons, instrument-makers experimenting with the 
bugle, which has a conical bore of very wide diameter in propor- 
tion to the length, found that baritone and bass instruments 
constructed on the same principle gave out the fundamental 
full and clear. A new "era in the construction of brass wind 
instruments was thus inaugurated, and now that the proportions 
of the bugle have been adopted, the tubes of the tubas are made 
just half the length of those of the older instruments, correspond- 
ing to the length of the organ pipe of the same pitch, so that a 
euphonium sounding 8 ft. C no longer needs to be 16 ft. long 
but only 8 ft. The older instruments, such as the saxhorns, 
with narrow bore, have therefore been denominated " half 
instruments," because only half the length of the instrument is 
of practical utility, while the tubas with wide bore are styled 
"whole instruments." 1 Bombardons are made in E flat and 
F of the 16 ft. octave, corresponding to the orchestral bass tuba, 
double bass in strings, and pedal clarinet and contrafagotto 
in the wood wind. The bombardon in B flat or C, an octave 
lower than the euphonium, corresponds to the contrabass tuba 
in the orchestra. 

1 See Dr E. Schafhautl's article on Musical Instruments, 
section 4 of Bericht der Beurtheilungscommission bei der Allg. 
deutschen Industrie-Ausstellung, 1854 (Munich, 1855), pp. 169- 
170; also Friedr. Zamminer, Die Musik und die Musikinstrumente 
in ihrer Beziehung zu den Gesetzen der Akustik (Giessen, 1855), 
P- 313- 



BOMBAY CITY 



183 



The bombardons possess a chromatic compass of 3! to 4 octaves. 
The harmonic series consists o£ the harmonics from the 1st to the 8th. 



Bombardon in E Flat. 

am- 




For the bombardon in F, one tone higher. 

Harmonic Series of the Contrabass Bombardon in C* 

-^. Compass. 




* For the Bfc» bombardon, one tone lower. 
** Or higher still for a first-rate player with a good lip. 



&va bassa. 



The lowest notes produced by the valves are very difficult to 
obtain, for the lips seldom have sufficient power to set in vibration 
a column of air of such immense length, at a rate of vibration slow 
enough to synchronize with that of notes of such deep pitch. 1 Even 
when they are played, the lowest valve notes can hardly be heard 
unless doubled an octave higher by another bombardon. 

Bombardons are generally treated as non-transposing instruments, 
the music being written as sounded, except in France and Belgium, 
where transposition is usual. The intervening notes are obtained 
by means of pistons or valves, which, on being depressed, either 
admit the wind into additional lengths of tubing to lower the pitch, 
or cut off a length in order to raise it. Bombardons usually have 
three or four pistons lowering the pitch of the instrument respectively 
I, J, ij and 2j tones (in Belgium, I, J, 2 and 3 tones). The valve 
system, disposal of the tubing and shape and position of the bell 
differ considerably in the various models of well-known makers. 
In Germany and Austria 2 what is known as the cylinder action is 
largely used; for the piston or pump is substituted a four- way 
brass cock operated by means of a key and a series of cranks. 

In order to obtain a complete chromatic scale throughout the 
compass, there must be, as on the slide-trombone, seven different 
positions or lengths of tubing available, each having its harmonic 
series. These different lengths are obtained on the bombardon by 
means of a combination of pistons: the simultaneous use of Nos. 2 
and 3 lowers the pitch two tones; of Nos. 1, 2 and 3, three tones; 
of Nos. I, 2, 3, 4, five and a half tones, &c. A combination of 
pistons, however, fails to give the interval with an absolutely correct 
intonation, since the length of tubing thrown open is not of the 
theoretical length required to produce it. Many ingenious con- 
trivances have been invented from time to time to remedy this 
inherent defect of the valve system, such as the six-valve independent 
system of Adolphe Sax; the Besson Registre, giving eight inde- 
pendent positions ; the Besson compensating system Transpositeur ; 
the Boosey automatic compensating piston invented by D. J. 
Blaikley, and V. Mahillon's automatic regulating pistons. More 
recently the Besson enharmonic valve system, with six independent 
tuning slides and three pistons, and Rudall, Carte & Company's new 
(Klussmann's patent) bore, conical throughout the open tube and 
additional lengths, have produced instruments which leave nothing 
to be desired as to intonation. (See Valves and Tuba.) (K. S.) 

BOMBAY CITY, the capital of Bombay Presidency, and 
the chief seaport of western India, situated in 18° 55' N. and 
7 2 54' E. The city stands on an island of the same name, 
which forms one of a group now connected by causeways with 
the mainland. The area is 22 sq. m.; and the population of the 
town and island (1901) 776,006 (estimate in 1906, 977,822). 
Bombay is the second most populous city in the Indian empire, 
having fallen behind Calcutta at the census of 1901. Its position 
on the side of India nearest to Europe, its advantages as a 
port and a railway centre, and its monopoly of the cotton 
industry, are counteracted by the fact that the region which it 
serves cannot vie with the valley of the Ganges in point of 
fertility and has no great waterway like the Ganges or Brahma- 
putra. Nevertheless Bombay pushes Calcutta hard for supremacy 
in point of population and commercial prosperity. 

The Bombay Island, or, as it ought to be more correctly 
called, the Bombay Peninsula, stands out from a coast ennobled 
by lofty hills, and its harbour is studded by rocky islands and 
precipices, whose peaks rise to a great height. The approach 

1 V. C. Mahillon, Elements d'acoustigue musicale et instrumentale 
(Bruxelles, 1874), p. 153. 

8 The bombardon is used in the military bands of Austria, but 
in those of Germany it has been superseded by a bass tuba differing 
slightly in form and construction from the bombardons and bass 
tubas used in England, France, Belgium and Austria. 



from the sea discloses one of the finest panoramas in the world, 
—the only European analogy being the Bay of Naples. The 
island consists of a plain about 11 m. long by 3 broad, flanked 
by two parallel lines of low hills. A neck of land stretching 
towards the south-west forms the harbour on its eastern side, 
sheltering it from the force of the open sea, and enclosing an 
expanse of water from 5 to 7 m. wide. At the south-west of 
the island, Back Bay, a shallow basin rather more than 2 m. 
in breadth, runs inland for about 3 m. between the extreme 
points of the two ranges of hills. On a slightly raised strip of 
land between the head of Back Bay and the harbour is situated 
the fort, the nucleus of the city of Bombay. From this point 
the land slopes westward towards the central plain, a low-lying 
tract, which before the construction of the embankment known 
as the Hornby Vellard, used at high tide to be submerged by the 
sea. The town itself consists of well-built and unusually hand- 
some native bazaars, and of spacious streets devoted to European 
commerce. In the native bazaar the houses rise three or four 
storeys in height, with elaborately carved pillars and front work. 
Some of the European hotels and commercial buildings are on 
the American scale, and have no rival in any other city of India. 
The Taj Mahal hotel, which was built by the Tata family in 
1904, is the most palatial and modern hotel in India. The 
private houses of the European residents lie apart alike from 
the native and from the mercantile quarters of the town. As a 
rule, each is built in a large garden or compound; and although 
the style of architecture is less imposing than that of the stately 
residences in Calcutta, it is well suited to the climate, and has a 
beauty and comfort of its own. The favourite suburb is Malabar 
hill, a high ridge running out into the sea, and terraced to the 
top by handsome houses, which command one of the finest 
views, of its kind, in the world. Of recent years wealthy natives 
have been competing with Europeans for the possession of this 
desirable quarter. To the right of this ridge, looking towards 
the sea, runs another suburb known as Breach Candy, built 
close upon the beach and within the refreshing sound of the 
waves. To the left of Malabar hill lies Back Bay, with a pro- 
montory on its farther shore, which marks the site of the old 
Bombay Fort; its walls are demolished, and the area is chiefly 
devoted to mercantile buildings. Farther round the island, 
beyond the fort, is Mazagon Bay, commanding the harbour, 
and the centre of maritime activity. The defences of the port, 
remodelled and armed with the latest guns, consist of batteries 
on the islands in the harbour, in addition to which there are 
three large batteries on the mainland. There is also a torpedo- 
boat detachment stationed in the harbour. 

No city in the world has a finer water-front than Bombay. 
The great line of public offices along the esplanade and facing 
Back Bay, which are in the Gothic style mixed with Saracenic, 
are not individually distinguished for architectural merit, but 
they have a cumulative effect of great dignity. The other 
most notable buildings in the city are the Victoria terminus of 
the Great Indian Peninsula railway and the Taj Mahal hotel. 
Towards the northern end of Malabar hill lie the Parsee Towers 
of Silence, where the Parsees expose their dead till the flesh is 
devoured by vultures, and then cast the bones into a well where 
they crumble into dust. The foundation-stone of a museum 
was laid by the prince of Wales in 1905. 1 

Local Government. — The port of Bombay (including docks 
and warehouses) is managed by a port trust, the members of 
which are nominated by the government from among the com- 
mercial community. The municipal government of the city 
was framed by an act of the Bombay legislative council passed 
in 1888. The governing body consists of a municipal corporation 
and a town council. The corporation is composed of 7 2 members, 
of whom 1 6 are nominated by the government. Of the remainder, 
36 are elected by the ratepayers, 16 by the justices of the peace, 
2 by the senate of the university, and 2 by the chamber of 
commerce. The council, which forms the standing committee 
of the corporation, consists of 12 members, of whom 4 are 
nominated by the government and the rest elected by the cor- 
poration. The members of the corporation include Europeans, 



184 



BOMBAY CITY 



Hindus, Mahommedans and Parsees. The Bombay University 
was constituted in 1857 as an examining body, on the model of 
the university of London. The chief educational institutions 
in Bombay City are the government Elphinstone College, two 
missionary colleges (Wilson and St Xavier), the Grant medical 
college, the government law school, the Sir Jamsetjee Jeejeebhoy 
school of art, and the Victoria Jubilee technical institute. 

Docks. — The dockyard, originally built in 1736, has a sea-face 
of nearly 700 yds. and an area of about 200 acres. There are 
five graving docks, three of which together make one large dock 
648 ft. long, while the other two make a single dock 582 ft. long. 
There are also four building slips opposite the Apollo Bandar 
(landing-place) on the south-east side of the enclosure. The dock- 
yard is lighted by electricity, so that work can be carried on by 
night as well as day. Bombay is the only important place near 
the sea in India where the rise of the tide is sufficient to permit 
docks on the largest scale. The highest spring tides here reach 
17 ft., but the average is 14 ft. Prince's dock, of which the 
foundation-stone was laid by the prince of Wales in 1875, was 
opened in 1879, and is 1460 ft. long by 1000 ft. broad, with a 
water area of 30 acres; while the Victoria dock, which was 
completed and opened in 1887-1888, has a water area of 25 acres. 
South of the Victoria dock, the foundation-stone of the Alexandra 
dock, the largest in India, was laid by the prince of Wales in 1905. 

Cotton Mills. — The milling industry is, next to the docks, 
the chief feature of Bombay's commercial success. The staple 
manufacture is cotton-spinning, but in addition to this there are 
flour mills and workshops to supply local needs. The number 
of factories increased from fifty-three in 1881 to eighty-three in 
1890, and that decade saw the influx of a great industrial popula- 
tion from the surrounding districts; but the decade 1891-1901 
witnessed at least a temporary set-back owing to the ravages 
caused by plague and the effects of over-production. In addition 
to the actual mortality it inflicted, the plague caused an exodus 
of the population from the island, disorganized the labour at the 
docks and in the mills, and swallowed up large sums which were 
spent by the municipality on plague queries and sanitary
improvements. After 1901, however, both population and trade 
began to revive again. In 1901 there were 131,796 persons 
employed in the cotton industry. 

Population. — Owing to its central position between East and 
West and to the diversity of races in India, no city in the world 
can show a greater variety of type than Bombay. The Mahratta 
race is the dominant element next to the European rulers, but 
in addition to them are a great and influential section of Parsee 
merchants, Arab traders from the Gulf, Afghans and Sikhs 
from northern India, Bengalis, Rajputs, Chinese, Japanese, 
Malays, negroes, Tibetans, Sinhalese and Siamese. Bombay 
is the great port and meeting-place of the Eastern world. Out of 
the large sections of its population, Hindu, Mahommedan, Parsee, 
Jain and Christian, the Parsees are one of the smallest and yet 
the most influential. They number only some 46,000 all told, 
but most of the great business houses are owned by Parsee 
millionaires and most of the large charities are founded by them. 

History. — The name of the island and city of Bombay is de- 
rived from Mumba (a form of Parvati), the goddess of the Kolis, 
a race of husbandmen and fishermen who were the earliest 
known inhabitants, having occupied the island probably about 
the beginning of the Christian era. Bombay originally consisted 
of seven islands (the Heptanesia of Ptolemy) and formed an 
outlying portion of the dominions of successive dynasties domi- 
nant in western India: Satavahanas, Mauryas, Chalukyas and 
Rashtrakutas. In the Maurya and Chalukya period (450-750) 
the city of Puri on Elephanta Island was the principal place in 
Bombay harbour. The first town built on Bombay Island was 
Mahikavati (Mahim) ,founded by King Bhima, probably a member 
of the house of the Yadavas of Deogiri, as a result of Ala-ud-din 
Khilji's raid into the Deccan in 1294. It remained under Hindu 
rule until 1348, when it was captured by a Mahommedan force 
from Gujarat; and the islands remained part of the province 
(later kingdom) of Gujarat till 1534, when they were ceded by 
Sultan Bahadur to the Portuguese. 



The island did not prosper under Portuguese rule. By the 
system known as aforamento the lands were gradually parcelled 
out into a number of fiefs granted, under the crown of Portugal, 
to individuals or to religious corporations in return for military 
service or equivalent quit-rents. The northern districts were 
divided among the Franciscans and Jesuits, who built a number 
of churches, some of which still survive. The intolerance of their 
rule did not favour the growth of the settlement, which in 1661, 
when it was transferred to the British, had a population of only 
10,000. The English had, however, long recognized its value 
as a naval base, and it was for this reason that they fought the 
battle of Swally (1614-1615), attempted to capture the place in 
1626, and that the Surat Council urged the purchase of Bombay 
from the Portuguese. In 1 6 54 the directors of the Company drew 
Cromwell's attention to this suggestion, laying stress on the 
excellence of its harbour and its safety from attack by land. 
It finally became the property of the British in 1661 as part of 
the dowry of the infanta Catherine of Portugal on her marriage 
to Charles II., but was not actually occupied by the British until 
1665, when they experienced much difficulty in overcoming 
the opposition of the Portuguese, and especially of the religious 
orders, to the cession. In 1668 it was transferred by the crown 
to the East India Company, who placed it under the factory of 
Surat. 

The real foundation of the modern city dates from this time, 
and was the work of Gerald Aungier (or Angier), brother of 
Francis Aungier, 3rd Lord Aungier of Longford and 1st earl of 
Longford in Ireland (d. 1700), who succeeded Sir George Oxenden 
as president of Surat in 1 669 and died in 1 6 7 7 . At this time Bom- 
bay was threatened by the Mahrattas from inland, by the Malabar 
pirates and the Dutch from the sea, and was cut off from the 
mainland by the Portuguese, who still occupied the island of 
Salsette and had established a customs-barrier in the channel 
between Bombay and the shore. In spite of the niggardly 
policy of the court of directors, who refused to incur the expense 
of employing skilled engineers, Aungier succeeded in fortifying 
the town and shore; he also raised a force of militia and regulars, 
the latter mainly Germans (as more trustworthy than the riff- 
raff collected in London by the Company's crimps). In 1672 
Aungier transferred his headquarters to Bombay, and after 
frightening off an imposing Dutch fleet, which in 1670 attempted 
to surprise the island, set to work to organize the settlement 
anew. To this task he brought a mind singularly enlightened and 
a sincere belief in the best traditions of English liberty. In 
its fiscal policy, in its religious intolerance, and in its cruel and 
contemptuous treatment of the natives, Portuguese rule had 
been alike oppressive. Aungier altered all this. With the con- 
sent of " a general assembly of the chief representatives of the 
people " he commuted the burdensome land tax for a fixed 
money payment; he protected all castes in the. celebration of 
their religious ceremonies; and he forbade any compulsion of 
natives to carry burdens against their will. The result was that 
the population of Bombay increased rapidly; a special quarter 
was set apart for the banya, or capitalist, class of Hindus; while 
Parsees and Armenians flocked to a city where they were secure 
of freedom alike for their trade and their religion. Within 
eight years the population had grown from 10,000 to 60,000. 
The immediate result of this concentration of people in a spot 
so unwholesome was the prevalence of disease, produced by 
the appalling sanitary conditions. This, too, Aungier set himself 
to remedy. In 1675 he initiated the works for draining the foul 
tidal swamps; and, failing the consent of the Company to the 
erection of a regular hospital, he turned the law court into an 
infirmary. He also set up three courts of justice: a tribunal 
for petty causes under a factor with native assessors, a court of 
appeal under the deputy governor and members of council, and 
a court-martial. A regular police force was also established and 
a gaol built in the Bazaar. 1 

During this period, however, the position of Bombay was 
sufficiently precarious. The Malabar pirates, though the city 
itself was too strong for them, were a constant menace to its 
1 Hunter, Hist, of British India, ii. pp. 212, &c. 



BOMBAY FURNITURE— BOMBAY PRESIDENCY 



185 



trade; and it required all the genius of Aungier to maintain the 
settlement, isolated as it was between the rival powers of the 
Mahrattas and the Mogul empire. After his death, on the 30th 
of June 1677, its situation became even more precarious. Even 
under Aungier the Siddi admirals of the Moguls had asserted 
their right to use Bombay harbour as winter quarters for their 
fleet, though they had failed to secure it as a base against the 
Mahrattas. Under his weak successor (Rolt, 1677-1682), the 
English waters, the value of which had now been proved, became 
the battle-ground between the rival navies, and for some years 
Bombay lay at the mercy of both. The Company's rule, more- 
over, was exposed to another danger. The niggardly policy of 
the board of directors, more intent on peaceful dividends than on 
warlike rule, could not but be galling to soldiers of fortune. A 
mutiny at Bombay in 1674 had only been suppressed by the 
execution of the ringleader; and in 1683 a more formidable 
movement took place under Richard Keigwin, a naval officer 
who had been appointed governor of St Helena in reward for the 
part played by him in the capture of the island from the Dutch 
in 1673. Keigwin, elected governor of Bombay by popular vote, 
issued a proclamation in the king's name, citing the " intolerable 
extortions, oppressions and exactions " of the Company, and 
declaring his government under the immediate authority of the 
crown. He ruled with moderation, reformed the system of 
taxation, obtained notable concessions from the Mahrattas, and 
increased the trade of the port by the admission of " interlopers." 
But he failed to extend the rebellion beyond Bombay; and 
when a letter arrived, under the royal sign manual, ordering him 
to surrender the fort to Sir John Child, appointed admiral and 
captain-general of the Company's forces, he obeyed. 1 

Meanwhile the Company had decided to consider Bombay as 
" an independent settlement, and the seat of the power and trade 
of the English in the East Indies." But a variety of causes set 
back the development of the city, notably the prevalence of 
plague and cholera due to the silting up of the creeks that 
divided its component islands; and it was not till after the 
amalgamation of the old and new companies in 1708 that the 
governor's seat was transferred from Surat to Bombay. In 17 18 
the city wall was completed ; settlers began to stream in, especially 
from distracted Gujarat; and a series of wise administrative 
reforms increased this tendency until in 1744 the popula- 
tion, which in 1718 had sunk to 16,000, had risen to 70,000. 
Meanwhile the Mahratta conquest of Bassein and Salsette (1737— 
1739) had put a stop to the hostility of the Portuguese, and a 
treaty of alliance with the Siddis (1733) had secured a base of 
supplies on the mainland. The French wars of 1744-1748 and 
1756-1763 led to a further strengthening of the fortifications; 
and the influx of settlers from the mainland made the questions 
of supplies and of the protection of trade from piracy more 
pressing. The former was in part settled by the acquisition of 
Bankot (1755) as a result of an alliance with the peshwa, the 
latter by the successful expedition under Watson and Clive 
against Vijayadrug (1756). During this period, too, the import- 
ance of Bombay as a naval base, long since recognized, was 
increased by the building of a dock (1750), a second being added 
in 1762. The year 1770 saw the beginning of the cotton trade 
with China, the result of a famine in that country, the Chinese 
government having issued an edict commanding more land to 
be used for growing grain. This, too, was a period of searching 
reforms in the administration and the planning and building of 
the city; the result being a further immense growth of its 
population, which in 1780 was 113,000. This was still further 
increased by the famine of 1803, which drove large numbers of 
people from Konkan and the Deccan to seek employment in 
Bombay. A great fire broke out in the fort in the same year and 
caused enormous loss; but it enabled the government to open 
wider thoroughfares in the more congested parts, and greatly 
stimulated the tendency of the natives to build their houses and 

1 See Hunter, op. oil. ii. 205, &c. He received a full pardon, was 
appointed later to the command of a frigate in the royal navy, 
and fell while leading the assault on St Christopher's (June 21, 
I690). 



shops outside the walls of the fort in what are now some of the 
busiest parts of the city. 

The British victory over thS Mahrattas and the annexation 
of the Deccan opened a new period of unrestricted development 
for Bombay. At this time, too ( 1 8 1 9) , its fortunes were vigorously 
fostered by Mounts tuart Elphinstone, and in 1838 the population 
had risen to 236,000. But in the next fifty years it more than 
doubled itself, the figures for 1891 being 821,000. This great 
leap was due to the influence of railways, of which the first line 
was completed in 1853, the opening of the Suez Canal, and the 
foundation of cotton factories. In 1 866- 186 7 the tide of pros- 
perity was interrupted by a financial crisis, due to the fall in 
the price of cotton on the termination of the American war. 
Bombay, however, soon recovered herself, and in 1891 was more 
prosperous than ever before; but during the ensuing decade 
great havoc was played by plague (q.v.) with both her population 
and her trade. In addition to a decline of 6 % in the population, 
the exports also declined by 7 %, whereas Calcutta's exports 
rose during the same period by 38 %. 

See S. M. Edwardes, The Rise of Bombay (1902) ; James Douglas, 
Bombay and Western India (1893); G. W. Forrest, Cities of India 
(1903) ; Sir William Hunter, History of British India (London, 
1900); Imp. Gazetteer of India (Oxford, 1908), 5.11. " Bombay City." 

BOMBAY FURNITURE. "Bombay blackwood furniture" 
is a term applied to a rather extensive class of articles manu- 
factured in the city of Bombay and in the towns of Surat and 
Ahmedabad in India. The wood used is Shisham or blackwood 
(Dalbergia), a hard-grained dark-coloured timber which with 
proper treatment assumes a beautiful natural polish. Much of 
the so-called Bombay furniture is clumsy and inelegant in form, 
defects which it is suggested by experts, like Sir George Birdwood, 
it owes to the circumstance that the original models were Dutch. 
Some of the smaller articles, such as flower stands, small tables, 
and ornamental stands, are, however, of exceedingly graceful 
contour, and good examples are highly prized by collectors. The 
carving at its best is lace-like in character, and apart from its 
inherent beauty is attractive on account of the ingenuity shown 
by the worker in adapting his design in detail to the purpose of 
the article he is fashioning. The workmen who manufacture the 
most artistic Bombay furniture are a special class with inherited 
traditions. Often a man knows only one design, which has been 
transmitted to him by his father, who in his turn had had it 
from his father before him. In recent years under European 
auspices efforts have been made with a certain measure of success 
to modernize the industry by introducing portions of the native 
work into furniture of Western design. In the main, however, 
the conventional patterns are still adhered to. " Bombay 
boxes " are inlaid in geometrical patterns on wood. The inlay- 
ing materials consist of the wire, sandal wood, sapan wood, 
ebony, ivory and stags' horns, and the effect produced by the 
combination of minute pieces of these various substances is 
altogether peculiar and distinctive. 

BOMBAY PRESIDENCY, a province or presidency of British 
India, consisting partly of British districts, and partly of native 
states under the administration of a governor. This territory 
extends from 13 53' to 28 45' N., and from 66° 40' to 76° 30' E., 
and is bounded on the N. by Baluchistan, the Punjab and 
Rajputana; on the E. by Indore, the Central Provinces and 
Hyderabad; on the S. by Madras and Mysore; and on the W. 
by the Arabian Sea. Within these limits lie the Portuguese 
settlements of Diu, Damaun and Goa, and the native state of 
Baroda which has direct relations with the government of India; 
while politically Bombay includes the settlement of Aden. 
The total area, including Sind but excluding Aden, is 188,745 
sq. m., of which 122,984 sq. m. are under British and 65,761 
under native rule. The total population (1901) is 25,468,209, of 
which 18,515,587 are resident in British territory and 6,908,648 
in native states. The province is divided into four commissioner- 
ships and twenty-six districts. The four divisions are the 
northern or Gujarat, the central or Deccan, the southern or 
Carnatic, and Sind. The twenty-six districts are: Bombay 
City, Ahmedabad, Broach, Kaira, Panch Mahals, Surat, Thana, 



i86 



BOMBAY PRESIDENCY 



Ahmednagar, Khandesh (partitioned into two districts in 1906), 
Nasik, Poona, Satara, Sholapur, Belgaum, Bijapur, Dharwar, 
Kanara, Kolaba, Ratnagiri, Karachi, Hyderabad, Shikarpur, 
Thar and Parkar, and Upper Sind Frontier. The native states 
comprise in all 353 separate units, which are administered 
either by political agents or by the collectors of the districts in 
which the smaller states are situated. The chief groups of states 
are North Gujarat, comprising Cutch, Kathiawar agency, 
Palanpur agency, Mahi Kantha agency, Rewa Kantha agency 
and Cambay; South Gujarat, comprising Dharampur, Bansda 
and Sachin; North Konkan, Nasik and Khandesh, comprising 
Khandesh political agency, Surgana and Jawhar; South Konkan 
and Dharwar, comprising Janjira, Sawantwari and Savanur; 
the Deccan Satara Jagirs, comprising Akalkot, Bhor, Aundh, 
Phaltan, Jath and Daphlapur; the southern Mahratta states, 
comprising Kolhapur and other states, and Khairpur in Sind. 
The native states under the supervision of the government of 
Bombay are divided, historically and geographically, into two 
main groups. The northern or Gujarat group includes the 
territories of the gaekwar of Baroda, with the smaller states 
which form the administrative divisions of Cutch, Palanpur, 
Rewa Kantha, and Mahi Kantha. These territories, with the 
exception of Cutch, have an historical connexion, as being the 
allies or tributaries of the gaekwar in 1805, when] final engage- 
ments were included between that prince and the British 
government. The southern or Mahratta group includes Kolhapur, 
Akalkot, Sawantwari, and the Satara and southern Mahratta 
Jagirs, and has an historical bond of union in the friendship 
they showed to the British in their final struggle with the power 
of the peshwa in 1818. The remaining territories may con- 
veniently be divided into a small cluster of independent zamin- 
daris, situated in the wild and hilly tracts at the northern 
extremity of the Sahyadri range, and certain principalities 
which, from their history or geographical position, are to some 
extent isolated from the rest of the presidency. 

Physical Aspects. — The Bombay Presidency consists of a long 
strip of land along the Indian Ocean from the south of the Punjab 
to the north of Mysore. The coast is rock-bound and difficult 
of access; and though it contains several bays forming fair- 
weather ports for vessels engaged in the coasting trade, Bombay, 
Karachi-in-Sind, Marmagoa and Karwar alone have harbours 
sufficiently land-locked to protect shipping during the prevalence 
of the south-west monsoon. The coast-line is regular and little 
broken, save by the Gulfs of Cambay and Cutch, between which 
lies the peninsula of Kathiawar. 

Speaking generally, a range of hills, known as the Western 
Ghats, runs down the coast, at places rising in splendid bluffs 
and precipices from the water's edge, at others retreat- 
ing inland, and leaving a flat fertile strip of 5 to 50 m. 
between their base and the sea. In the north of the 
presidency on the right bank of the Indus, the Hala mountains, 
a continuation of the great Suleiman range, separate British 
India from the dominions of the khan of Kalat. Leaving 
Sind, and passing by the ridges of low sandhills, — the leading 
feature of the desert east of the Indus, — and the isolated hills 
of Cutch and Kathiawar, which form geologically the western 
extremity of the Aravalli range, the first extensive mountain 
range is that separating Gujarat from the states of central India. 
The rugged and mountainous country south of the Tapti forms 
the northern extremity of the Sahyadri or Western Ghats. This 
great range of hills, sometimes overhanging the ocean, and 
generally running parallel to it at a distance nowhere exceeding 
50 m., with an average elevation of about 1800 ft., contains 
individual peaks rising to more than double that height. They 
stretch southwards for upwards of 500 m., with a breadth of 
10 to 20 m. The western declivity is abrupt, the land at the base 
of the hills being but slightly raised above the level of the sea. As 
is usually the case with the trap formation, they descend to the 
plains in terraces with abrupt fronts. The landward slope is in 
many places very gentle, the crest of the range being sometimes 
but slightly raised above the level of the plateau of the Deccan. 
Their best-known elevation is Mahabaleshwar, 4500 ft. high, a 



Moaa 
tains. 



Plains. 



Rivers. 



fine plateau, 37 m. from Poona, covered with rich vegetation, and 
used by the Bombay government as its summer retreat and 
sanitarium. In the neighbourhood of the Sahyadri hills, par- 
ticularly towards the northern extremity of the range, the 
country is rugged and broken, containing isolated peaks, masses 
of rock and spurs, which, running eastward, form watersheds for 
the great rivers of the Deccan. The Satpura hills separate the 
valley of the Tapti from the valley of the Nerbudda, and the 
district of Khandesh from the territories of Indore. The 
Satmala or Ajanta hills, which are rather the northern slope of 
the plateau than a distinct range of hills, separate Khandesh 
from the Nizam's Dominions. 

The more level parts of Bombay consist of five well-demarcated 
tracts — Sind, Gujarat, the Konkan, the Deccan, and the Carnatic. 
Sind, or the lower valley of the Indus, is very flat, with 
but scanty vegetation, and depending for productive- 
ness entirely on irrigation. Gujarat, except on its northern 
parts, consists of rich, highly cultivated alluvial plains, watered 
by the Tapti and Nerbudda, but not much subject to inundation. 
The Konkan lies between the Western Ghats and the sea. It is 
a rugged and difficult country, intersected by creeks, and abound- 
ing in isolated peaks and detached ranges of hills. The plains 
of the Deccan and Khandesh are watered by large rivers, but as 
the rainfall is uncertain, they are generally, during the greater 
part of the year, bleak and devoid of vegetation. The Carnatic 
plain, or the country south of the river Kistna, consists of 
extensive tracts of black or cotton soil in a high state of 
cultivation. 

The chief river of western India is the Indus, which enters 
the presidency from the north of Sind and flowing south in a 
tortuous course, falls into the Arabian Sea by several 
mouths, such as the Ghizri creek, Khudi creek, Pitiani 
creek, Sisa creek, Hajamro creek, Vatho creek, Mall creek, Wari 
creek, Bhitiara creek, Sir creek and Khori creek. In the dry 
season the bed varies at different places from 480 to 1600 yds. 
The flood season begins in March and continues till September, 
the average depth of the river rising from 9 to 24 ft., and the 
velocity of the current increasing from 3 to 7 m. an hour. Next 
to the Indus comes the Nerbudda. Rising in the Central Pro- 
vinces, and traversing the dominions of Holkar, the Nerbudda 
enters the presidency at the north-western extremity of the 
Khandesh district, flows eastward, and after a course of 700 m. 
from its source, falls into the Gulf of Cambay, forming near its 
mouth the alluvial plain of Broach, one of the richest districts 
of Bombay. For about 100 m. from the sea the Nerbudda is at 
all seasons navigable by small boats, and during the rains by 
vessels of from 30 to 50 tons burden. The Tapti enters the 
presidency a few miles south of the town of Burhanpur, a station 
on the Great Indian Peninsula railway, flows eastward through 
the district of Khandesh, the native state of Rewa Kantha and 
the district of Surat, and falls into the Gulf of Cambay, a few 
miles west of the town of Surat. The Tapti drains about 250 m. 
of country, and is, in a commercial point of view, the most useful 
of the Gujarat rivers. Besides these there are many minor 
streams. The Banas and the Saraswati take their rise in the 
Aravalli hills, and flowing eastward through the native state of 
Palanpur, fall into the Runn of Cutch. The Sabarmati and the 
Mahi rise in the Mahi Kantha hills, and flowing southwards, 
drain the districts of Northern Gujarat, and fall into the sea near 
the head of the Gulf of Cambay. The streams which, rising in 
tlie Sahyadri range, or Western Ghats, flow westward into the 
Arabian Sea, are of little importance. During the rains they are 
formidable torrents, but with the return of the fair weather they 
dwindle away, and during the hot season, with a few exceptions, 
they almost dry up. Clear and rapid as they descend the hills, 
on reaching the lowlands of the Konkan they become muddy 
and brackish creeks. The Kanarese rivers have a larger body of 
water and a more regular flow than the streams of the Konkan. 
One of them, the Sharawati, forcing its way through the western 
ridge of the Ghats, plunges from the high to the low country by 
a succession of falls, the principal of which is 800 ft. in height. 
The Sahyadri, or Western Ghats, also throw off to the eastward 



BOMBAY PRESIDENCY 



187 



the two principal rivers of the Madras Presidency, the Godavari 
and the Kistna. These rivers collect countless tributary streams, 
some of them of considerable size, and drain the entire plain 
of the Deccan as they pass eastward towards the Bay of 
Bengal. 

The Manchar Lake is situated on the right bank of the Indus. 
During inundations it attains a length of 20 m., and a breadth 
, . of 10, covering a total area estimated at 180 sq. m. 

But the most peculiar lacustrine feature of the pre- 
sidency is the Runn or Lake of Cutch, which, according to the 
season of the year, is a salt marsh, an inland lake, or an arm of 
the sea with an area of 8000 sq. m. It forms the western boundary 
of the province of Gujarat, and when flooded during the rains 
unites the Gulfs of Cutch and Cambay, and converts the territory 
of Cutch into an island. 

Geology; — South of Gujarat nearly the whole of Bombay is 
covered by the horizontal lava flows of the Deccan Trap series, 
and these flows spread over the greater part of the Kathiawar 
peninsula and extend into Cutch. In Cutch and Kathiawar 
they are underlaid by Jurassic and Neocomian beds. The 
Jurassic beds are marine and contain numerous Ammonites, 
but the beds which are referred to the Neocomian include a 
series of sandstones and shales with remains of plants. Several 
of the plants are identical with forms which occur in the upper 
portion of the Gondwana system. Tertiary limestones, sand- 
stones and shales overlie the Deccan Trap in Cutch, but the 
greatest development of deposits of this age is to be met with 
on the western side of the Indus (see Sind). The plain of Sind 
and of eastern Gujarat is covered by alluvium and wind-blown 
sand. 

Climate. — Great varieties of climate are met with in the 
presidency. In its extreme dryness and heat, combined with the 
aridity of a sandy soil, Upper Sind resembles the sultry deserts 
of Africa. The mean maximum temperature at Hyderabad, in 
Lower Sind, during the six hottest months of the year, is 98 F. 
in the shade, and the water of the Indus reaches blood heat; 
in Upper Sind it is even hotter, and the thermometer has been 
known to register 130° in tne shade. In Cutch and in Gujarat 
the heat, though less, is still very great. The Konkan is hot and 
moist, the fall of rain during the monsoon sometimes approaching 
300 in. The table-land of the Deccan above the Ghats, on the 
contrary, has an agreeable climate except in the hot months, 
as has also the southern Mahratta country; and in the hills of 
Mahabaleshwar, Singarh, and other detached heights, Europeans 
may go out at all hours with impunity. Bombay Island itself, 
though in general cooled by the sea breeze, is oppressively hot 
during May and October. The south-west monsoon generally 
sets in about the first week in June, and pours down volumes 
of rain along the coast. From June to October travelling is 
difficult and unpleasant, except in Sind, where the monsoon 
rains exert little influence. 

Forests. — Bombay Presidency possesses two great classes 
of forests — those of the hills and those of the alluvial plains. 
The hill forests are scattered over a wide area, extending from 
23 to 14 N. lat. Most of them lie among the Sahyadri hills or 
Western Ghats. The alluvial forests lie in Sind, on or close to 
the banks of the Indus, and extend over an area of 550 sq. m. 
The principal timber trees in the forests are — teak; blackwood 
of two varieties {Dalbergia Sisu andDalbergia latifolia), Dalbergia 
ujainensis, Pterocarpus Marsupium, Terminalia glabra, Acacia 
arabica, Acacia Catechu, Nauclea cordifolia, Nauclea parvifolia, 
Bidelia spinosa, Hardwickia binata, Juga xylocarpa, Populus 
euphratica, and Tamarindus indica. The forests contain many 
trees which, on account of their fruits, nuts or berries, are 
valuable, irrespective of the quality of their timber. Among 
these are the mango (Mangifera indica); the jack {Artocarpus 
integrifolia) , Zizyphus Jujuba, Aegle Marmelos, Terminalia 
Chebula, Calophyllum Inophyllum, Bassia latifolia and Pongamia 
glabra. The jungle tribes collect gum from several varieties of 
trees, and in Sind the Forest Department derives a small revenue 
from lac. The palms of the presidency consist of cocoa-nut, 
date, palmyra and areca catechu. 



Population. — The census of 1901 gave a total of 25,468,209, 
out of which the chief religions furnished the following 
numbers : — 



Hindu . 
Mahommedan 
Jain . . 
Zoroastrian . 
Christian 



19,916,438 

4.567.295 

535,950 

78,552 

216,118 



In Sind Islam has been the predominant religion from the 
earliest Arab conquest in the 8th century. In Gujarat the 
predominant religion is Hinduism, though petty Mahommedan 
kingdoms have left their influence in many parts of the province. 
The Deccan is the home of the Mahrattas, who constitute 30% 
of the population. The Konkan is notable for various Christian 
castes, owing their origin to Portuguese rule; while in the 
Carnatic* Lingayatism, a Hindu reformation movement of the 
12th century, has been embraced by 45% of the population. 
The Mahrattas are the dominating race next to the Europeans and 
number (1901) 3,650,000, composed of 1,900,000 Kunbis, 350,000 
Konkanis, and 1,400,000 Mahrattas not otherwise specified. 

Languages. — The chief languages of the presidency are Sindhi 
in Sind, Cutchi in Cutch, Gujarati and Hindustani in Gujarat, 
Mahratti in Thana and the central division, Gujarati and 
Mahratti in Khandesh, and Mahratti and Kanarese in the 
southern division. There are also Bhil (120,000) and Gipsy 
(30,000) dialects. 

Agriculture. — The staple crops are as follows: — Joar {Sorghum 
vulgare) and bajra (Holcus spicatus) are the staple food grains 
in the Deccan and Khandesh. Rice is the chief product of the 
Konkan. Wheat, generally grown in the northern part of the 
Presidency, but specially in Sind and Gujarat, is exported to 
Europe in large quantities from Karachi, and on a smaller scale 
from Bombay. Barley is principally grown in the northern 
parts of the presidency. Nachani (Eleusine coracana) and kodra 
{Paspalum scrobiculatum) , inferior grains grown on the hill-sides, 
furnish food to the Kolis, Bhils, Waralis, and other aboriginal 
tribes. Of the pulses the most important are gram (Cicer arie- 
tinum), tax (Cajanusindicus), kulti (Dolichos biflorus) , and mug 
(Phaseolus Mungo). Principal oil-seeds: til {Sesamum orien- 
tate), mustard, castor-oil, safflower and linseed. Of fibres the 
most important are cotton, Deccan hemp {Hibiscus cannabinus), 
and sunn or tag {Crotalaria juncea). Much has been done to 
improve the cotton of the presidency. American varieties have 
been introduced with much advantage in the Dharwar collec- 
torate and other parts of the southern Mahratta country. 
In Khandes"h the indigenous plant from which one of the lowest 
classes of cotton in the Bombay market takes its name has been 
almost entirely superseded by the superior Hinganghat variety. 
Miscellaneous crops: sugar-cane, requiring a rich soil and a 
perennial water-supply, and only grown in favoured localities, 
red pepper, potatoes, turmeric and tobacco. 

Manufactures. — The chief feature of the modern industrial 
life of Bombay is the great development in the growth and 
manufacture of cotton. Large steam mills have rapidly sprung 
up in Bombay City, Ahmedabad and Khandesh. In 1905 there 
were 432 factories in the presidency, of which by far the greater 
number were engaged in the preparation and manufacture of 
cotton. The industry is centred in Bombay City and Island, 
which contains nearly two-thirds of the mills. During the decade 
1891-1901 the mill industry passed through a period of depression 
due to widespread plague and famine, but on the whole there has 
been a marked expansion of the trade as well as a great im- 
provemeift in the class of goods produced. In addition to the 
mills there are (1901) 178,000 hand-loom weavers in the province, 
who still have a position of their own in the manipulation of 
designs woven into the cloth. Silk goods are manufactured in 
Ahmedabad, Surat, Yeola, Nasik, Thana and Bombay, the 
material being often decorated with printed or woven designs; 
but owing to the competition of European goods most branches 
of the industry are declining. The custom of investing savings 
in gold and silver ornaments gives employment to many 
goldsmiths; the metal is usually supplied by the customer, and 



i88 



BOMBAY PRESIDENCY 



the goldsmith charges for his labour. Ahmedabad and Surat 
are famous for their carved wood-work. Many of the houses in 
Ahmedabad are covered with elaborate wood-carving, and ex- 
cellent examples exist in Broach, Baroda, Surat, Nasik and 
Yeola. Salt is made in large quantities in the government works 
at Kharaghoda and Udu in Ahmedabad, whence it is exported 
by rail to Gujarat and central India. There is one brewery at 
Dapuri near Poona. 

Railways and Irrigation. — The province is well supplied with 
railways, all of which, with one exception, concentrate at 
Bombay City. The exception is the North-Western line, which 
enters Sind from the Punjab and finds its natural terminus at 
Karachi. The other chief lines are the Great Indian Peninsula, 
Indian Midland, Bombay, Baroda & Central India, Rajputana- 
Malwa & Southern Mahratta systems. In 1905 the total 
length of railway under the Bombay government open f6r traffic 
was 7980 m. These figures do not include the railway system 
in Sind. With the exception of Sind, the water-supply of the 
Bombay Presidency does not lend itself to the construction of 
large irrigation works. 

Army. — Under Lord Kitchener's re-arrangement of the 
Indian army in 1904 the old Bombay command was abolished 
and its place was taken by the Western army corps under a 
lieutenant-general. The army corps was divided into three 
divisions under major-generals. The 4th division, with head- 
quarters at Quetta, comprises the troops in the Quetta and 
Sind districts. The 5th division, with headquarters at Mhow, 
consists of three brigades, located at Nasirabad, Jubbulpore and 
Jhansi, and includes the previous Mhow, Deesa, Nagpur, Ner- 
budda and Bundelkhand districts, with the B6mbay district 
north of the Tapti. The 6th division, with headquarters at 
Poona, consists of three brigades, located at Bombay, Ahmed- 
nagar and Aden. It comprises the previous Poona district, 
Bombay district south of the Tapti, Belgaum district north 
of the Tungabhadra, and Dharwar and Aurungabad districts. 

Education. — The university of Bombay, established in 1857, 
is a body corporate, consisting of a chancellor, vice-chancellor 
and fellows. The governor of Bombay is ex officio chancellor. 
The education department is under a director of public instruc- 
tion, who is responsible for the administration of the department 
in accordance with the general educational policy of the state. 
The native states have generally adopted the government 
system. Baroda and the Kathiawar states employ their own 
inspectors. In 1905 the total number of educational institutions 
was 10,194 with 593,431 pupils. There are ten art colleges, 
of which two are managed by government, three by native 
states, and five are under private management. According to 
the census of 1901, out of a population of 25J millions nearly 
24 millions were illiterate. 

Administration. — The government of Bombay is administered 
by a governor in council consisting of the governor as president 
and two ordinary members. The governor is appointed from 
England; the council is appointed by the crown, and selected 
from the Indian civil service. These are the executive members 
of government. For making laws there is a legislative council, 
consisting of the governor and his executive council, with certain 
other persons, not fewer than eight or more than twenty, at 
least half of them being non-officials. Each of the members of 
the executive council has in his charge one or two departments 
of the government; and each department has a secretary, 
an under-secretary, and an assistant secretary, with a 
numerous staff of clerks. The political administration of the 
native states is under the superintendence of British agents 
placed at the principal native courts; their position varies in 
different states according to the relations in which the princi- 
palities stand with the paramount power. The administration 
of justice throughout the presidency is conducted by a high 
court at Bombay, consisting of a chief justice and seven puisne 
judges, along with district and assistant judges throughout the 
districts of the presidency. The administration of the districts 
is carried on by collectors, assistant collectors, and a varying 
number of supernumerary assistants. 



History. — In the earliest times of which any record remains 
the greater part of the west coast of India was occupied by 
Dravidian tribes, living under their kings in fortified villages, 
carrying on the simpler arts of life, and holding a faith in which 
the propitiation of spirits and demons played the chief part. 
There is evidence, however, that so early as 1000 B.C. an export 
trade existed to the Red Sea by way of East Africa, and before 
750 B.C. a similar trade had sprung up with Babylon by way of 
the Persian Gulf. It was by this latter route that the traders 
brought back to India the Brahmi alphabet, the art of brick- 
making and the legend of the Flood. Later still the settlement 
of Brahmans along the west coast had already Aryanized the 
country in religion, and to some extent in language, before the 
Persian conquest of the Indus valley at the close of the 6th 
century B.C. The Persian dominion did not long survive; and 
the march of Alexander the Great down the Indus paved the 
way for Chandragupta and the Maurya empire. Under this 
empire Ujjain was the seat of a viceroy, a prince of the imperial 
house, who ruled over Kathiawar, Malwa and Gujarat. On the 
death of Asoka in 231 B.C. the empire of the Mauryas broke up, 
and their heritage in the west fell to the Andhra dynasty of 
the Satavahanas of Paithan on the Godavari, a Dravidian family 
whose dominion by 200 B.C. stretched across the peninsula from 
the deltas of the Godavari and Kistna to Nasik and the Western 
Ghats. About a.d. 210, however, their power in the west seems 
to have died out, and their place was taken by the foreign dynasty 
of the Kshaharatas, the Saka satraps of Surashtra (Kathiawar), 
who in 120 had mastered Ujjain and Gujarat and had built up 
a rival kingdom to the north. Since about a.d. 40 the coast 
cities had been much enriched by trade with the Roman empire, 
which both the Satavahanas and the satraps did much to 
encourage; but after the fall of Palmyra (273) and the extinction 
of the main Kshaharata dynasty (c. 300) this commerce fell 
into decay. The history of the century and a half that follows 
is very obscure; short-lived Saka dynasties succeeded one another 
until, about 388, the country was conquered by the Guptas of 
Magadha, who kept a precarious tenure of it till about 470, 
when their empire was destroyed by the White Huns, or Ephthal- 
ites (q.v.), who, after breaking the power of Persia and assailing 
the Kushan kingdom of Kabul, poured into India, conquered 
Sind, and established their dominion as far south as the Nerbudda. 

Under the Hun tyranny, which lasted till the overthrow of 
the White Huns on the Oxus by the Turks (c. 565), native 
dynasties had survived, or new ones had established themselves. 
In Kathiawar a chief named Bhatarka, probably of foreign 
origin, had established himself at Valabhi (Wala) on the ruins 
of the Gupta power (c. 500), and founded a dynasty which 
lasted until it was overthrown by Arab invaders from Sind in 
770. 1 The northern Konkan was held by the Mauryas of Puri 
near Bombay, the southerly coast by the Kadambas of Vanavasi, 
while in the southern Deccan Chalukyas and Rashtrakutas 
struggled for the mastery. A new power, too, appeared from 
the north: the Gurjaras (ancestors, it is supposed, of the Gujar 
caste), who had probably entered India with the White Huns, 
established their power over Gujarat and (c. 600) overran north- 
eastern Kathiawar, made the raja of Valabhi their tributary, and 
established a branch at Broach (585-740). During the short- 
lived empire of Harsha (d. 647 or 648), Malwa, Gujarat and 
Kathiawar were subject to his sway; but the southern boundary 
of his kingdom was the Nerbudda, south of which the Chalukyas 
in the 7th century, having overcome the Rashtrakutas and other 
rivals, had absorbed the smaller kingdoms into their empire. 
In 710-711 (92 a.h.) the Arabs invaded India, and in 712 con- 
quered and established themselves in Sind; they did not, 
however, attempt any serious attack on the Gurjara and Chalukya 
empires, confining themselves to more or less serious raids. In 
770 they destroyed the city of Valabhi and, as already mentioned, 
brought its dynasty to an end. Meanwhile the Chalukyas, 
after successfully struggling with the Pallavas (whose capital 
was taken by Vikramaditya II., c. 740), had in their turn suc- 
cumbed to their ancient rivals the Rashtrakutas, who succeeded 
1 V. A. Smith, Early History of India, p. 295. 



BOMBAY PRESIDENCY 



189 



to the bulk of their dominions, including Gujarat, where they had 
set up a branch line. For some two centuries (c. 750-950) 
there was a balance of power between the Gurjaras and Rash- 
trakutas, neither kingdom being strong enough to encroach on 
the other to any extent. The Rashtrakutas were, moreover, 
debarred from large schemes of conquest by dissensions with 
the branch dynasty which they had set up in Gujarat and by 
the constant threat of attack by the Chalukyas from Mysore. 
Nevertheless their power and magnificence (they were notable 
builders and patrons of literature) greatly impressed the Arabs, 
by whom the king was known as Balhara {i.e. Vallhaba, " well- 
beloved "), a title borrowed from the preceding dynasty. Under 
them the Konkan and the coast farther south were governed 
by chiefs of the Silahara family, whose rule is mainly notable for 
the revival of trade with the Persian Gulf and, doubtless as a 
result of this, the arrival in 775 on the west coast of a number of 
Parsee refugees, who found, in a country where three religions 
were already equally honoured, the toleration denied to them in 
Mussulman Persia. But in the 10th century the Rashtrakuta 
power began to break up; in 961 Mularaja Solanki (Chalukya) 
conquered the kingdom of Anhilvada (Anhilvara) in Gujarat, 
where his dynasty reigned till 1242; and twelve years later the 
Chalukyas once more overthrew the Rashtrakutas in the Deccan, 
establishing their capital at Kalyani, while a branch line was set. 
up in southern Gujarat. Farther south the Silaharas, however, 
continued to rule the coast, and succeeded in maintaining their 
independence until after the final fall of the Chalukyas in n 92. 
The cause of the downfall of the dynasty, splendid and enlightened 
as any of its predecessors, was the system of governing by means 
of great feudatories, which also proved fatal to the Solanki 
rajas of Anhilvada. From n 43 onward the power of the latter 
had been overshadowed by that of the Vaghela chiefs of Dholka, 
and during the same period the Deccan had been rapidly 
lapsing into absolute anarchy, amid which rival chiefs struggled 
for the supreme power. In the end the Yadavas of Devagiri 
(Daulatabad) prevailed, and in 1192 established a short-lived 
empire to which the Dholka princes were ultimately forced to 
become tributary. 

But meanwhile a new power had appeared, which was destined 
to establish the Mussulman domination in western and southern 
India. In 1023 Mahmud of Ghazni had already invaded Gujarat 
with a large army, destroyed the national Hindu idol of Somnath, 
and carried away an immense booty. Mahommed Ghori also 
invaded Gujarat, and left a garrison in its capital. But it was 
not till after the Mussulman power was firmly established in 
northern India that the Mahommedan sovereigns of Delhi 
attempted the conquest of the south. In 1294 the emperor 
Ala-ud-din first invaded the Deccan, and in 1 297 he conquered 
Gujarat. In 131 2 the Mahommedan arms were triumphant 
through the Mahratta country; and seven years later the whole 
of Malabar fell a prey to the invaders. In the middle of the 14th 
century the weakness of the Delhi sovereigns tempted the 
governors of provinces to revolt against their distant master, 
and to form independent kingdoms. In this way the Bahmani 
kingdom was established in the Deccan, and embraced a part 
of the Bombay presidency. Ahmednagar and Gujarat also 
became the seats of a new kingdom. In 1573 Akbar conquered 
Gujarat and reannexed it to the empire; in 1599 he effected the 
reconques.t of Khandesh, and in 1600 that of Ahmednagar. 
From this time the country was never tranquil, and Ahmednagar 
became the focus of constant rebellions. During the latter part 
of the 17th century the Mahrattas rose into power, and almost 
every part of the country now comprising the presidency of 
Bombay fell under their sway. In 1498 the Portuguese came 
first to Calicut, their earliest possession in the presidency being 
the island of Anjidiv. After their victory at Diu over the Egyp- 
tian fleet their mastery of the Indian Ocean was undisputed, 
and they proceeded to establish themselves on the coast. They 
captured Goa in 1510, Malacca in 1511, and Ormuz in 1515. 
They next took advantage of the decay of the kingdom of Gujarat 
to occupy Chaul (1531), Bassein with its dependencies, including 
Bombay ( 1 534) , Diu (1 53 5) and Daman (1559). But the inherent 



vices of their intolerant system undermined their power, even 
before their Dutch and English rivals appeared on the scene. 

The first English settlement in the Bombay presidency was in 
1 6 1 8, when the East India Company established a factory a t Surat, 
protected by a charter obtained from the emperor Jahangir. 
In 1626 the Dutch and English made an unsuccessful attempt 
to gain possession of the island of Bombay, and in 1653 proposals 
were suggested for its purchase from the Portuguese. In 1661 
it was ceded to the English crown, as part of the dower of the 
infanta Catherine of Portugal on her marriage with Charles II. 
So lightly was the acquisition esteemed in England, and so 
unsuccessful was the administration of the crown officers, that 
in 1668 Bombay was transferred to the East India Company 
for an annual payment of £10. At the time of the transfer, 
powers for its defence and for the administration of justice were 
also conferred; a European regiment Vas enrolled; and the 
fortifications erected proved sufficient to deter the Dutch from 
their intended attack in 1673 (see Bombay City: History). 
In 1687 Bombay was placed at the head of all the Company's 
possessions in India; but in 1753 the government of Bombay 
became subordinate to that of Calcutta. The first collision of 
the English with the Mahratta power was in 1774 and resulted 
in 1782 in the treaty of Salbai, by which Salsette was ceded to 
the British, while Broach was handed over to Sindhia. More 
important were the results of the second Mahratta war, which 
ended in 1803. Surat had already been annexed in 1800; the 
East India Company now received the districts of Broach, 
Kaira, &c. 

In 1803 the Bombay presidency included only Salsette, the 
islands of the harbour (since 1774), Surat and Bankot (since 
1756); but between this date and 1827 the framework of the 
presidency took its present shape. The Gujarat districts were 
taken over by the Bombay government in 1805 and enlarged 
in 1818; and the first measures for the settlement of Kathiawar 
and Mahi Kantha were taken between 1807 and 1820. Baji 
Rao, the last of the peshwas, who had attempted to shake off 
the British yoke, was defeated, captured and pensioned (1817- 
18 1 8), and large portions of his dominions (Poona, Ahmednagar, 
Nasik, Sholapur, Belgaum, Kaladgi, Dharwar, &c.) were included 
in the presidency, the settlement of which was completed by 
Mountstuart Elphinstone, governor from 1819 to 1827. His 
policy was to rule as far as possible on native lines, avoiding 
all changes for which the population was not yet ripe; but the 
grosser abuses of the old regime were stopped, the country was 
pacified, the laws were codified, and courts and schools were 
established. The period that followed is notable mainly for the 
enlargement of the presidency through the lapse of certain 
native states, by the addition of Aden (1839) and Sind (1843), 
and the lease of the Panch Mahals from Sindhia (1853). The 
establishment of an orderly administration, one outcome 'of 
which was a general fall of prices that made the unwonted 
regularity of the collection of taxes doubly unwelcome, naturally 
excited a certain amount of misgiving and resentment; but 
on the whole the population was prosperous and contented, 
and under Lord Elphinstone (1853-1860) the presidency passed 
through the crisis of the Mutiny without any general rising. 
Outbreaks among the troops at Karachi, Ahmedabad and' 
Kolhapur were quickly put down, two regiments being disbanded, 
and the rebellions in Gujarat, among the Bhils, and in the 
southern Mahratta country were local and isolated. Under 
Sir Bartle Frere (1862-1867) agricultural prosperity reached its 
highest point, as a result of the American Civil War and the 
consequent enormous demand for Indian cotton in Europe. 
The money thus poured into the country produced an epidemic 
of speculation known as the " Share Mania " (1864-1865), 
which ended in a commercial crisis and the failure of the bank 
of Bombay (1866). But the peasantry gained on the whole 
more than they lost, and the trade of Bombay was not per- 
manently injured. Sir Bartle Frere encouraged the completion 
of the great trunk lines of railways, and with the funds obtained 
by the demolition of the town walls (1862) he began the magnifi- 
cent series of public buildings that now adorn Bombay. 



190 



BOMBAZINE— BONA 



During recent times the entire history of Bombay has been 
sadly affected by plague and famine. Bubonic plague, of a 
fatal and contagious nature, first broke out in Bombay City in 
September 1896, and, despite all the efforts of the government, 
quickly spread to the surrounding country. Down to the end 
of October 1902 over 531,000 deaths had taken place due to 
plague. In 1903-1904 there were 426,387 cases with 316,523 
deaths, and iQ'04-1905 there were 285,897 cases with 212,948 
deaths. The great cities of Bombay, Karachi and Poona 
suffered most severely. A few districts in Gujarat almost 
entirely escaped; but the mortality was very heavy in Satara, 
Thana, Surat, Poona, Kolaba, and in the native states of Cutch, 
Baroda, Kolhapur and Palanpur. The only sanitary measure 
that can be said to have been successful was complete migration, 
which could only be adopted in villages and smaller towns. 
Inoculation was extensively tried in some cases. Segregation 
was the one general method of fighting the disease; but, unfor- 
tunately, it was misunderstood by the people and led to some 
deplorable outbreaks. In Poona, during 1897, two European 
officials were assassinated; the editor of a prominent native 
paper was sentenced to imprisonment for sedition; and two 
leaders of the Brahman community were placed in confinement. 
At Bombay, in March 1898, a riot begun by Mahommedan 
weavers was not suppressed until several Europeans had been 
fatally injured. In Nasik district, in January 1898, the native 
chairman of the plague committee was brutally murdered by a 
mob. But on the whole the people submitted with characteristic 
docility to the sanitary regulations of the government. Bombay, 
like the Central Provinces, suffered from famine twice within 
three years. The failure of the monsoon of 1896 caused wide- 
spread distress throughout the Deccan, over an area of 46,000 
sq. m., with a population of 7 millions. The largest number of 
persons on relief was 301,056 in September 1897; and the total 
expenditure on famine relief was Rs.i, 28,000,000. The measures 
adopted were signally successful, both in saving life and in 
mitigating distress. In 1899 the monsoon again failed in 
Gujarat, where famine hitherto had been almost unknown; 
and the winter rains failed in the Deccan, so that distress 
gradually spread over almost the entire presidency. The worst 
feature was a virulent outbreak of cholera in Gujarat, especially 
in the native states. In April 1900 the total number of persons 
in receipt of relief was 1,281,159 in British districts, 566,671 
in native states, and 71,734 in Baroda. For 1900-1901 the 
total expenditure on famine relief was nearly 3 crores (say, 
£2,000,000 sterling) ; and a continuance of drought necessitated 
an estimate of 1 crore in the budget of the following year. The 
Bombay government exhausted its balances in 1897, and was 
subsequently dependent on grants from the government of 
India. 

See Sir James Campbell, Gazetteer of Bombay (26 vols., 1896); 
S. M. Edwardes, The Rise of Bombay (1902); James Douglas, 
Bombay and Western India (1893) ; and Sir William Lee-Warner, 
The Presidency of Bombay (Society of Arts, 1904) ; The Imperial 
Gazetteer of India (Oxford, 1908) ; and for the early history, V. A. 
Smith, The Early History of India (2nd ed., Oxford, 1908). 

BOMBAZINE, or Bombasine, a stuff originally made of silk 
or silk and wool, and now also made of cotton and wool or of wool 
alone. Good bombazine is made with a silk warp and a worsted 
weft. It is twilled or corded and used for dress-material. Black 
bombazine has been used largely for mourning, but the material 
has gone out of fashion. The word is derived from the obsolete 
French bombasin, applied originally to silk but afterwards to 
" tree-silk " or cotton. Bombazine is said to have been made 
in England in Queen Elizabeth's reign, and early in the 19th 
century it was largely made at Norwich. 

BOMBELLES, MARC MARIE, Marquis de (1744-1822), 
French diplomatist and ecclesiastic, was the son of the comte de 
Bombelles, tutor and guardian of the duke of Orleans. He was 
born at Bitsch in Lorraine, and served in the army through the 
Seven Years' War. In 1765 he entered the diplomatic service, 
and after several diplomatic missions became ambassador of 
France to Portugal in 1786, being charged to win over that 
country to the Family Compact; but the madness of the queen 



and then the death of the king prevented his success. He was 
transferred to Vienna early in 1789, but the Revolution cut short 
his diplomatic career, and he was deprived of his post in 
September 1790. He remained attached to Louis XVI., and 
was employed on secret missions to other sovereigns, to gain 
their aid for Louis. In 1792 he emigrated, and after Valmy 
lived in retirement in Switzerland. In 1804, after the death of 
his wife, he withdrew to the monastery of Briinn in Austria, and 
became bishop of Oberglogau in Prussia. In 1815 he returned 
to France, and became bishop of Amiens (18 19). He died in 
Paris in 1822. 

His son, Louis Philippe, comte de Bombelles (1780-1843), 
born at Regensburg, passed his life in the diplomatic service of 
Austria. In i8i4he became Austrian ambassador to Denmark, 
and in 1816 filled a similar position at Dresden. (E. Es.) 

BOMBERG, DANIEL, a famous Christian printer of Hebrew 
books. His chief activity was in Venice between 15 16 and 1549 
(the year of his death) . Bomberg introduced a new era in Hebrew 
typography. Among other great enterprises, he published the 
editio princeps (1516-1517) of the rabbinical Bible (Hebrew text 
with rabbinical commentaries, &c). He also produced the first 
complete edition of the Talmud (1520-1523) . 

BONA, JOHN (1609-1674), Italian cardinal and author, was 
born at Mondovi in Piedmont, on the 10th of October 1609. In 
1624 he joined the Congregation of Feuillants and was succes- 
sively elected prior of Asti, abbot of Mondovi and general of 
his order. He was created cardinal in 1669 by Clement IX., and 
during the conclave, which followed that pope's death, was 
regarded as a possible candidate for the papacy. He died on the 
27th of October 1674. Bona's writings are mainly concerned 
with liturgical and devotional subjects. Of the numerous 
editions of his works, the best are those of Paris (1677), Turin 
(1747) and Antwerp (1777). Stores of interesting rubrical 
information, interspersed with verses and prayers, are to be 
found in the De Libris Liturgicis and the Divina Psalmodia; 
recent advances in liturgical studies, however, have somewhat 
lessened their value. The De Discretione Spirituum treats of 
certain higher phases of mysticism; the Via Compendii ad Deum 
was well translated in 1876 by Henry Collins, O. Cist., under the 
title of An Easy Way to God. Sir Roger L'Estrange's translation 
{The Guide to Heaven, 1680) of the Manuductio ad Coelum was 
reprinted in 1898, and a new edition of the Principia Vitae 
Christianae, ed. by D. O'Connor, appeared in 1906. The devo- 
tional treatise De Sacrificio Missae is the classical work in its 
field (new edition by Ildephonsus Cummins, 1903). 

The chief source for the life of Bona is the biography by the 
Cistercian abbot Bertolotti (Asti, 1677) ; the best modern study is 
by A. Ighina (Mondovi, 1874). 

BONA (Bone), a seaport of Algeria, in 36 53' N., 7 46' E., on 
a bay of the Mediterranean, chief town of an arrondissement 
in the department of Constantine, 220 m. by rail W. of Tunis, 
and 136 m. N.E. of Constantine. The town, which is situated at 
the foot of the wooded heights of Edugh, is surrounded with a 
modern rampart erected • outside the old Arab wall, the compass 
of which was found too small for its growth. Much of the old 
town has been demolished, and its general character now is that 
of a flourishing French city. The streets are wide and well laid 
out, but some are very steep. Through the centre of the town 
runs a broad tree-lined promenade, the Cours Jerome-Bertagna, 
formerly the Cours National, in which are the principal buildings 
—theatre, banks, hotels. At its southern end, by the quay, is a 
bronze statue of Thiers, and at the northern end, the cathedral 
of St Augustine, a large church built in quasi-Byzantine style. 
In it is preserved a relic supposed to be the right arm of St 
Augustine, brought from Pavia in 1842. The Grand Mosque, 
built out of ruins of the ancient Hippo, occupies one side of 
the chief square, the Place d'Armes. There are barracks with 
accommodation for 3000 men, and civil and military hospitals. 
The Kasbah (citadel) stands on a hill at the north-east of the 
town. The inner harbour, covering 25 acres, is surrounded by 
fine quays at which vessels drawing 2 2 ft. can be moored. Beyond 
is a spacious outer harbour, built 1857-1868 and enlarged in 



BONA DEA— BONALD 



91 



1905-1907. Bona is in direct steamship communication with 
Marseilles, and is the centre of a large commerce, ranking after 
Algiers and Oran alone in Algeria. It imports general mer- 
chandise and manufactures, and exports phosphates, iron, zinc, 
barley, sheep, wool, cork, esparto, &c. There are manufactories 
of native garments, tapestry and leather. The marshes at the 
mouths of the Seybuse and Bujema rivers, which enter the sea 
to the south of Bona, have been drained by a system of canals, 
to the improvement of the sanitary condition of the town, which 
has the further advantage of an abundant water supply obtained 
from the Edugh hills. There are cork woods and marble quarries 
in the vicinity, and the valley of the Seybuse and the neighbour- 
ing plains are rich in agricultural produce. The population of 
the town of Bona in 1906 was 36,004, of the commune 42,934, 
of the arrondissement, which includes La Calle (q.v.) and 11 
other communes, 77,803. 

Bona is identified with the ancient Aphrodisium, the seaport 
of Hippo Regius or Ubbo, but it derives its name from the latter 
city, the ruins of which, consisting of large cisterns, now restored, 
and fragments of walls, are about a mile to the south of the town. 
In the first three centuries of the Christian era Hippo was one 
of the richest cities in Roman Africa; but its chief title to fame 
is derived from its connexion with St Augustine, who lived here 
as priest and bishop for thirty-five years. Hippo was captured 
by the Vandals under Genseric in 431, after a siege of fourteen 
months, during which Augustine died. Only the cathedral, 
together with Augustine's library and MSS., escaped the general 
destruction. The town Avas partially restored by Belisarius, 
and again sacked by the Arabs in the 7th century. On the top 
of the hill on which Hippo stood, a large basilica, with chancel 
towards the west, dedicated to St Augustine, was opened in 1900. 
An altar surmounted by a bronze statue of the saint has also 
been erected among the ruins. The place was named Hippo 
Regius -(Royal) by the Romans because it was a favourite residence 
of the Numidian kings. Bona (Arabic annaba, "the city of 
jujube trees "), which has passed through many vicissitudes, was 
built by the Arabs, and was for centuries a possession of the 
rulers of Tunis, who built the Kasbah in 1 300. From the beginning 
of the 14th to the middle of the 15th century it was frequented 
by Italians and Spaniards, and in the 16th it was held for some 
time by Charles V., who strengthened its citadel. Thereafter 
it was held in turn by Genoese, Tunisians and Algerines. From 
the time of Louis XIV. to the Revolution, the French Compagnie 
d'Afrique maintained a very active trade with the port. The 
town was occupied by the French for a few months in 1830 and 
reoccupied in 1832, when Captains Armandy and Yusuf with a 
small force of marines seized the Kasbah and held it for some 
months until help arrived. From that time the history of Bona 
is one of industrial development, greatly stimulated since 1883 
by the discovery of the phosphate beds at Tebessa. 

BONA DEA, the " good goddess," an old Roman deity of 
fruitfulness, both in the earth and in women. She was identified 
with Fauna, and by later syncretism also with Ops and Maia — 
the latter no doubt because the dedication-day of her temple 
on the Aventine was 1st May (Ovid, Fasti, v. 149 foil.). This 
temple was cared for, and the cult attended, by women only, 
and the same was the case at a second celebration at the begin- 
ning of December in the house of a magistrate with imperium, 
which became famous owing to the profanation of these mysteries 
by P. Clodius in 62 B.C., and the political consequences of his 
act. Wine and myrtle were tabooed in the cult of this deity, 
and myths grew up to explain these features of the cult, of which 
an account may be read in W. W. Fowler's Roman Festivals, 
pp. 103 foil. Herbs with healing properties were kept in her 
temple, and also snakes, the usual symbol of the medicinal art. 
Her victim was a porca, as in the cults of other deities of fertility, 
and was called damium, and we are told that the goddess herself 
was known as Damia and her priestess as damiatrix. These 
names are almost certainly Greek; Damia is found worshipped 
at several places in Greece, and also at Tarentum, where there 
was a festival called Dameia. It is thus highly probable that on 
the cult of the original Roman goddess was engrafted the Greek 



one of Damia, perhaps after the conquest of Tarentum (272 B.C.). 
It is no longer possible to distinguish clearly the Greek and 
Roman elements in this curious cult, though it is itself quite 
intelligible as that of an Earth-goddess with mysteries attached. 
See also Pauly-Wissowa, Realencyclopddie. (W. W. F. *) 

BONA FIDE (Lat. " in good faith "), in law, a term implying 
the absence of all fraud or unfair dealing or acting. It is usually 
employed in conjunction with a noun, e.g. " bona fide purchaser," 
one who has purchased property from its legal owner, to whom 
he has paid the consideration, and from whom he has taken a 
legal conveyance, without having any notice of any trust affect- 
ing the property; " bona fide holder " of a bill of exchange, 
one who has taken a bill complete and regular on the face of 
it, before it was overdue, and in good faith and for value, and 
without notice of any defect in the title of the person who 
negotiated it to him; " bona fide traveller " under the licensing 
acts, one whose lodging-place during the preceding night is at 
least 3 m. distant from the place where he demands to be 
supplied with liquor, such distance being calculated by the 
nearest public thoroughfare. 

BONALD, LOUIS GABRIEL AMBROISE, Vicomte de (1754- 
1840), French philosopher and politician, was born at LeMonna, 
near Millau in Aveyron, on the 2nd of October 1754. Disliking 
the principles of the Revolution, he emigrated in 1791, joined 
the army of the prince of Conde, and soon afterwards settled 
at Heidelberg. There he wrote his first important work, the 
highly conservative Theorie du pouvoir politique et religieux 
(3 vols., 1796; new ed., Paris, 1854, 2 vols.), which was con- 
demned by the Directory. Returning to France he found himself 
an object of suspicion, and was obliged to live in retirement. 
In 1806 he was associated with Chateaubriand and Fievee in 
the conduct of the Mercure de France, and two years later was 
appointed councillor of the Imperial University which he had 
often attacked. After the restoration he was a member of the 
council of public instruction, and from 18 15 to 1822 sat in the 
chamber as deputy. His speeches were on the extreme con- 
servative side; he even advocated a literary censorship. In 
1822 he was made minister of state, and presided over the censor- 
ship commission. In the following year he was made a peer, 
a dignity which he lost through refusing to take the oath 
in 1830. From 1816 he had been a member of the Academy. 
He took no part in public affairs after 1830, but retired to his 
seat at Le Monna, where he died on the 23rd of November 1840. 
Bonald was one of the leading writers of the theocratic or 
traditionalist school, which included de Maistre, Lamennais, 
Ballanche and d'Eckstein. His writings are mainly on social 
and political philosophy, and are based ultimately on one 
great principle, the divine origin of language. In his own 
words, " L'homme pense sa parole avant de parler sa 
pensee/'; the first language contained the essence of all truth. 
From this he deduces the existence of God, the divine origin 
and consequent supreme authority of the Holy Scriptures, and 
the infallibility of the church. While this thought lies at the 
root of all his speculations there is a formula of constant ap- 
plication. All relations may be stated as the triad of cause, 
means and effect, which he sees repeated throughout nature. 
Thus, in the universe, he finds the first cause as mover, move- 
ment as the means, and bodies as the result; in the state, power 
as the cause, ministers as the means, and subjects as the effects; 
in the family, the same relation is exemplified by father, mother 
and children. These three terms bear specific relations to one 
another; the first is to the second as the second to the third. 
Thus, in the great triad of the religious world — God, the Mediator, 
and Man — God is to the God-Man as the God-Man is to Man. 
On this basis he constructed a system of political absolutism 
which lacks two things only: — well-grounded premisses instead 
of baseless hypotheses, and the acquiescence of those who were 
to be subjected to it. 

Bonald's style is remarkably fine; ornate, but pure and 
vigorous. Many fruitful thoughts are scattered among his 
works, but his system scarcely deserves the name of a philosophy. 
In abstract thought he was a mere dilettante, and his strength 



192 



BONAPARTE 



lay in the vigour and sincerity of his statements rather than in 
cogency of reasoning. 

He had four sons. Of these, Victor de Bonald (1780-1871) 
followed his father in his exile, was rector of the academy of 
Montpellier after the restoration, but lost his post during the 
Hundred Days. Regaining it at the second restoration, he 
resigned finally in 1830. He wrote Des vrais principes opposes 
aux erreurs du XIX' sie.de (1833), Moise et les geologues 
modernes (1835), and a life of his father. Louis Jacques 
Maurice (1787-1870), cardinal (1841), was condemned by the 
council of state for a pastoral letter attacking Dupin the elder's 
Manuel de droit ecclesiastique. In 1848 he held a memorial 
service " for those who fell gloriously in defence of civil and 
religious liberty." In 1851 he nevertheless advocated in the 
senate the maintenance of the temporal power of Rome by force 
of arms. Henri (d. 1846) was a contributor to legitimist 
journals; and Rene was interim prefect of Aveyron in 181 7. 

Besides the Theorie above mentioned, the vicomte de Bonald 
published Essai analytique sur les lots naturelles de I'ordre social 
(1800); Legislation primitive (1802); Du divorce considers au XIX' 
siecle (1801); Recherches philosophiques sur les premiers objets de 
connaissances morales (2 vols., 1818) ; Melanges litteraires et politiques, 
demonstration philosophique du principe constitutif de la societe (18 19, 
1852). The first collected edition appeared in 12 vols., 1817-1819; 
the latest is that of the Abbe Migne (3 vols., 1859). 

See Notice sur M. le Vicomte de Bonald (1841, ed. Avignon, 1853), 
(by his son Victor) ; Damiron, Phil, en France au XIX" siecle ; 
Windelband, History of Philosophy (trans. J. H. Tufts, 1893); E. 
Faguet in Rev. des deux mondes (April 15, 1889). 

BONAPARTE, the name of a family made famous by 
Napoleon I. (q.v.), emperor of the French. The French form 
Bonaparte was not commonly used, even by Napoleon, until 
after the spring of 1796. The original name was Buonaparte, 
which was borne in the early middle ages by several distinct 
families in Italy. One of these, which settled at Florence before 
the year 1100, divided in the 13 th century into the two branches 
of San Miniato and Sarzana. A member of this latter, Francesco 
Buonaparte, emigrated in the middle of the 16th century to 
Corsica, where his descendants continued to occupy themselves 
with the affairs of law and the magistracy. 

Carlo Buonaparte [Charles Marie de Bonaparte] (1746- 
1785), the father of Napoleon I., took his degree in law at the 
Napoleon's university of Pisa, and after the conquest of Corsica 
father by the French became assessor to the royal court of 
aad Ajaccio and the neighbouring districts. His restless 

mother. an( j dissatisfied nature led him to press or intrigue 
for other posts, and to embark in risky business enterprises 
which compromised the fortune of his family for many years 
to come. In 1764 he married Letizia Ramolino, a beautiful and 
high-spirited girl, aged fourteen, descended from a well-con- 
nected family domiciled in Corsica since the middle of the 1 5th 
century. The first two children, born in 1765 and 1767, died 
in infancy; Joseph (see below), the first son who survived, was 
born in 1768, and Napoleon in 1769. The latter was born in 
the midst of the troubles consequent on the French conquest, 
Letizia having recently accompanied her husband in several 
journeys and escapes. Her firm and courageous disposition 
showed itself at that trying time and throughout the whole 
of her singularly varied career. Simple and frugal in her tastes, 
and devout in thought and manner of life, she helped to bind 
her children to the life of Corsica, while her husband, a schemer 
by nature and a Voltairian by conviction, pointed the way to 
careers in France, the opening up of which moulded the fortunes 
of the family and the destinies of Europe. He died of cancer 
in the stomach at Montpellier in 1785. 

Letizia lived to witness the glory and the downfall of her great 
son, surviving Napoleon I. by sixteen years. She never accom- 
modated herself to the part she was called on to play during 
the Empire, and, though endowed with immense wealth and 
distinguished by the title of Madame Mere, lived mainly in 
retirement, and in the exercise of a strict domestic economy 
which her early privations had made a second nature to her, 
but which rendered her very unpopular in France and was dis- 
pleasing to Napoleon. After the events of 1814 she joined the 



emperor in the island of Elba and was privy to his plans of escape, 
returning to Paris during the Hundred Days. After the final 
downfall of Waterloo, she took up her residence at Rome, where 
Pope Pius VII. treated her with great kindness and consideration, 
and protected her from the suspicious attentions of the powers 
of the Grand Alliance. In 181 8 she addressed a pathetic letter 
to the powers assembled at the congress of Aix, petitioning for 
Napoleon's release, on the ground that his mortal illness had 
removed any possibility of his ever again becoming a menace 
to the world's peace. The letter remained unanswered, the 
powers having reason to believe that it was a mere political 
move, and that its terms had been previously concerted with 
Napoleon. Henceforth, saddened by the death of Napoleon, 
of her daughters Pauline and Elisa, and of several grandchildren, 
she lived a life of mournful seclusion. In 1829 she was crippled 
by a serious fall, and was all but blind before her death in 1836. 

For the Bonaparte family in general, and Carlo and Letizia, see 
Storia genealogica della famiglia Bonaparte, delta sua origine fi.no 
all' estinzione del ramo gid esisente nella cittd di S. Miniato, scritta da un 
Samminiatese (D. Morali) (Florence, 1 846) ; F. de Stefani, Le antichitd 
dei Bonaparte; precede per una introduzione (L. Beretta) (Venice, 
1857) ; L. Ambrosini and A. Huard, La Famille imperiale. Hist, de 
la famille Bonaparte depuis son origine jusqu'en i860 (Paris, i860) ; 

C. Leynadier, Histoire de la famille Bonaparte de Van 1050 a. I' an 1848 
(continuee jusqu'en 1866 par de la Brugere) (Paris, 1866) ; A. Klein- 
schmidt, Die Eliern und Geschwister Napoleons I. (Berlin, 1876); 

D. A. Bingham, The Marriages of the Bonapartes (2 vols., London, 
1881) ; F. Masson, Napoleon et sa famille (4 vols., Paris, 1897-1900) ; 
A. Chuquet, La Jeunesse de Napoleon (3 vols., Paris, 1897-1899); 
T. Nasica, Memoires sur I'enfance et la jeunesse de NapoUon 
jusqu'd, I'dge de vingt-trois ans; precedes d'une notice historique sur 
son pere; Baron H. Larrey, Madame Mere (2 vols., Paris, 1892); 
Clara Tschudi, Napoleons Mutter: aus dem Norwegischen ubersetzt 
von H. von Lenk (Leipzig, 1901). 

The brothers and sisters of Napoleon I., taken m order of age, 
are the following: — 

I. Joseph (1768-1844), was born at Corte in Corsica, on the 
7th of January 1768. He was educated at the college at Autun 
in France, returned to Corsica in 1784, shortly after 
the death of his father, and thereafter studied law at ^° h '"°°' s 
the university of Pisa. He became a barrister at an a 
Bastia in June 1788, and was soon elected a councillor sisters: 
of the municipality of Ajaccio. Like his brothers, {• Jose P h 
Napoleon and Lucien, he embraced the French or parte ~ . 
democratic side, and on the victory of the Paolist party 
fled with his family from Corsica and sought refuge in France. 
After spending a short time in Paris, where he was disgusted 
with the excesses of the Jacobins, he settled at Marseilles and 
married Mile Julie Clary, daughter of a merchant of that town. 
The Bonapartes moved from place to place, mainly with the view 
of concerting measures for the recovery of Corsica. Joseph 
took part in these efforts and went on a mission to Genoa in 
1795. In 1796 he accompanied his brother Napolegn in the 
early part of the Italian campaign, and had some part in the 
negotiations with Sardinia which led to the armistice of Cherasco 
(April 28), the news of which he bore to the French govern- 
ment. Later he proceeded to Leghorn, took part in the French 
expedition for the recovery of Corsica, and, along with the 
commissioner of the French Republic, Miot de Melito, helped 
in the reorganization of that island. In March 1797 he was ap- 
pointed by the Directory, minister to the court of Parma, and 
early in the summer he proceeded to Rome in the same capacity. 
Discords arose between the Vatican and the French Republic, 
and it is clear that Napoleon and the French Directory ordered 
Joseph to encourage revolutionary movements in Rome. On 
the 28th of December 1797 a disturbance took place opposite 
the French embassy, which led to the death of the French 
general, Leonard Duphot. Joseph at once left Rome, which 
soon became a republic. Repairing to Paris, he entered on 
parliamentary life, becoming one of the members for Corsica 
in the Council of Five Hundred. He made no mark in the 
chamber and retired in 1799. 

Before the coup d'etat of Brumaire he helped Napoleon in 
making overtures to Sieyes and Moreau, but otherwise did little. 
Thereafter he refused to enter the ministry, but became a member 



BONAPARTE 



r 93 



of the council of state and of the Corps Lfgislatif, where his 
advice on the state of public opinion was frequently useful. He 
had a hand in the negotiations for the Concordat, but, according 
to Lucien Bonaparte, looked on that measure as " ill-advised 
and retrograde." His services in the diplomatic sphere were 
more important. At Mortfontaine, his country-house, he con- 
cluded with the envoy of the United States a convention which 
bears that name (1800). He also presided over the negotiations 
which led to the treaty of Luneville with Austria (February 9, 
1801); and he and Maret represented France in the lengthy 
discussions with the British envoy, Lord "Cornwallis, which 
resulted in the signature of the treaty of Amiens (March 25, 
1802). This diplomatic triumph in its turn led to the con- 
solidation of Napoleon's power as First Consul for life (August 
1, 1802) with the chief voice in the selection of his successor. 
On this question the brothers disagreed. As neither Joseph 
nor Napoleon had a male heir, the eldest brother, whose ideas 
of primogeniture were very strict, claimed to be recognized as 
heir, while Napoleon wished to recognize the son of Louis 
Bonaparte. On the proclamation of the French empire (May 
1804) the friction became acute. Napoleon offered to make 
Joseph king of Lombardy if he would waive all claim of suc- 
cession to the French throne, but met with a firm refusal. 

Meanwhile Joseph had striven earnestly, but in vain, to 
avert a rupture with England, which came about in May 1803. 
In 1805 he acted as chief of the French government while 
Napoleon was campaigning in Germany. Early in 1806 he 
proceeded to Naples with a French force in order to expel the 
Bourbon dynasty from southern Italy, Napoleon adding the 
promise that the Neapolitan crown would be for Joseph if he 
chose to accept it. The conquest of the mainland was speedily 
effected, though Gaeta, Reggio and the rock of Scylla held out 
for some months. The Bourbon court retired to Sicily, where 
it had the protection of a British force. By the decree of the 
30th of March 1806 Napoleon proclaimed Joseph king of Naples, 
but allowed him to keep intact his claims to the throne of France. 
In several letters he enjoined his brother to greater firmness in 
his administration: " These peoples in Italy, and in general all 
nations, if they do not find their masters, are disposed to re- 
bellion and mutiny." The memoirs of Count Miot de Melito, 
whom Joseph appointed minister of war, show how great were 
the difficulties with which the new monarch had to contend — 
an almost bankrupt treasury, a fickle and degraded populace, 
Bourbon intrigues and plots, and frequent attacks by the British 
from Sicily. General Stuart's victory at Maida (July 3) 
shook Joseph's throne to its base; but the surrender of Gaeta 
soon enabled Massena to march southwards and subdue Calabria. 
During his brief reign at Naples, Joseph effected many improve- 
ments; he abolished the relics of feudalism, reformed the 
monastic orders, reorganized the judicial, financial and educa- 
tional systems, and initiated several public works. In everything 
he showed his desire to carry out the aims which he expressed 
to his consort in April 1806: " Justice demands that I should 
make this people as happy as the scourge of war will permit." 

From these well-meant, but not alwayfe successful, efforts he 
was suddenly called away by Napoleon to take the crown of 
Spain (May 1808). There his difficulties were far greater. 
Despite the benevolent intentions announced to the Spaniards 
in his proclamation dated Bayonne, 23rd of June 1808, all 
reconciliation between them and the French was impossible after 
Napoleon's treatment of their de facto king, Ferdinand VII. 
For the varying fortunes of King Joseph in Spain and in the 
eventful years of the Peninsular War, see Spain and Peninsular 
War. His sovereignty was little more than titular. Compelled 
to leave Madrid hastily in August 1808, owing to the Spanish 
success at Baylen, he was reinstated by Napoleon at the close 
of the year; and he was thereafter kept in a subordinate position 
which led him on four occasions to offer to abdicate. The 
emperor took no notice of these offers, and ordered him to govern 
with more energy. Between February and May 18 10 the emperor 
placed the northern and north-eastern provinces under the 
command of French generals as military districts, virtually 
IV. 7 



independent of Joseph's authority. Again the king protested, 
but in vain. As his trusted adviser, Miot de Melito, observed in 
his memoirs, Joseph tried to be constitutional king of Spain, 
whereas after the experience of the years 1808- 1809 he could 
only succeed in the Peninsula by becoming " the mere instrument 
of a military power." " Bearing a title which was only an 
oppressive burden, the king had in reality ceased to exist as a 
monarch, and barely retained some semblance of authority over 
a small part of the French army as a general. Reduced by the 
exhausted state of his treasury to the last extremity he at length 
seriously thought of departure." Joseph took this step in April 
181 1, and proceeded to Paris in order to extort better terms, or 
offer his abdication; but he had to return with a monthly subsidy 
of 500,000 francs and the promise that the army of the centre 
(the smallest of the five French armies) should be under his 
control. Late in that year Napoleon united Catalonia to France. 
Wellington's victory at Salamanca (July 22, 1812) compelled 
Joseph to leave his capital; and despite the retirement of the 
British in the autumn of that year, Joseph's authority never fully 
recovered from that blow. The end of his nominal rule came in 
the next year, when Wellington utterly overthrew the chief 
French army, commanded by King Joseph and Marshal Jourdan, 
at Vittoria (June 21, 18 13). The king fled from Spain, was 
disgraced by Napoleon, and received the order to retire incognito 
to Mortfontaine. The emperor wrote to the minister of war 
(July ir, 1813): — "His [Joseph's] behaviour has never ceased 
bringing misfortune upon my army; it is time to make an 
end of it." 

Napoleon was equally dissatisfied with his brother's conduct 
as lieutenant-general of France, while he himself was conducting 
the campaign of 18 14 in the east of France. On the 30th of 
March, Joseph empowered Marmont to make a truce with the 
assailants of Paris if they should be in overpowering strength. 
On the surrender of the capital Joseph at once retired. The part 
which he played during the Hundred Days (181 5) was also 
insignificant. It is strange that, four days after Waterloo, 
Napoleon should have urged him to inspirit the Chamber of 
Deputies with a view to a national resistance (Lettres nouvelles 
de Napoleon) . In point of fact Joseph did little beyond seeking 
to further the emperor's plans of escape to America. After the 
surrender of his brother to the captain of H.M.S. " Bellerophon " 
at Rochefort, Joseph went to the United States. Settling in 
Bordentown, New Jersey, he adopted the title of comte de 
Survilliers, and sought to promote plans for the rescue of his 
brother from St Helena. In 1830 he pleaded, but unsuccessfully, 
for the recognition of the claims of the duke of Reichstadt (king . 
of Rome) to the French throne. He afterwards visited England, 
and for a time resided at Genoa and Florence. In the latter city, 
the cradle of his race, he died on the 28th of July 1844. In 
person he somewhat resembled Napoleon, but utterly lacked his 
strength and energy. He was fitted for an embassy or judgeship, 
but was too mild, supine and luxurious for the tasks thrust upon 
him by his brother. Yet his correspondence and memoirs prove 
that he retained for Napoleon warm feelings of affection. 

Of the many works dealing with Joseph Bonaparte we may cite 
Baron A. du Casse, Memoires et correspondance politique et mxlitaire 
du roi Joseph (10 vols., Paris, 1854), and Les Rois freres de Napoleon 
(1883); J. S. C. Abbott, History of Joseph Bonaparte (New York, 
1869); G. Bertin, Joseph Bonaparte in America; Joseph Bonaparte 
juge par ses contemporains (anon.) ; the Memoirs of Count Miot de 
Melito (translation, edited by General Fleischmann, 2 vols., 1881); 
R. M. Johnston, The Napoleonic Empire in Southern Italy (2 vols., 
with an excellent bibliography, London, 1904) ; Correspondence of 
Napoleon with Joseph Bonaparte (2 vols., New York, 1856); Baron 
A. du Casse, Histoire des . . . traites de Mortfontaine, de Luneville 
et d'Amiens,_ &c. (1855-1857); F. Masson, Napoleon et sa famille 
(4 vols., Paris, 1889-1900). 

II. Lucien (1775-1840), prince of Canino, was born at Ajaccio 
on the 2 1st of May 1775. He followed his elder brothers 
to the schools of Autun and Brienne. At that time he b' ^". " 
wished to enter the French army, but, being debarred parte. 
by defective sight, was destined for the church, and 
with this aim in view went to the seminary at Aix in Provence 
( 1 786) . His excitable and volatile disposition agreed ill with the 

11 



194 



BONAPARTE 



discipline of the place, and on the outbreak of the Revolution in 
1789 he eagerly espoused the democratic and anti-clerical move- 
ment then sweeping over France. On returning to Corsica he 
became the leading speaker in the Jacobin club at Ajaccio. 
Pushing even Napoleon to more decided action, Lucien urged 
his brothers to break with Paoli, the leader of the more con- 
servative party, which sought to ally itself with England as 
against the regicide republic of France. He headed a Corsican 
deputation which went to France in order to denounce Paoli 
and to solicit aid for the democrats; but, on the Paolists gaining 
the upper hand, the Bonapartes left the island and joined Lucien 
at Toulon. In the south of France he worked hard for the 
Jacobinical cause, and figured as " Brutus " in the Jacobin club 
of the small town of St Maximin (then renamed Marathon). 
There on the 4th of May 1794 he married Mile Catherine 
Boyer, though he was a minor and had not the consent of his 
family — an act which brought him into a state almost approach- 
ing disgrace and penury. The coup d'etat of Thermidor (July 
28, 1794) compelled the young disciple of Robespierre hurriedly 
to leave St Maximin, and to accept a small post at St Chamans. 
There he was arrested and imprisoned for a time until Napoleon's 
influence procured his release, and further gained for him a post 
1 as commissioner in the French army campaigning in Germany. 
Lucien soon conceived a dislike for a duty which opened up no 
vista for his powers of oratory and political intrigue, and repaired 
to Corsica. In the hope of being elected a deputy of the island, 
he refused an appointment offered by Napoleon in the army of 
Egypt in 1798. His hopes were fulfilled, and in 1798 he entered 
the Council of Five Hundred at Paris. There his vivacious 
eloquence brought him into prominence, and he was president 
of that body on the eventful day of the 19th of Brumaire 
(November 10) 1799, when Napoleon overthrew the national 
councils of France at the palace of St Cloud. The refusal of 
Lucien to put the vote of outlawry, for which the majority of 
the council clamoured, his opportune closing of the sitting, and 
his appeal to the soldiers outside to disperse les representants 
du poignard, turned the scale in favour of his brother. 

By a strange irony this event, the chief event of Lucien's life, 
was fatal to the cause of democracy of which he had been the 
most eager exponent. In one of his earlier letters to his brother 
Joseph, Lucien stated that he had detected in Napoleon " an 
ambition not altogether egotistic but which surpassed his love 
for the general weal; ... in case of a counter-revolution he 
would try to ride on the crest of events." Napoleon having by 
his help triumphed over parliamentary institutions in France, 
Lucien's suspicion of his brother became a dominant feeling; 
and the relations between them became strained during the 
period of the consulate (1799-1804). He accepted office as 
minister of the interior, but was soon deprived of it owing to 
political and personal differences with the First Consul. In 
order to soften the blow, Napoleon appointed him ambassador 
to the court of Madrid (November 1800). There again Lucien 
displeased his brother. France and Spain were then about to 
partition Portugal, and the Spanish forces were beginning to 
invade that land, when the court of Lisbon succeeded, owing 
(it is said) to the free use of bribes, in inducing Godoy, the 
Spanish minister, and Lucien Bonaparte to sign the preliminaries 
of peace on the 6th of June 1801 at Badajoz. The First Consul, 
finding his plans of seizing Lisbon frustrated, remonstrated with 
his brother, who thereupon resigned his post, and returned to 
Paris, there taking part in the opposition which the Tribunate 
offered to some of Napoleon's schemes. Lucien's next proceeding 
completed the breach between the two brothers. His wife had 
died in 1800; he became enamoured of a Mme Jouberthou in 
the early summer of 1802, made her his mistress, and finally, 
despite the express prohibition of the First Consul, secretly 
married her at his residence of Plessis (on October 23, 1803). 
At that time Napoleon was pressing Lucien for important 
reasons of state to marry the widow of the king of Etruria, and 
on hearing of his brother's action he ordered him to leave French 
territory. Lucien departed for Italy with his wife and infant 
son, after annoying Napoleon by bestowing on her publicly the 



3. Ellsa. 



name of Bonaparte. He also charged Joseph never to try to 
reconcile Napoleon to him. 

For some years he lived in Italy, chiefly at Rome, showing 
marked hostility to the emperor. In December 1807 the latter 
sought to come to an arrangement by which Lucien would take 
his place as a French prince, provided that he would annul his 
marriage. This step Lucien refused to take; and after residing 
for some time at his estate of Canino, from which he took the 
papal title of prince of Canino,. he left for America. Captured 
by a British ship, he was taken to Malta and thence to England, 
where he resided under some measure of surveillance up to the 
peace of 1814. Returning to Rome, he offered Napoleon his 
help during the Hundred Days (1815), stood by his side at the 
" Champ de Mai " at Paris, and was the last to defend his pre- 
rogatives at the time of his second abdication. He spent the 
rest of his life in Italy, and died at Rome on the 29th of June 
1840. His family comprised four sons and six daughters. He 
wrote an epic, Charlemagne, ou I'Eglise delivree (2 vols., 1814), 
also La Verile sur les Cent Jours and Memoirs, which were not 
completed. 

For sources see T. Jung, Lucien Bonaparte et ses memoires (3 vols., 
Paris, 1 882-1 883); an anonymous work, Le Prince Lucien Bona- 
parte et sa famille (Paris, 1888); F. Masson, Napoleon et sa famille 
(4 vols., Paris, 1897-1900), and H. Houssaye, " 1815 " (3 vols., 
Paris, 1 899- 1 905). 

III. Marianne Elisa (1777^1820) was born at Ajaccio on 
the 3rd of January 1777. Owing to the efforts of her brothers 
she entered the establishment of St Cyr near Paris 
as a " king's scholar." On its disruption by the 
revolutionists in 1792 Napoleon took charge of her and 
brought her back to Ajaccio. She. shared the fortunes of the 
family in the south of France, and on the 5th of May 1797 
married Felix Bacciochi, a well-connected Corsican. In 1805, 
after the foundation of the French empire, Napoleon bestowed 
upon her the principality of Piombino and shortly afterwards 
Lucca; in 1808 her importunities gained for her the grand 
duchy of Tuscany. Bacciochi being almost a nullity, her pride 
and ability had a great influence on the administration and on 
Italian affairs in general. Her relations with Napoleon were 
frequently strained; and in 1813-1814 she abetted Murat in his 
enterprises (see Murat). After her brother's fall she retired, 
with the title of countess of Compignano, first to Bologna and 
afterwards to Santo Andrea near Trieste,, where she died on the 
6th of August 1820. 

See J. Turquan, Les Sceurs de Napoleon (Paris, 1896) ; P. Mar- 
mothan, Eiisa Bonaparte (Paris, 1898); E. Rodocanachi, Elisa 
Bonaparte en Italie (Paris, 1900) ; F. Masson, Napoleon et sa famille 
(4 vols., Paris, 1897-1900). 

IV. Louis (1 778-1846) was born at Ajaccio on the 2nd of 
September 1778. His elder brother Napoleon supervised 

his education with much care, gaining for him scholar- * Louis 
ships to the royal military schools of France, and during 
the time when the elder brother was a lieutenant in 
garrison at Auxonne Louis shared his scanty fare. In 1795 
Napoleon procured for him admission to the military school at 
Chalons, and wrote thus of the boy: — " I am very pleased with 
Louis; he fulfils my hopes; intelligence, warmth, good health, 
talent, good address, kindness — he possesses all these qualities." 
Louis went through the Italian campaign of 1796-97 with 
Napoleon and acted as his aide-de-camp in Egypt in 1798-99. 
In 1802 the First Consul married him to Hortense Beauharnais, 
a forced union which led to most deplorable results. In 1804 
Louis was raised to the rank of general, and entered the council 
of state in order to perfect his knowledge of administrative 
affairs. In the next year he became governor of Paris and under- 
took various military and administrative duties. 

After the victory of Austerlitz (December 2, 1805) Napoleon 
began to plan the formation of a ring of states surrounding, and 
in close alliance with, the French empire. He destined Louis for 
the throne of Holland, and proclaimed him king of that country 
on the 6th of June 1806. From the first the emperor reproached 
him with being too easy with his subjects and with courting 
popularity too much. The increasing rigour of the continental 



Bona- 
parte. 



BONAPARTE 



195 



system brought the two brothers to an open rupture. Their 
relations were embittered by a violent jealousy which Louis 
conceived against his wife. In 1808 the emperor offered Louis 
the throne of Spain then vacant; but on Louis refusing to 
accept it the honour went to Joseph. The dispute between 
Louis and the emperor continued. In the latter part of 1809 
Napoleon virtually resolved to annex Holland, in order to stop 
the trade which the Dutch secretly carried on with England. 
At the close of the year Louis went to Paris, partly in order to 
procure a divorce from Hortense and partly to gain better 
terms for Holland. He failed in both respects. In January 
1 8 10 Napoleon annexed the island of Walcheren, alleging that 
Louis had not done his share in defending the interests of France 
at the time of the British Walcheren expedition (1809). The 
French troops also occupied Breda and Bergen-op-Zoom. Louis 
gave way on all the points in dispute; but his acquiescence only 
postponed the crisis. After the collapse of negotiations with 
Great Britain in the spring of 1810, the emperor again pressed 
Louis hard, and finally sent French troops against the Dutch 
capital. Thereupon Louis, despairing of offering resistance, 
fled from his kingdom and finally settled at Toplitz in Bohemia. 
On the 9th of July 18 10 Napoleon annexed Holland to the 
French empire. Louis spent the rest of his life separated from 
his wife, and in 181 5 gained the custody of his elder son. He 
lived chiefly at Rome, concerning himself with literary and 
philosophic studies and with the fortunes of his sons. Their 
devotion to the national and democratic cause in Italy in 1830- 
183 1 gave him much pleasure, which was overclouded by the 
death of the elder, Napoleon Louis, in the spring campaign of 
183 1 in the Romagna. The failure of his other son, Charles 
Louis Napoleon (afterwards Napoleon III.), to wrest the French 
crown from Louis Philippe by the attempts at Strassburg and 
Boulogne also caused him much disappointment. He died on 
the 25th of July 1846 and was buried at St Leu. Under more 
favourable conditions Louis would have gained a name for 
kindness and philanthropy, proofs of which did indeed appear 
during his reign in Holland and gained him the esteem of his 
subjects; but his morbid sensitiveness served to embitter his 
relations both of a domestic and of a political nature and to sour 
his own disposition. His literary works are unimportant. His 
sons were Napoleon Charles (1802-1807), Napoleon Louis (1804- 
1831), and Charles Louis Napoleon (1808-1873), afterwards 
emperor of the French as Napoleon III. (?.».)• 

The chief works on the life and reign of Louis are le comte de 
Saint-Leu, Documents historiques et reflexions sur le gouvernement de 
la Hollande 3 vols., 2nd ed., Paris, 1820) ; F. Rocquain, Napoleon I er 
et le Roi Louis, d'apres les documents conserves aux archives nationales 
(Paris, 1875); Baron A. du Casse, Les Rois freres de Napoleon 
(Paris, 1883) ; A Gamier, La Cour de Hollande sous le regnede Louis 
Bonaparte, par un auditeur (Paris and Amsterdam, 1823) ; T. 
Jorissen, Napoleon I" et le roi de Hollande (1806-1813) d'apres des 
documents authentiques et inedits (Paris and The Hague, 1868); 
V. Loosjes, Louis Bonaparte, Koning van Holland (Amsterdam, 
1888); L. Wichers, De Regeering van Koning Lodewijk Napoleon 
(1806-1810) (Utrecht, 1892); F. Masson, Napoleon et sa famille 
(4 vols., Paris, 1897-1900). 

V. Marie Pauline (1780-1825), the gayest and most 
beautiful member of the family, was born at Ajaccio on the 
5. Pauline. 20t ^ °* October 1780. At seventeen years of age she 
married General Leclerc, a staff officer of Napoleon, and 
accompanied him to St Domingo, where he died of yellow fever in 
1802. Returning to Paris she espoused Prince Camillo Borghese 
(August 23, 1803) and went to reside with him in Rome. She 
soon tired of him, returned to Paris and gratified her whims in 
ways that caused some scandal. In 1806 she received the title of 
duchess of Guastalla. Her offhand treatment of the new empress, 
Marie Louise, in 18 10 led to her removal from court. Neverthe- 
less in 1814 she repaired with "Madame Mere " to Elba, and is said 
to have expressed a wish to share Napoleon's exile in St Helena. 
She died in 1825 of cancer. Canova's statue of her as Venus 
reclining on a couch is well known. 

See J. Turquan, Les Sceurs de Napoleon: les princesses Ulisa, 
Pauline et Caroline (Paris, 1896); F. Masson, Napoleon et sa famille 
(4 vols., Paris, 1897-1900). 



VI. Maria Annunciata Caroline (1 782-1839) was born 
at Ajaccio on the 25th of March 1782. Early in 1800 she 
married Joachim Murat, whose interests she afterwards 
advanced with all the power of her ambitious and Murat. "* 
intriguing nature. He became governor of Paris, 
marshal of France (1804), grand duke of Berg and of Cleves 
(1806), lieutenant of the emperor in Spain (1808), and early in 
the summer of that year king of Naples. The distance of 
this capital from Paris displeased Caroline; her relations with 
Napoleon became strained, and she associated herself with the 
equivocal movements of her husband in 1814-1815. Before 
his tragic end at Pizzo on the 13th of October 1815, she had 
retired to Austrian territory and was placed under some measure 
of restraint. Finally she lived at Trieste with her sister Elisa. 
She died on the 18th of May 1839. 

See J. Turquan, Caroline Murat, reine de Naples (Paris, 1899); 
F. Masson, Napoleon et sa famille (4 vols., Paris, 1897-1900). See 
also under Murat, Joachim. 

VII. Jerome (1784-1860) was born at Ajaccio on the 
15th of November 1784; he shared the fortunes of the family in 
the early years of the French Revolution, was then 
educated at Juilly and was called to the side of his 7 ' • ,er ° me 
brother, then First Consul of France, in 1800. Many par t e . 
stories are told illustrating his impetuous but affection- 
ate nature. While in the Consular Guard he fought a duel with 
the younger brother of General Davout and was wounded. Soon 
afterwards he was transferred to the navy and cruised in the 
West Indies, until, when blockaded by a British cruiser, he left 
his ship and travelled through the United States. At Baltimore 
he fell in love with Miss Elizabeth Patterson, and,though a minor, 
married her. This disregard of discipline and of the laws of 
France greatly annoyed Napoleon; and when in 1805 Jerome 
brought his wife to Europe, the emperor ordered her to be 
excluded from his states. Jerome vainly sought to bend his 
brother's will in an interview at Alexandria. In May 1805 he 
received command of a small squadron in the Mediterranean, 
while his wife proceeded to Camberwell, where she gave birth to a 
son. In November Jerome sailed in a squadron commanded by 
Admiral Willaumez, which was to ravage the West Indies ; but it 
was scattered by a storm. After damaging British commerce in 
the North Atlantic, Jerome reached France with his ship in 
safety in August 1806. Napoleon made him a prince of France, 
and gave him command of a division of South Germans in the 
campaign of 1806. After Jena, Jerome received the surrender of 
several Prussian towns. An imperial decree having annulled the 
Patterson marriage, the emperor united Jerome to the princess 
Catherine of Wurttemberg; and in pursuance of the terms of 
the treaty of Tilsit (July 7, 1807) raised him to the throne of the 
new kingdom of Westphalia. There Jerome, though frequently 
rebuked by the emperor, displayed his fondness for luxury, 
indulged in numerous amours and ran deeply into debt. In 
some respects his kingdom benefited by the connexion with 
France. Feudalism was abolished; the Code Napoleon was 
introduced; the Jews were freed from repressive laws; and 
education received some impulse in its higher departments. 
But the unpopularity of Jerome's rule was shown by the part 
taken by the peasants in the abortive rising headed by Baron 
Wilhelm von Dornberg and other Westphalian officers in April 
1809. Despite heavy taxation, the state debt increased greatly; 
and the sending of a contingent to Russia in 181 2 brought the 
state to the verge of bankruptcy. In the early part of that 
campaign Jerome was entrusted with an important movement 
which might have brought the southern Russian army into grave 
danger; on his failure (which was probably due to his lack of 
energy) the emperor promptly subjected him to the control of 
Marshal Davout, and Jerome returned to Cassel. In 1813, on the 
fall of the Napoleonic regime in Germany, Jerome retired to 
France, and in 1814 spent some time in Switzerland and at 
Trieste. Returning to France in 1815, he commanded a division 
on the French left wing at Waterloo and attacked Hougomont 
with great pertinacity. On Napoleon's second abdication 
Jerome proceeded to Wurttemberg, was threatened with arrest 



196 



BONAPARTE 



unless he gave up his wife and child, and was kept under sur- 
veillance at Goppingen; finally he was allowed to proceed to 
Augsburg, and thereafter resided at Trieste, or in Italy or Switzer- 
land. His consort died in 1835. He returned to France in 1847, 
and after the rise of Louis Napoleon to power, became succes- 
sively governor of the Invalides, marshal of France and president 
of the senate. He died on the 24th of June i860. His children 
were Jerome Napoleon (see XIV.), Mathilde (see XII.) and 
Napoleon Joseph Charles Paul (born in 1822); the last was 
afterwards known as Prince Napoleon (see XI. below) and finally 
became the heir to the fortunes of the Napoleonic dynasty. 

The chief works relating to Jerome Bonaparte are : Baron Albert 
du Casse, Memoires et correspondance du roi Jerome et de la reine 
Catherine (7 vols., Paris, 1861-1866) and Les Rois freres de Napoleon 
(1883); M. M. Kaisenberg, Konig Jerome Napoleon; W. T. R. 
Saffell, The Bonaparte-Patterson Marriage; August von Schloss- 
berger, Briefwechsel de- Kbnigin Katharina und des Konigs Jerome 
von Westfalen mil Konig Friedrich von Wiirttemberg (Stuttgart, 
1886-1887). supplemented by du Casse in Corresp. inedite de la 
reine Catherine de Westphalie (Paris, 1 888-1 893); A. Martinet, 
Jerome Napoleon, roi de Westfalie (Paris, 1902) ; P. W. Sergeant, 
The Burlesque Napoleon (1905) ; F. Masson, Napoleon et sa famille 
(4 vols., Paris, 1 897-1 900). (J. Hl. R.) 

The fortunes of the Bonaparte family may be further followed 
under the later biographies of its leading members, mainly 
descendants of Lucien (II. above) and Jerome (VII. above). 

VIII. Charles Lucien Jules Laurent (1803-1857), prince 
of Canino, son of Lucien Bonaparte, was a scientist rather than a 
oe d- politician. He married his cousin, Zenaide Bonaparte, 
ants ot " daughter of Joseph, in 1 8 2 2 . At the age of twenty-two 
Lucien: he began the publication of an American Ornithology 
8. Charles. ^ vo j s>) Philadelphia, 1825-1833), which established 
his scientific reputation. A series of other works in zoology 
followed: Iconographia della fauna Itaiica (3 vols., Rome, 1832- 
1841), Catalogo metodico degli uccelli europei (1 vol., Bologna, 
1842), Catalogo metodico dei pesci europei (1 vol., Naples, 1845, 
4to), Catalogo metodico dei mammiferi europei (1 vol., Milan, 
1845), Telachorum tabula analytica (Neufchatel, 1838). He was 
elected honorary member of the academy of Upsala in 1833, of 
that of Berlin in 1843, and correspondent of the Institute of 
France in 1844. Towards 1847 he took part in the political 
agitation in Italy, and presided over scientific congresses, 
notably at Venice, where he declared himself in favour of the 
independence of Italy and the expulsion of the Austrians. He 
entered the Junto of Rome in 1848 and was elected deputy by 
Viterbo to the national assembly. The failure of the revolution 
forced him to leave Italy in July 1849. He gained Holland, then 
France, where he turned again to science. His principal works 
were, Conspectus systematis ornithologiae, maslozologiae, erpeto- 
logiae et amphibologiae, Ichthyologiae (Leiden, 1850), Tableau des 
oiseaux-moitches (Paris, 1854), Ornithologie fossile (Paris, 1858). 
Eight children survived him: Joseph Lucien Charles Napoleon, 
prince of Canino (1824-1865), who died without heirs; Lucien 
Louis Joseph Napoleon, born in 1828, who took holy orders in 
1853 and became a cardinal in 1868; Julie Charlotte Zenaide 
Pauline Laetitia Desiree Bartholomee, who married the marquis 
of Roccagiovine; Charlotte Honorine Josephine, who married 
Count Primoli; Marie Desiree Eugenie Josephine Philomene, 
who married the count Campello ; Auguste Amelie Maximilienne 
Jacqueline, who married Count Gabrielli; Napoleon Charles 
Gregoire Jacques Philippe, born in 1839, who married the 
princess Ruspoli, by whom he had two daughters; and Bathilde 
Aloyse Leonie, who married the comte de Cambaceres. The 
branch is now extinct. 

IX. Louis Lucien (1813-1891), son of Lucien Bonaparte, 
was born at Thorngrove, Worcestershire, England, on the 4th of 

January 1813. He passed his youth in England, not 
going to France until 1848, when, after the revolution, 
he was elected deputy for Corsica on the 28th of 
November 1848; his election having been invalidated, he was 
returned as deputy for the Seine in June 1849. He sat in the 
right of the Legislative Assembly, but had no direct part in the 
coup d'etat of his cousin on the 2nd of December 1851. Napoleon 
III. named him senator and prince, but he took hardly any part in 



9. Louis 
Lucien. 



politics during the Second Empire, and after the proclamation of 
the Third Republic in 1870 he withdrew to England. There he 
busied himself with philology, and published notably some works 
on the Basque language: Grammaire basque, Remarques sur 
plusieurs assertions concernant la langue basque (1876), Observa- 
tions sur le basque Fontarabie (1878). He died on the 3rd of 
November 1891, leaving no children. 

X. Pierre Napoleon (1815-1881), son of Lucien Bona- 
parte, was born at Rome on the 12th of September 1815. He 
began his life of adventure at the age of fifteen, join- 
ing the insurrectionary bands in the Romagna (1830- 
183 1); was then in the United States, where he went to join 
his uncle Joseph, and in Colombia with General Santander 
(1832). Returning to Rome he was taken prisoner by order 
of the pope (1835-1836). He finally took refuge in England. 
At the revolution of 1848 he returned to France and was elected 
deputy for Corsica to the Constituent Assembly. He declared 
himself an out-and-out republican and voted even with the 
socialists. He pronounced himself in favour of the national 
workshops and against the loi Falloux. His attitude contributed 
greatly to give popular confidence to his cousin Louis Napoleon 
(Napoleon III.), of whose coup d'Uat on the 2nd of December 
185 1 he disapproved; but he was soon reconciled to the emperor, 
and accepted the title of prince. The republicans at once 
abandoned him. From that time on he led a debauched life, 
and lost all political importance. He turned to literature and 
published some mediocre poems. In January 1870 a violent 
incident brought him again into prominence. As the result 
of a controversy with Paschal Grousset, the latter sent him two 
journalists to provoke him to a duel. Pierre Bonaparte took 
them personally to account, and during a violent discussion 
he drew his revolver and killed one of them, Victor Noir. This 
crime greatly excited the republican press, which demanded his 
trial. The High Court acquitted him, and criticism then fell 
upon the government. Pierre Bonaparte died in obscurity 
at Versailles on the 7th of April 1881. He had married the 
daughter of a Paris working-man, Justine Eleanore Ruffin, by 
whom he had, before his marriage, two children: (1) Roland 
Napoleon, born on the 19th of May 1858, who entered the army, 
was excluded from it in 1886, and then devoted himself to 
geography and scientific explorations; (2) Jeanne, wife of the 
marquis de Vence. 

XL Napoleon Joseph Charles Paul, commonly known 
as Prince Napoleon, or by the sobriquet of " Plon-Plon," l 
(1822-1891), was the second son of Jerome Bona- 
parte, king of Westphalia, by his wife Catherine, prin- Desce " am 
cess of Wiirttemberg, and was born at Trieste on the j er0 me: 
9th of September 1822. He soon rendered himself //. Prince 
popular by his advanced democratic ideas, which Napoleon 
he expressed on all possible occasions. After the p^T 
French revolution of 1848 he was elected to the 
National Assembly as a representative of Corsica, and (his elder 
brother, Jerome Napoleon Charles, dying in 1847) assumed the 
name of Jerome. Notwithstanding his ostensible opposition 
to the coup d'itat of 185 1, he was designated, upon the establish- 
ment of the Empire, as successor to the throne if Napoleon III. 
should die childless, and received a liberal dotation, but was 
allowed no share in public affairs. Privately he professed him- 
self the representative of the Napoleonic tradition in its demo- 
cratic aspect, and associated mainly with men of advanced 
political opinions. At court he represented the Liberal party 
against the empress Eugenie. In 1854 he took part in the 
Crimean campaign as general of division. His conduct at the 
battle of the Alma occasioned imputations upon his personal 
courage, but they seem to have been entirely groundless. Re- 
turning to France he undertook the chief direction of the National 
Exhibition of 1855, in which he manifested great capacity. 
In 1858 he was appointed minister for the Colonies and Algeria, 
and his administration aroused great hopes, but his activity 
was diverted into a different channel by his sudden marriage 

1 Derivea, it is supposed, from the nickname "Plomb-plomb," or 
"Craint-plomb" (fear-lea4) , given- bim by his soldiers in the Crimea. 



BONAR— BONA VENTURA 



97 



in January 1859 with the princess Marie Clo tilde of Savoy, 
daughter of Victor Emmanuel, a prelude to the war for the 
liberation of Italy. In this war Prince Napoleon commanded 
the French corps that occupied Tuscany, and it was expected 
that he would become ruler of the principality, but he refused 
to exert any pressure upon the inhabitants, who preferred union 
with the Italian kingdom. The next few years were chiefly 
distinguished by remarkable speeches which displayed the prince 
in the unexpected character of a great orator. Unfortunately 
his indiscretion equalled his eloquence: one speech (1861) sent 
him to America to avoid a duel with the duke d'Aumale; another 
(1865), in which he justly but intemperately protested against 
the Mexican expedition, cost him all his official dignities. Never- 
theless he was influential in effecting the reform by which in 1869 
it was sought to reconcile the Empire with Liberal principles. 
The fatal war of 1870 was resolved upon during his absence 
in Norway, and was strongly condemned by him. After the 
first disasters he undertook an ineffectual mission to Italy to 
implore the aid of his father-in-law; and after the fall of the 
Empire lived in comparative retirement until in 1879 the death 
of Napoleon III.'s son, the Prince Imperial (see XIII. below), 
made him direct heir to the Napoleonic succession. His part as 
imperial pretender was unfortunate and inglorious: his demo- 
cratic opinions were unacceptable to the imperial party, and 
before his death he was virtually deposed in favour of his son 
Prince Napoleon Victor, who, supported by Paul de Cassagnac 
and others, openly declared himself a candidate for the throne 
in 1884. He died at Rome on the 17th of March 1891. In the 
character of his intellect, as in personal appearance, he bore 
an extraordinary resemblance to the first Napoleon, possessing 
the same marvellous lucidity of insight, and the same gift of 
infallibly distinguishing the essential from the non-essential. 
He was a warm friend of literature and art, and in a private 
station would have achieved high distinction as a man of 
letters. 

His eldest son, Prince Napoleon Victor Jerome Frederic (b. 
1862), became at his death the recognized head of the French 
Bonapartist party. The second son, Prince Louis Napoleon, an 
officer in the Russian army, showed a steadier disposition, and 
was more favoured in some monarchist quarters; in 1906 he 
was made governor of the Caucasus. 

XII. Mathilde Letitia Wilhelmine (1820-1904), daughter 
of Jerome, and sister of Prince Napoleon (XL), was born at 

Trieste on the 20th of May 1820; after being almost 
Mathilde. betrothed to her cousin Louis Napoleon, in 1840 she 

was married to Prince Anatole Demidov. His conduct, 
however, led to a separation within five years, and the tsar 
Nicholas compelled him to make Princess Mathilde a handsome 
allowance. After the election of Louis Napoleon to the presi- 
dency of the republic she took up her residence in Paris, and 
did the honours of the Elysee till his marriage. She continued 
to live in Paris, having great influence as a friend and patron of 
men of art and letters, till her death on the 2nd of January 1904. ' 

XIII. Napoleon Eugene Louis Jean Joseph (1856-1879), 
Prince Imperial, only son of the emperor Napoleon III. and the 

. _. empress Eugenie, was born at Paris on the 16th of 
imperial: March 1 8 56. He was a delicate boy, but when the 
son of war of 1870 broke out his mother sent him to the army, 
Napoleon to wm popularity for him, and the government journals 
vaunted his bravery. After the first defeats he had 
to flee from France with the empress, and settled in England 
at Chislehurst, completing his military education at Woolwich. 
On the death of his father on the 9th of January 1873 the 
Imperialists proclaimed him Napoleon IV., and he became 
the official Pretender. He was naturally inactive, but he was 
influenced by his mother on the one hand, and by the Bonapartist 
leaders in France on the other. They thought that he should 
win his crown by military prestige, and he was persuaded to 
attach himself as a volunteer to the English expedition to Zulu- 
land in February 1879. It was a blunder to have allowed him 
to go, and the blunder ended in a tragedy, for while out on a 
reconnaissance with a few troopers they were surprised by Zulus, 



and the Prince Imperial was killed (June 1, 1879). His body 
was brought back to England, and buried at Chislehurst. 

XIV. The Bonapartes of Baltimore are a branch of the 
family settled in America, descended from Jerome Bonaparte 
(VII.) by his union with Elizabeth (b. 1785), daughter of William 
Patterson, a Baltimore merchant, probably descended from the 
Robert Paterson who was the original of Sir Walter Scott's " Old 
Mortality." The marriage took place at Baltimore on the 24th of 
December 1803, but it was greatly disliked by Napoleon, who 
refused to recognize its legality. However, it was valid according 
to American law, and Pope Pius VII. refused to declare it void. 
Nevertheless Jerome was forced by his brother to separate 
himself from his wife, whom he had brought to Europe, and 
after a stay in England Madame Patterson, or Madame Bona- 
parte, as she was usually called, returned to Baltimore. She 
died in 1879. Jerome's only child by this marriage was Jerome 
Napoleon Bonaparte (1805-1870), who was born in England, 
but resided chiefly in Baltimore, and is said to have shown a 
marked resemblance to his uncle, the great emperor. He was 
on good terms with Jerome, who for some time made him a large 
allowance, and father and son occasionally met. His elder son, 
also called Jerome Napoleon Bonaparte (183 2-1893), entered the 
French army, with which he served in the Crimea and in Italy. 

Charles Joseph Bonaparte (b. 1851), younger son of the first 
Jerome Napoleon Bonaparte, and a grandson of Jerome, king 
of Westphalia, attained a distinguished place in American 
politics. Born at Baltimore on the 9th of June 1851 and edu- 
cated at Harvard University, he became a lawyer in 1874 and 
has been president of the National Municipal League and has 
filled other public positions. He was secretary of the navy in 
President Roosevelt's cabinet from July 1905 to December 1906, 
and then attorney-general of the United States until March 1909. 

BONAR, HORATIUS (1 808-1 889), Scottish Presbyterian 
divine, was born in Edinburgh on the 19th of December 1808, 
and educated at the high school and university of his native city. 
After a term of mission work at Leith, he was appointed parish 
minister of Kelso in 1837, and at the Disruption of 1843 became 
minister of the newly formed Free Church, where he remained 
till 1866, when he went to the Chalmers memorial church, Edin- 
burgh. He had in 1853 received the D.D. degree from Aberdeen 
University, and in 1883 he was moderator of the general assembly 
of his church. He died on the 31st of July 1889. Bonar was a 
prolific writer of religious literature, and edited several journals, 
including the Christian Treasury, the Presbyterian Review and 
the Quarterly Journal of Prophecy; but his best work was done 
in hymnology, and he published three series of Hymns of Faith 
and Hope between 1857 and 1866 (new ed., 1886). Nearly every 
modern hymnal contains perhaps a score of his hymns, including 
" Go, labour on," " I heard the voice of Jesus say," " Here, O my 
Lord, I see Thee face to face," " When the weary, seeking rest." 

See Horatius Bonar, D.D., a Memorial (iS 



BONA VENTURA, SAINT (John of Fidanza), Franciscan 
theologian, was born in 1221 at Bagnarea in Tuscany. He was 
destined by his mother for the church, and is said to have received 
his cognomen of Bonaventura from St Francis of Assisi, who 
performed on him a miraculous cure. He entered the Franciscan 
order in 1243, and studied at Paris possibly under Alexander 
of Hales, and certainly under Alexander's successor, John of 
Rochelle, to whose chair he succeeded in 1253. Three years 
earlier his fame had gained for him permission to read upon the 
Sentences, and in 1255 he received the degree of doctor. So high 
was his reputation that in the following year he was elected 
general of his order. It was by his orders that Roger Bacon was 
interdicted from lecturing at Oxford, and compelled to put 
himself under the surveillance of the order at Paris. He was 
instrumental in procuring the election of Gregory X., who 
rewarded him with the titles of cardinal and bishop of Albano, 
and insisted on his presence at the great council of Lyons in the 
year 1274. At this meeting he died. 

Bonaventura's character seems not unworthy of the eulo- 
gistic title, " Doctor Seraphicus," bestowed on him by his 



198 



BONCHAMPS- 



-BOND, SIR E. A. 



contemporaries, and of the place assigned to him by Dante in his 
Paradise He was formally canonized in 1482 by Sixtus IV., 
and ranked as sixth among the great doctors of the church by 
Sixtus V. in 1587. His works, as arranged in the Lyons edition 
(7 vols., folio), consist of expositions and sermons, filling the 
first three volumes; of a commentary on the Sentences of 
Lombardus, in two volumes, celebrated among medieval theo- 
logians as incomparably the best exposition of the third part; 
and of minor treatises filling the remaining two volumes, and 
including a life of St Francis. The smaller works are the most 
important, and of them the best are the famous Itinerarium 
Mentis ad Deum, Breviloquium, De Reductione Artium ad Theo- 
logiam, Soliloquium, and De septem ilineribus aeternitatis, in which 
most of what is individual in his teaching is contained. 

In philosophy Bonaventura presents a marked contrast to 
his great contemporaries, Thomas Aquinas and Roger Bacon. 
While these may be taken as representing respectively physical 
science yet in its infancy, and Aristotelian scholasticism in its 
most perfect form, he brings before us the mystical and Platoniz- 
ing mode of speculation which had already to some extent found 
expression in Hugo and Richard of St Victor, and in Bernard 
of Clairvaux. To him the purely intellectual element, though 
never absent, is of inferior interest when compared with the 
living power of the affections or the heart. He rejects the 
authority of Aristotle, to whose influence he ascribes much of the 
heretical tendency of the age, and some of whose cardinal 
doctrines — such as the eternity of the world — he combats 
vigorously. But the Platonism he received was Plato as under- 
stood by St Augustine, and as he had been handed down by the 
Alexandrian school and the author of the mystical works passing 
under the name of Dionysius the Areopagite. Bonaventura 
accepts as Platonic the theory that ideas do not exist in rerum 
natura, but as thoughts of the divine mind, according to which 
actual things were formed; and this conception has no slight 
influence upon his philosophy. Like all the great scholastic 
doctors he starts with the discussion of the relations between 
reason and faith. All the sciences are but the handmaids of 
theology; reason can discover some of the moral truths which 
form the groundwork of the Christian system, but others it can 
only receive and apprehend through divine illumination. In 
order to obtain this illumination the soul must employ the 
proper means, which are prayer, the exercise of the virtues, 
whereby it is rendered fit to accept the divine light, and medi- 
tation which may rise even to ecstatic union with God. The 
supreme end of life is such union, union in contemplation or 
intellect and in intense absorbing love; but it cannot be entirely 
reached in this life, and remains as a hope for futurity. The 
mind in contemplating God has three distinct aspects, stages or 
grades — the senses, giving empirical knowledge of what is 
without and discerning the traces (vestigia) of the divine in the 
world; the reason, which examines the soul itself, the image 
of the divine Being; and lastly, pure intellect (intelligentia), 
which, in a transcendent act, grasps the Being of the divine cause. 
To these three correspond the three kinds of theology — theologia 
symbolica, theologia propria and theologia mystica. Each stage 
is subdivided, for in contemplating the outer world we may use 
the senses or the imagination; we may rise to a knowledge of 
God per vestigia or in vesiigiis. In the first case the three great 
properties of physical bodies — weight, number, measure, — in 
the second the division of created things into the classes of 
those that have merely physical existence, those that have life, 
and those that have thought, irresistibly lead us to conclude the 
power, wisdom and goodness of the Triune God. So in the 
second stage we may ascend to the knowledge of God, per 
imaginem, by reason, or in imagine, by the pure understanding 
(intellectus); in the one case the triple division — memory, 
understanding and will, — in the other the Christian virtues — 
faith, hope and charity, — leading again to the conception of a 
Trinity of divine qualities — eternity, truth and goodness. In 
the last stage we have first intelligentia, pure intellect, contem- 
plating the essential being of God, and finding itself compelled 
by necessity of thought to hold absolute being as the first notion, 



for non-being cannot be conceived apart from being, of which it 
is but the privation. To this notion of absolute being, which is 
perfect and the greatest of all, objective existence must be 
ascribed. In its last and highest form of activity the mind rests 
in the contemplation of the infinite goodness of God, which is 
apprehended by means of the highest facidty, the apex mentis or 
synderesis. This spark of the divine illumination is common to 
all forms of mysticism, but Bonaventura adds to it peculiarly 
Christian elements. The complete yielding up of mind and heart 
to God is unattainable without divine grace, and nothing renders 
us so fit to receive this gift as the meditative and ascetic life of 
the cloister. The monastic life is the best means of grace. 

Bonaventura, however, is not merely a meditative thinker, 
whose works may form good manuals of devotion; he is a 
dogmatic theologian of high rank, and on all the disputed 
questions of scholastic thought, such as universals, matter, 
the principle of individualism, or the intellectus agens, he gives 
weighty and well-reasoned decisions. He agrees with Albertus 
Magnus in regarding theology as a practical science; its truths, 
according to his view, are peculiarly adapted to influence the 
affections. He discusses very carefully the nature and meaning 
of the divine attributes; considers universals to be the ideal 
forms pre-existing in the divine mind according to which things 
were shaped; holds matter to be pure potentiality which 
receives individual being and determinateness from the formative 
power of God, acting according to the ideas; and finally maintains 
that the intellectus agens has no separate existence. On these 
and on many other points of scholastic philosophy the Seraphic 
Doctor exhibits a combination of subtilty and moderation which 
makes his works peculiarly valuable. 

Editions. — 7 vols., Rome, 1588-1596; 7 vols., Lyons, 1668; 
13 vols., Venice, 1751 ff. ; by A. C. Peltier, 15 vols., Paris, 1863 ff. ; 
10 vols.,. Rome, 1882-1892. K. J. Hefele edited the Breviloquium 
and the Itin. Mentis (3rd ed., Tubingen, 1862); two volumes of 
selections were issued by Alix in 1853-1856. 

Literature. — W. A. Hollenberg, Studien zu Bonaventura (1862) ; 
F. Nitzsch, art. in Herzog-Hauck, Realencyk. fur prot. Theol., where 
a list of monographs is given, to which add one by De Chevance 
(1899). (R. Ad.;X.) 

BONCHAMPS, CHARLES MELCHIOR ARTUS, Marquis de 
(c. 1 760-1 793), Vendean leader, was born at Jouverteil, Anjou. 
He gained his first military experience in the American War of 
Independence, and on his return to France was made a captain 
of grenadiers in the French army. He was a staunch upholder 
of the monarchy, and at the outbreak of the French Revolution 
resigned his command and retired to his chateau at St Florent. 
In the spring of 1793 he was chosen leader by the insurgents of 
the Vendee, and to his counsels may be attributed in great 
measure the success of the peasants' arms. He was present at 
the taking of Bressuire, Thouars and Fontenay, at which last 
place he was wounded; but dissensions among their leaders 
weakened the insurgents, and at the bloody battle of Cholet 
(October 1793) the Vendeans sustained a severe defeat and 
Bonchamps was mortally wounded. He died the next day. 
It is said that his last act was the pardoning of five thousand 
republican prisoners, whom his troops had sworn to kill in 
revenge for his death. A statue of him by David d' Angers 
stands in the church of St Florent. 

BOND, SIR EDWARD AUGUSTUS (1815-1898), English 
librarian, was born at Hanwell on the 31st of December 1813, 
the son of a schoolmaster. He was educated at Merchant 
Taylors' school, and in 1832 obtained a post in the*public record 
office. In 1838 he became an assistant in the Manuscript 
department of the British Museum, ^where he attracted the 
notice of his chief, Sir Frederick Madden, the most eminent 
palaeographer of his day, and in 1852 he was made Egerton 
librarian. In 1856 he became assistant keeper of MSS., and in 
1867 was promoted io the post of keeper. His work in re- 
organizing the manuscript department was of lasting value, 
and to him is due the classified catalogue of MSS., and the 
improved efficiency and punctuality of publication of the 
department. In 1878 he was appointed principal librarian. 
Under his supervision were erected the new buildings of the 



BOND— BONDE 



99 



" White Wing," which provide accommodation for prints, 
drawings, manuscripts and newspapers, and the purchase of 
the Stowe MSS. was concluded while he remained in office. 
He founded, in conjunction with Sir E. Maunde Thompson, the 
Palaeographical Society, and first made classical palaeography 
an exact science. He was made LL.D. of Cambridge in 1879, 
created C.B. in 1885, and K.C.B. the day before his death on 
the 2nd of January 1898. He was the editor of four volumes 
of facsimiles of Anglo-Saxon charters from 679 to the Conquest, 
The Speeches in the Trial of Warren Hastings (1859-1861), and 
a number of other interesting historic documents. 

BOND, 1 in English law, an obligation by deed. Its design is 
to secure that the obligor, i.e. the person giving the bond, will 
either pay a sum of money, or do or refrain from doing some act ; 
and for this purpose the obligor binds himself in a penalty to the 
obligee, with a condition added that, if the obligor pays the sum 
secured — which is usually half the penalty — or does or refrains 
from doing the specified act, the bond shall be void: otherwise 
it shall remain in full force. This condition is known as the 
defeasance because it defeats or undoes the bond. The form 
of a common money bond runs as follows: — 

Know Al! Men by these presents that I, A. B. (name, address and 
description of obligor) , am bound to C. D. (name, address and descrip- 
tion of obligee) in the sum of £[2000] to be paid to the said (obligee), 
his executors, administrators or assigns or to his or their attorney 
or attorneys, for which payment I bind myself by these presents. 
Sealed with my seal. Dated this day of 19 . 

The condition of the above-written bond is such that if the above 
A. B., his heirs, executors or administrators, shall on the 
day of pay to the above-named C. D., his heirs, executors, 

administrators or assigns the sum of £[1000], with interest for the 
same from the date of the above-written bond at the rate of 
per cent per annum without any deduction, then the above-written 
bond shall be void : otherwise the bond shall remain in full force. 

Signed, sealed and delivered 
by the above-named A. B. 
in the presence of (witness) 

Recitals are frequently added to explain the circumstances 
under which the bond is given. 

If the condition is not performed, i.e. if the obligor does not 
pay the money by the day stipulated, or do or refrain from 
doing the act provided for, the bond becomes forfeit or absolute 
at law, and charges the obligor and his estate (see Conveyancing 
Act 1881, s. 59). In old days, when a bond was forfeit, the whole 
penalty was recoverable at law and payment post diem could not 
be pleaded to an action on it, but the court of chancery early 
interposed to prevent oppression. It held the penalty of a bond 
tobe the form, not the substance of it, a pledge merely to secure 
repayment of the sum bona fide advanced, and would not permit 
a man to take more than in conscience he ought, i.e. in case of 
a common money bond, his principal, interest and expenses. 
This equitable relief received statutory recognition by an act of 
1705, which provided that, in case of a common money bond, 
payment of the lesser sum with interest and costs shall be taken 
in full satisfaction of the bond. An obligee of a common money 
bond can, since the date of the Judicature Act, obtain summary 
judgment under O. xiv. (R.S.C. 1883) by specially endorsing 
his writ under O. iii. R. 6. 

Bonds were, however, and still are given to secure performance 
of a variety of matters other than the payment of a sum of money 
at a fixed date. They may be given and are given, for instance, 

1 This word, meaning " that which binds," is a phonetic variant 
of " band," and is derived from the Teutonic root seen in bindan, 
to bind; it must be distinguished from the obsolete "bond," 
meaning originally a householder. In the laws of Canute this word 
is used as equal to the Old English ceorl (see Churl), and thus, as 
the churl's position became less free after the Norman Conquest, the 
" bond " approximated to the " villein," and still later to the '' serf." 
The word is in Old English bonda, and appears in " husband " (q.v.), 
and is derived from the root of the verb bua, to dwell, to have a 
house, the Latin colere, and thus in origin is cognate with German 
Bauer and English " boor," The transition in meaning to the idea 
of serfdom, and hence to slavery, is due to an early confusion with 
" bond," from " bind." The same wrong connexion appears in the 
transition of meaning in " bondage," properly " tenure in villein- 
age," but now used as synonymous with " slavery." A trace of the 
early meaning still survives in " bondager " {q.v.). 



to guarantee the fidelity of a clerk, of a rent collector, or of a 
person in an office of public trust, or to secure that an intended 
husband will settle a sum on his wife in the event of her surviving 
him, or that a building contract shall be carried out, or that a 
rival business shall not be carried on by the obligor except 
within certain limits of time and space. The same object can 
often be attained — and more conveniently attained— by a 
covenant than by bond, and covenants have in the practice of 
conveyancers largely superseded bonds, but there are cases 
where security by bond is still preferable to security by covenant. 
Thus under a bond to secure an annuity, if the obligor makes 
default, judgment may be entered for the penalty and stand as 
security for the future payments without the necessity of 
bringing a fresh action for each payment. In cases of bonds 
with special conditions, such as those instanced above, the 
remedy of the obligee for breach of the condition is prescribed 
by an act of 1696, the procedure under which is preserved by the 
Judicature Act (O. xxii. R. 1, O. xiii. R. 14). The obligee 
assigns the particular breaches of which he complains, damages 
in respect of such breaches are assessed, and, on payment into 
court by the obligor of the amount of such damages, the court 
enters a stay of execution. A difficulty which has much exercised 
and still exercises the courts is to determine, in these cases of 
special conditions, whether the sum for which the bond is given 
is a true penalty or only liquidated damages. There is nothing 
to prevent the parties to a bond from agreeing the damages for 
a breach, and if they have done so, the court will not interfere, 
as it will in the case of a penalty. The leading case on the 
subject is Kemble v. Farren (1829; 6 Bing. 148). 

Bonds given to secure the doing of anything which is contrary 
to the policy of the law are void. Such, for instance, is a bond 
given to a woman for future cohabitation (as distinguished from 
past cohabitation), or a marriage brocage bond, that is, a bond 
given to procure a marriage between parties. (See the matri- 
monial agency case, Hermann v. Charlesworth, 1905, 2 K.B. 123). 
It was not without design that Shakespeare laid the scene of 
Shylock's suit on Antonio's bond in a Venetian court; the bond 
would have had short shrift in an English court. 

Post Obit Bonds. — A post obit bond is one given by an expectant 
heir or legatee, payable on or after the death of the person from 
whom the obligor has expectations. Such a bond, if the obligee has 
exacted unconscionable terms, may be set aside. 

Bottomry Bonds. — A bottomry bond is a contract of hypothecation 
by which the owner of a ship, or the master as his agent, borrows 
money for the use of the ship to meet some emergency, e.g. necessary 
repairs, and pledges the ship (or keel or bottom of the ship, partem 
pro toto) as security for repayment. If the ship safely accomplishes 
her voyage, the obligee gets his money back with the agreed interest : 
if the ship is totally lost, he loses it altogether. 

Lloyd's Bonds. — Lloyd's bonds are instruments under the seal of a 
railway company, admitting the indebtedness of the company to 
the obligee to a specified amount for work done or goods supplied, 
with a covenant to pay him such amount with interest on a future 
day. They are a device by which railway companies were enabled 
to increase their indebtedness without technically violating their 
charter. The name is derived from the counsel who settled the form 
of the bond. 

Debenture Bonds. — Debenture bonds are bonds secured only by 
the covenant of the company without any floating or fixed charge on 
the assets. (See Debentures and Debenture Stock.) 

Recognizance. — A recognizance differs from a bond in being 
entered into before a court of record and thereby becoming an 
obligation of record. 

Heritable bond is a Scots law term, meaning a bond for money, 
joined with a conveyance of land, and held by a creditor as security 
for his debt. 

For goods " in bond " see Bonded Warehouse. (E. Ma.) 

BONDAGER, a word meaning generally a servant, but speci- 
ally used in the south of Scotland and Northumberland as the 
term for a female outworker whom a married farm-labourer, living 
in a cottage attached to the farm, undertakes as a condition of 
his tenancy to supply for field-labour, sometimes also to board 
and lodge. The origin of the system was a dearth of field-labour. 

BONDE, GUSTAF, Count (1620-1667), Swedish statesman. 
He is remarkable for being the persistent advocate of a pacific 
policy at a time when war on the slightest provocation was the 
watchword of every Swedish politician. Even the popular 



200 



BONDED WAREHOUSE— BONE 



Polish adventure of Charles X. was strenuously opposed by 
Bonde, though when once it was decided upon he materially 
assisted the king to find the means for carrying it on. He was 
also in favour of strict economy coupled with the recovery of the 
royal domains which had fallen into the hands of the nobles, 
though his natural partiality for his fellow-peers came out clearly 
enough when in 1655 he was appointed a member of Charles X.'s 
land-recovery commission. In 1659 he succeeded Herman 
Fleming as lord high treasurer, and was one of the council of 
regency appointed to govern Sweden during the minority of 
Charles XI. In 1661 he presented to the senate a plan which 
aimed at rendering Sweden altogether independent of foreign 
subsidies, by a policy of peace, economy and trade-development, 
and by further recovery of alienated estates. His budget in 
the following year, framed on the same principles, subsequently 
served as an invaluable guide to Charles XI. Bonde's extra- 
ordinary tenacity of purpose enabled him for some years to carry 
out his programme, despite the opposition of the majority of 
the senate and his co-regents, who preferred the more adventur- 
ous methods of the chancellor Magnus de la Gardie, ultimately 
so ruinous to Sweden. But the ambition of the oligarchs, and 
the fear and jealousy of innumerable monopolists who rose in 
arms against his policy of economy, proved at last too strong 
for Bonde, while the costly and useless expedition against 
Bremen in 1665, undertaken contrary to his advice, completed 
the ruin of the finances. In his later years Bonde's powers of 
resistance were weakened by sickness and mortification at the 
triumph of reckless extravagance, and he practically retired 
from the government some time before his death. 

See Martin Veibull, Sveriges Storhetstid (Stockholm, 1881). 

BONDED WAREHOUSE, a warehouse established by the 
state, or by private enterprise, in which goods liable to duty 
are lodged until the duty upon them has been paid. Previous 
to the establishment of bonded warehouses in England the pay- 
ment of duties on imported goods had to be made at the time 
of importation, or a bond with security for future payment 
given to the revenue authorities. The inconveniences of this 
system were many; it was not always possible for the importer 
to find sureties, and he had often to make an immediate sale of 
the goods, in order to raise the duty, frequently selling when 
the market was depressed and prices low; the duty, having to 
be paid in a lump sum, raised the price of the goods by the 
amount of the interest on the capital required to pay the duty; 
competition was stifled from the fact that large capital was 
required for the importation of the more heavily taxed articles; 
there was also the difficulty of granting an exact equivalent 
drawback to the exporter, on goods which had already paid 
duty. To obviate these difficulties and to put a check upon 
frauds on the revenue, Sir Robert Walpole proposed in his 
" excise scheme " of 1733, the system of warehousing, so far as 
concerned tobacco and wine. The proposal, however, was very 
unpopular, and it was not till 1803 that the system was actually 
adopted. By an act of that year imported goods were to be 
placed in warehouses approved by the customs authorities, and 
importers were to give " bonds " for payment of duties when 
the goods were removed. It was from this that the warehouses 
received the name of " bonded " or " bonding." The Customs 
Consolidation Act 1853 dispensed with the giving of bonds, and 
laid down various provisions for securing the payment of customs 
duties on goods warehoused. These provisions are contained in 
the Customs Consolidation Act 1876, and the amending statutes, 
the Customs and Inland Revenue Act 1880, and the Revenue 
Act 1883. The warehouses are known as " king's warehouses," 
and by s. 284 of the act of 1876 are defined as " any place pro- 
vided by the crown or approved by the commissioners of 
customs, for the deposit of goods for security thereof, and the 
duties due thereon." By s. 12 of the same act the treasury may 
appoint warehousing ports or places, and the commissioners 
of customs may from time to time approve and appoint ware- 
houses in such ports or places where goods may be warehoused 
or kept, and fix the amount of rent payable in respect of the 
goods. The proprietor or occupier of every warehouse so approved 



(except existing warehouses of special security in respect 
of which security by bond has hitherto been dispensed with), 
or some one on his behalf, must, before any goods be warehoused 
therein, give security by bond, or such other security as the 
commissioners may approve of, for the payment of the full 
duties chargeable on any goods warehoused therein, or for the 
due exportation thereof (s. 13). All goods deposited in a ware- 
house, without payment of duty on the first importation, upon 
being entered for home consumption, are chargeable with 
existing duties on like goods under any customs acts in force 
at the time of passing such entry (s. 19). The act also prescribes 
various rules for the unshipping, landing, examination, ware- 
housing and custody of goods, and the penalties on breach. 
The system of warehousing has proved of great advantage both 
to importers and purchasers, as the payment of duty is deferred 
until the goods are required, while the title-deeds, or warrants, 
are transferable by endorsement. 

While the goods are in the warehouse ("in bond") the owner 
may subject them to various processes necessary to fit them 
for the market, such as the repacking and mixing of tea, the 
racking, vatting, mixing and bottling of wines and spirits, the 
roasting of coffee, the manufacture of certain kinds of tobacco, 
&c, and certain specific allowances are made in respect of waste 
arising from such processes or from leakage, evaporation and 
the like. 

BONDU, a French protectorate in West Africa, dependent on 
the colony of Senegal. Bondu lies between the Faleme river 
and the upper course of the Gambia, that is between 13 and 
15 N., and 12° and 13 W. The country is an elevated plateau, 
with hills in the southern and central parts. These are generally 
unproductive, and covered with stunted wood; but the lower 
country is fertile, and finely clothed with the baobab, the 
tamarind and various valuable fruit-trees Bondu is traversed 
by torrents, which flow rapidly during the rains but are empty 
in the dry season, such streams being known in this part of West 
Africa as marigots. The inhabitants are mostly Fula, though 
the trade is largely in the hands of Mandingos. The religion and 
laws of the country are Mahommedan, though the precepts of 
that faith are not very rigorously observed. Mungo Park, the 
first European traveller to visit the country, passed through 
Bondu in 1795, and had to submit to many exactions from the 
reigning prince. The royal residence was then at Fatteconda; 
but when Major W. Gray, a British officer who attempted to 
solve the Niger problem, visited Bondu in 1818 it had been 
removed to Bulibani, a small town, with about 3000 population, 
surrounded by a strong clay wall. In August 1845 the king of 
Bondu signed a treaty recognizing French sovereignty over his 
country. The treaty was disregarded by the natives, but in 
1858 Bondu came definitely under French control. The country 
has since enjoyed considerable prosperity (see Senegal). 

See A. Rangon, Le Bondou: Stude de geographie el d'histoire 
soudaniennes de 168 1 & nos jours (Bordeaux, 1894). 

BONE, HENRY (1755-1834), English enamel painter, was born 
at Truro. He was much employed by London jewellers for small 
designs in enamel, before his merits as an artist were well known 
to the public. In 1800 the beauty of his pieces attracted the 
notice of the Royal Academy, of which he was then admitted 
as an associate; in 18 11 he was made an academician. Up to 
183 1 he executed many beautiful miniature pieces of much 
larger size than had been attempted before in England; among 
these his eighty-five portraits of the time of Queen Elizabeth, 
of different sizes, from 5 by 4 to 13 by 8 in. are most admired. 
They were disposed of by public sale after his death. His 
Bacchus and Ariadne, after Titian, painted on a plate, brought 
the great price of 2200 guineas. 

BONE (a word common in various forms to Teutonic languages, 
in many of which it is confined to the shank of the leg, as in the 
German Bein), the hard tissue constituting the framework of the 
animal skeleton. For anatomy see Skeleton and Connective 
Tissues. 

Bone Diseases and Injuries. — The more specific diseases 
affecting the bones of the human body are treated under separate 



BONE 



20. i 



Ostitis. 



headings; in this article inflammation of bone and fractures are 
dealt with. 

Ostitis (oariov, bone), or inflammation of bone, may be acute 
or chronic. Acute ostitis is one of the most serious diseases which 
can be met with in young people. It is due to the 
cultivation of virulent germs in the delicat'e growing 
tissue of the bone and in the marrow. Another name for it is 
septic osteomyelitis, which has the advantage of expressing the 
cause as well as the exact seat (five\6s, marrow) of the inflam- 
mation. The name of the micro-organism causing the inflam- 
mation is Staphylococcus pyogenes aureus, which means that the 
germs collect in clusters like grapes, that they are of the virulent 
pus-producing kind, and that they have a yellow tinge. As a 
rule, the germs find their way to the bone by the blood-stream, 
which they have entered through the membrane lining the 
mouth or gullet, or some other part of the alimentary canal. In 
the pre-antiseptic days they often entered the sawn bone during 
the amputation of a limb, and were not infrequently the cause 
of blood-poisoning and death. When the individual is well and 
strong, and there has been no hurt, strain or accident to lower 
the power of resistance of the bone, the staphylococci may 
circulate harmlessly in the blood, until they are gradually eaten 
up by the white corpuscles; but if a bone has been injured it 
offers a likely and attractive focus to the wandering germs. 

The disease is infective. That is to say, the micro-organisms 
having begun to germinate in the damaged bone find their way 
by the blood-stream into other tissues, and developing after their 
kind, are apt to cause blood-poisoning. Should a surgeon prick 
his finger whilst operating on a case of septic osteomyelitis his 
blood also might be poisoned, and he would run the risk of losing 
his finger, his hand, or even his life. The starting-point of the 
disease is the delicate growing tissue recently deposited between 
the main part of the shaft of the bone (diaphysis) and the cartila- 
ginous end. And it often happens that the earliest complaint 
of pain is just above or below the knee; just above the ankle, 
the elbow or the wrist. It the surgeon is prompt in operating 
he may find the disease limited to that spot. In the case of 
infants, the germs are very apt to make their way into the 
neighbouring joint, giving rise to the very serious disease known 
as acute arthritis of infants. 

Probably the first sign of there being anything amiss with the 
limb will be a complaint of aches or pains near a joint; and 
these pains are apt to be miscalled rheumatic. Perhaps they 
occur during convalescence from scarlet or typhoid fever, or after 
exposure to injury, or to wet or cold, or after unusual fatigue. 
The part becomes swollen, hot, red and excessively tender; the 
tenderness, however, is not in the skin but in the bone, and in 
the engorged membrane around it, the periosteum. The tem- 
perature may run up to 104°, and may be associated with con- 
vulsions or shiverings. The patient's nights are disturbed, and 
very likely he has violent delirium. If the case is allowed 
to drift on, abscess forms, and death may ensue from septic 
pneumonia, or pericarditis, or from some other form of blood- 
poisoning. 

As soon as the disease is recognized an incision should be made 
down to the bone, and the affected area should be scraped out, and 
disinfected with a solution of corrosive sublimate. A considerable 
area of the bone may be found stripped bare by sub-periosteal 
abscess, and necrosis is likely to ensue.' Perhaps the shaft of 
the bone will have to be opened up in the chief part of its length 
in order that it may be cleared of germs and pus. The surgeon is 
more apt to err on the side of doing too little in these serious 
cases than too much. It may be that the whole of that piece of 
bone (diaphysis) which lies between the joint-ends is found loose 
in a large abscess cavity, and in some cases immediate amputa- 
tion of the limb may be found necessary in order to save life; in 
other cases, amputation may be called for later because of long- 
continued suppuration and grave constitutional disturbance. 
Several bones may be affected at the same time, and large pieces 
of them may be killed outright (multiple necrosis) by inflam- 
matory engorgement and devastating abscess. 

Septic ostitis may be confounded with erysipelas and rheuma- 



tism, but the central thickening and tenderness should suffice to 
distinguish it. 

Chronic ostitis and periostitis denote long-continued and 
increased vascular supply. This may be due to injury, syphilis or 
rheumatism. The disease is found chiefly in the shafts of the 
bones. There is a dull pain in the bone, which is worse at night, 
and the inflamed piece of bone is thickened and tender. The 
lump thus formed is called a hard node, and its outline shows 
clearly by X-rays. The affected limb should be rested and kept 
elevated. Leeches and fomentations may ease the pain, and 
iodide of potassium is the most useful medicine. 

Chronic inflammation of tuberculous origin affects the soft, 
cancellated tissue of such bones as the vertebrae, and the bones 
of the hands and feet, as well as the spongy ends of the long bones. 
In tuberculous ostitis the presence of the bacilli in the spongy 
tissue causes an escape of colourless corpuscles from the blood, 
which, collecting around the bacilli, form a small greyish white 
heap, a tubercle. These tubercles may be present in large numbers 
at the expense of the living tissue, and a rarefying ostitis is thus 
produced. Later the tubercles break down and form tuberculous 
abscesses, which slowly, and almost painlessly, find escape upon 
the surface. They should not be allowed to open spontaneously, 
however, as the wounds are then likely to become infected with 
pus-producing germs, and fuel being added to the fire, as it were, 
destruction advances with increased rapidity. The treatment 
for these tuberculous foci is to place the limb or the part at 
absolute rest upon a splint, to give plenty of fresh air to the 
patient, and to prescribe cod-liver oil and iron. And when it is 
seen that in spite of the adoption of these measures the tubercu- 
lous abscess is advancing towards the surface, the surgeon should 
cut down upon the part, scrape out the foci, and disinfect with 
some strong antiseptic lotion. Consideration should also be 
given to the treatment by injection of tuberculin. 

Caries (rottenness, decay) is the name given to tuberculous 
disease of bone when the tubercles are running together and are 
breaking down the cancellous tissue. In short, caries generally 
means tuberculous ostitis, though syphilitic ulceration of bone 
has also received the same name. 

Fractures. — A bone may be broken at the part where it is 
struck (fracture from direct violence), or it may break in conse- 
quence of a strain applied to it (fracture from indirect picture. 
violence) , or the fracture may be due to muscular action 
as when a violent cough causes a rib to break. In the first case 
the fracture is generally transverse and in the second more or less 
oblique. The fully developed bone is broken fairly across; the 
soft bones of young people may simply be bent — green stick or 
willow fracture. Fractures are either simple or compound. A 
simple fracture is analogous to the subcutaneous laceration in the 
soft parts, and a compound one to an open wound in the soft 
parts. The wound of the soft parts in the compound fracture may 
be due either to the force which caused the fracture, as in the case 
of a cart-wheel going over a limb, first wounding the soft parts and 
then fracturing the bone, or to the sharp point of the fractured 
bone coming out through the skin. In either case there is a com- 
munication between the external air and injured bone, and the 
probability arises of the germs of suppuration finding their way 
to the seat of fracture. This greatly increases the risks of the 
case, for septic inflammation and suppuration may lead to delayed 
union, to death of large pieces of the bone (necrosis) , and to osteo- 
myelitis and to blood-poisoning. In the treatment of a fracture, 
every care should be taken to prevent any sharp fragment coming 
near the skin. Careless handling has often been the means of a 
simple fracture being converted into a compound one. 

In most cases of fracture crepitus can be made out; this is the 
feeling elicited when two rough osseous surfaces are rubbed 
together. When a bone is merely bent there is, of course, no 
crepitus. It is also absent in fractures in which the broken 
extremities are driven into one another (impacted fracture^). 
In order to get firm bony union it is necessary to secure accurate 
apposition of the fragments. Putting the broken ends together 
is termed " setting the fracture," and the needful amount of rest 
is obtained by the use of splints. As a rule, it is also advisable to 



202 



BONE 



fix with the splint the joint above or below the fracture. In 
cases in which a splintering of the bone into a joint has taken 
place, more especially in those cases in which tendons have been 
injured, there may be a good deal of effusion into the joint and 
the tendon sheaths, and this may be organized into fibrous 
tissue leading to permanent stiffness. This is particularly apt to 
occur in old people. Care must be taken in such instances by 
gentle exercises, and by passive movement during the process of 
cure, to keep the joint and tendons free. To take a common 
example, — in fracture close to the wrist joint, it is necessary to 
arrange the splint so that the patient can move his fingers and 
thumb, and the splint must be taken off every day, in order 
that the wrist and fingers may be gently bent, straightened and 
exercised. 

The treatment of fractures has undergone considerable im- 
provement of late years. Simple fractures are not kept so long 
at rest in splints, but are constantly " taken down " in order 
that massage and movements of the limb may be resorted to. 
This, of course, is done with the utmost gentleness, and with the 
result that swelling, pain and other evidences of the serious 
injury quickly disappear, whilst a more rapid and complete 
recovery is ensured. Stiff hands and feet after fracture are much 
less frequently met with. By the aid of the X-rays it is now easy 
for the surgeon to assure himself that fractured surfaces have been 
well adjusted and are in close apposition. But if they are not in 
a satisfactory position, and it be found impracticable to assure 
their close adjustment by ordinary methods, the surgeon now, 
without undue loss of time, cuts down upon the broken ends and 
fixes them together by a strong wire suture, which remains 
permanently in the tissues. If the fracture be associated with an 
open wound of the part (compound fracture), and the broken 
ends are found incapable of easy adjustment, immediate wiring 
together of the fragments is now considered to be a necessary 
part of the primary treatment. The French surgeon, Just 
Lucas-Championniere, has done more than any one else to show 
the advantage of discreet movements, of massage and of exercises 
in the treatment of fractures. 

Special Fracture in Young People. — The long bones of children 
and growing persons consist of a shaft with cartilaginous ends 
in which bone is developed. As the result of injury, the end of 
the bone may become detached, a variety of fracture known as 
diastasis. Such a fracture — however well treated — may be 
followed by arrest of growth of the bone or by stiffness of the 
neighbouring joint. 

Delayed union means that consolidation is taking place very 
slowly, if at all. This may be due to local or constitutional 
causes, but provided the bones are in good position, nothing 
further than patience, with massage, and with due attention 
to general health-measures, is necessary. 

An ununited fracture is one in which after many weeks or 
months no attempt has been made by nature to consolidate the 
parts. This may be due to the ends not having been brought 
close enough together; to the seat of fracture having been 
constantly disturbed; to muscle or tendon being interposed 
between the broken ends, or to the existence of some consti- 
tutional defect in the patient. Except in the last-named 
condition, the treatment consists in cutting down to the broken 
ends; freshening them up by sawing off a thin slice, and by 
adjusting and fixing them by a wire or screw. Ununited 
fracture of the leg-bones in children is a most unsatisfactory 
and rebellious condition to deal with. 

There is still a difference of opinion as to the best way of 
treating a recent fi jcture of the patella (knee-cap) . Many surgeons 
are still content to follow the old plan of fixing the limb on a 
back-splint, or in plaster of Paris splints, and awaiting the result. 
It is beyond question that a large percentage of these cases 
recover with a perfectly useful limb — especially if the fibrous 
bond of union between the pieces of the broken knee-cap is 
adequately protected against being stretched by bending the 
leg at too early a date. But in some cases the fragments have 
been eventually found wide apart, the patient being left with 
an enfeebled limb. Still, at any rate, this line of treatment was [ 



unassociated with risk. But after Lister showed (1883) that 
with due care and cleanliness the knee-joint could be opened, 
and the fragments of the broken patella secured in close 
apposition by a stout wire suture, the treatment of the injury 
underwent a remarkable change. The great advantage of Lister's 
treatment was that the fragments, being fixed close together 
by the wire stitch, became solidly united by bone, and the joint 
became as sound as it was before. Some surgeons, however, 
objected to the operation — in spite of the excellence of the 
results obtainable by it— because of the undoubted, risk which 
it entailed of the joint becoming invaded by septic micro- 
organisms. As a sort of compromise, Professor A. E. J. Barker 
introduced the method, which he deemed to be less hazardous, 
of holding the fragments close together by means of a strong 
silver wire passed round them vertically by a large needle without 
actually laying open the joint. But experience has shown that 
in the hands of careful and skilful surgeons Lister's operation 
of openly wiring the fragments gives a perfect result with a 
comparatively small risk. Other surgeons secure the fragments 
in close contact for bony union by passing a silk or metal suture 
around them circumferentially. Many years ago Lister remarked 
that the careful selection of one's patients is an antiseptic 
measure — by which he meant that if a surgeon intended to get 
the most perfect results for his operative work, he must carefully 
consider whether any individual patient is physically adapted 
for the performance upon him of any particular operation. This 
aphorism implies that not every patient with a broken knee-cap 
is suited for the opening of his knee-joint, or even for the sub- 
cutaneous adjustment of the broken fragments. An operative 
procedure which is admirably suited for one patient might 
result in disaster when adopted for another, and it is an important 
part of the surgeon's business to know what to advise in each 
individual case. (£. o.*) 

Industrial Applications of Bones. — By the increasing inventiveness 
of man, the industrial utilization of animal bone has been so developed 
that not one of the constituents fails to reappear in commerce. 
Composed of mineral matter — phosphates, &c. — fat and gelatinous 
substances, the phosphates are used as artificial manures, the fat is 
worked up by the soap-maker and chandler, and the gelatinous 
matter forms the basis of the gelatin and glue of commerce ; while 
by the dry distillation of bones from which the gelatin has been but 
partially removed, there are obtained a carbonaceous residue — 
animal charcoal — and a tarry distillate, from which " bone oil " 
and bone pitch are obtained. To these by-products there must be 
added the direct uses of bone — for making buttons, knife-handles, 
&c. — when an estimate is desired of the commercial importance of 
these components of the animal frame. 

While most of the world's supply of bones goes to the glue and 
gelatin works, the leg and thigh bones, termed " marrows " and 
" knuckles," are used for the manufacture of bone articles. The 
treatment which they receive is very different from that practised 
in the glue-works. The ends are removed by a saw, and the bones 
are steeped in a 1% brine solution for three to four days in order 
to separate the fibrous matter. The bones are now heated with 
water, and allowed to simmer for about six hours. This removes a 
part of the fat and gelatinous matter; the former rises as a scum, 
the latter passes into solution, and the bones remain sufficiently 
firm to be worked up by the lathe, &c. The fat is skimmed off, and, 
after bleaching, reappears as a component of fine soaps, or, if un- 
bleached, the oil is expressed and is used as an adulterant of other 
oils, while the stearine or solid matter goes to the candle-maker; 
the gelatinous water is used (after filtration) for making size for 
cardboard boxes; while the bones are scrubbed, dried, and then 
transferred to the bone-worker. 

The glue-worker first removes the fat, which is supplied to the 
soap and candle trades; the bones are now treated for glue {q.v.) ; 
and the residue is worked up for manures, &c. These residues are 
ground to a fine or coarse meal, and supplied either directly as a 
fertilizer or treated with sulphuric acid to form the more soluble 
superphosphates, which are more readily assimilated by growing 
plants. _ In some places, especially South America, the residues are 
burned in a retort to a white ash, the " bone-ash " of commerce, 
which contains some 70-80% of tricaleium phosphate, and is much 
used as a manure, and in the manufacture of high-grade super- 
phosphates. In the gelatin industry (see Gelatin) the mineral 
matter has to be recovered from its solution in hydrochloric acid. 
To effect this, the liquors are freed from suspended matter by 
filtration, and then run into vats where they are mixed with milk of 
lime, or some similar neutralizer. The slightly soluble bicalcium 
phosphate, CaHP0 4 , is first precipitated, which, with more lime, 
gives ordinary tricaleium phosphate, Ca 3 (P0 4 )2. The contents of 



BONE BED— BONFIRE 



203 



the vats are filter-pressed, and the cakes dried on plates supported 
on racks in heated chambers. This product is a very valuable 
manure, and is also used in the manufacture of phosphorus. 

Instead of extracting all the gelatinous matter from degreased 
bones, the practice of extracting about one half and carbonizing 
the residue is frequently adopted. The bones are heated in hori- 
zontal cast-iron retorts, holding about 5 cwt., and the operation 
occupies about twelve to thirteen hours. The residue in the retorts 
is removed while still red-hot to air-tight vessels in which it is allowed 
to cool. It is then passed through grinding mills, and is subsequently 
riddled by revolving cylindrical sieves. The yield is from 55 to 
60 % of the bones carbonized, and the product contains about 10 % 
of carbon and about 75 % of calcium phosphate, the remainder 
being various inorganic salts and moisture (6-7 %). Animal char- 
coal has a deep black colour, and is much used as a filtering and 
clarifying material. The vapours evolved during carbonization are 
condensed in vertical air condensers. The liquid separates into two 
layers : the upper tarry layer is floated off and redistilled ; the 
distillate is termed " bone oil," l and mainly consists of many fatty 
amines and pyridine derivatives, characterized by a most disgusting 
odour; the residue is " bone pitch," and finds application in the 
manufacture of black varnishes and like compositions. The lower 
layer is ammoniacal liquor; it is transferred to stills, distilled with 
steam, and the ammonia received in sulphuric acid ; the ammonium 
sulphate, which separates, is removed, drained and dried, and is 
principally used as a manure. Both during the carbonization of the 
bones and the distillation of the tar inflammable gases are evolved ; 
these are generally used, after purification, for motive or illuminating 
purposes. (C. E.*) 

BONE BED, a term loosely used by geologists when speaking 
generally of any stratum or deposit which contains bones of 
whatever kind. It is also applied to those brecciated and stalag- 
mitic deposits on the floor of caves, which frequently contain 
osseous remains. In a more restricted sense it is used to connote 
certain thin layers of bony fragments, which occur upon well- 
defined geological horizons. One of the best-known of these is 
the Ludlow Bone Bed, which is found at the base of the Downton 
Sandstone in the Upper Ludlow series. At Ludlow itself, two 
such beds are actually known, separated by about 14 ft. of strata. 
Although quite thin, the Ludlow Bone Bed can be followed from 
that town into Gloucestershire for a distance of 45 m. It is 
almost made up of fragments of spines, teeth and scales of 
ganoid fish. Another well-known bed, formerly known as the 
" Bristol " or " Lias " Bone Bed, exists in the form of several 
thin layers of micaceous sandstone, with the remains of fish 
and saurians, which occur in the Rhaetic Black Paper Shales 
that lie above the Keuper marls in the south-west of England. 
It is noteworthy that a similar bone bed has been traced on the 
same geological horizon in Brunswick, Hanover and Franconia. 
A bone bed has also been observed at the base of the Carboni- 
ferous limestone series in certain parts of the south-west of 
England. 

BONE-LACE, a kind of lace made upon a cushion from linen 
thread; the pattern is marked out with pins, round which are 
twisted the different threads, each wound on its own bobbin. 
The lace was so called from the fact that bobbins were formerly 
made of bone. 

BONER (or Bonerius), ULRICH (fl. 14th century), German- 
Swiss writer of fables, was born in Bern. He was descended of 
an old Bernese family, and, as far as can be ascertained, took 
clerical orders and became a monk; yet as it appears that 
he subsequently married, it is certain that he received the 
" tonsure " only, and was thus entitled to the benefit of the 
clerici uxoriati, who, on divesting themselves of the clerical garb, 
could return to secular life. He is mentioned in records between 
1324 and 1349, but neither before nor after these dates. He 
wrote, in Middle High German, a collection of fables entitled 
Der Edelstein (c. 1349), one hundred in number, which were 
based principally on those of Avianus (4th century) and the 
Anonymus (edited by I. Nevelet, 1610). This work he dedicated 
to the Bernese patrician and poet, Johann von Rinkenberg, 
advocatus (Vogt) of Brienz (d. c. 1350). It was printed in 1461 
at Bamberg; and it is claimed for it that it was the first book 

1 Bone oil, also known as Dippel's oil, was originally produced 
by the distillation of stags' horns; it is of interest in the history of 
chemistry, since from it were isolated in 1846 by T. Anderson pyridine 
and some of its homologues. 



printed in the German language. Boner treats his sources with 
considerable freedom and originality; he writes a clear and 
simple style, and the necessarily didactic tone of the collection 
is relieved by touches of humour. 

Der Edelstein has been edited by G. F. Benecke (Berlin, 1816) and 
Franz Pfeiffer (Leipzig, 1844); a translation into modern German 
by K. Pannier will be found . in Reclam's Universal-Bibliothek 
(Leipzig, 1895). See also G. E. Lessing in Zur Geschichte und 
Literatur (Werke, ix.); C. Waas, Die Quellen der Beispiele Boners 
(Giessen, 1897). 

BO'NESS, or Borrowstounness, a municipal and police burgh 
and seaport of Linlithgowshire, Scotland. Pop. (i89i)6295;(i90i) 
9306. It lies on the southern shore of the Firth of Forth, 17 m. 
W. by N. of Edinburgh, and 24 m. by rail, being the terminus 
of the North British railway's branch line from Manuel. In 
the 1 8th century it ranked next to Leith as a port, but the growth 
of Grangemouth, higher up the firth, seriously affected its ship- 
ping trade, which is, however, yet considerable, coal and pig-iron 
forming the principal exports, and pit props from the Baltic the 
leading import. It has an extensive harbour (the area of the 
dock being 7 J acres). The great industries are coal-mining — 
some of the pits extending for a long distance beneath the firth — 
iron-founding (with several blast furnaces) and engineering, but 
it has also important manufactures of salt, soap, vitriol and other 
chemicals. Shipbuilding and whaling are extinct. Traces of 
the wall of Antoninus which ran through the parish may still be 
made out, especially near Inveravon. Blackness, on the coast 
farther east, was the seaport of Linlithgow till the rise of Bo'ness, 
but its small export trade now mainly consists of coal, bricks, 
tiles and lime. Its castle, standing on a promontory, is of 
unknown age. James III. of Scotland is stated to have consigned 
certain of the insurgent nobles to its cells; and later it was used 
as a prison in which many of the Covenanters were immured. 
It was one of the four castles that had to be maintained by the 
Articles of Union, but when its uselessness for defensive purposes 
became apparent, it was converted into an ammunition depot. 
Kinneil House, 1 m. south of Bo'ness, a seat of the duke of 
Hamilton, formerly a keep, was fortified by the regent Arran, 
plundered by the rebels in Queen Mary's reign, and reconstructed 
in the time of Charles II. Dr John. Roebuck (1718-1794), 
founder of the Carron Iron Works, occupied it for several years 
from 1764. It was here that, on his invitation, James Watt 
constructed a model of his steam-engine, which was tested in a 
now disused colliery. Though Roebuck lost all his money in the 
coal-mines and salt works which he established at Bo'ness, the 
development of the mineral resources of the district may be 
regarded as due to him. 

BONFIGLI, BENEDETTO, 15th century Italian painter, was 
born at Perugia. Until near the middle of the 15th century the 
Umbrian school was far behind those of Florence and the North, 
but in the person of Perugino and some of his followers it suddenly 
advanced into the very first rank. Among the latter none holds 
a more distinguished place than Benedetto Bonfigli. The most 
important of his extant works are a series, in fresco, of the life 
of St Louis of Toulouse, in the communal palace of Perugia. 

BONFIRE (in Early English " bone-fire," Scottish " bane-fire "), 
originally a fire of bones, now any large fire lit in the open air on 
an occasion of rejoicing. Though the spelling "bonfire" was 
used in the 16th century, the earlier "bone-fire" was common 
till 1760. The earliest known instance of the derivation of the 
word occurred as ban fyre ignis ossium in the Catholicon A nglicum, 
a.d. 1483. Other derivations, now rejected, have been sought 
for the word. Thus some have thought it Baal-fire, passing 
through Bael, Baen to Bane. Others have declared it to be boon- 
fire by analogy with boen-harow, i.e. "harrowing by gift," the 
suggestion being that these fires were " contribution " fires, 
every one in the neighbourhood contributing a portion of the 
material, just as in Northumberland the " contributed Ploughing 
Days " are known as Bone-daags. 

Whatever the origin of the word, it has long had several 
meanings — (a) a fire of bones, (b) a fire for corpses, a funeral pile, 
(c) a fire for immolation, such as that in which heretics and 



204 



BONGARS— BONGO 



proscribed books were burnt, (d) a large fire lit in the open air, 
on occasions of national rejoicing, or as a signal of alarm such 
as the bonfires which warned England of the approach of the 
Armada. Throughout Europe the peasants from time imme- 
morial have lighted bonfires on certain days of the year, and 
danced around or leapt over them. This custom can be traced 
back to the middle ages, and certain usages in antiquity so nearly 
resemble it as to suggest that the bonfire has its origin in the 
early days of heathen Europe. Indeed the earliest proof of the 
observance of these bonfire ceremonies in Europe is afforded by 
the attempts made by Christian synods in the 7th and 8th 
centuries to suppress them as pagan. Thus the third council of 
Constantinople (a.d. 680), by its 65th canon, orders: " Those fires 
that are kindled by certaine people on new moones before their 
shops and houses, over which also they use ridiculously and 
foolishly to leape, by a certaine antient custome, we command 
them from henceforth to cease." And the Synodus Francica 
under Pope Zachary, a.d. 742, forbids " those sacrilegious fires 
which they call Nedjri (or bonefires) , and all other observations 
of the Pagans whatsoever." Leaping over the fires is mentioned 
among the superstitious rites used at the Palilia (the feast of 
Pales, the shepherds' goddess) in Ovid's Fasti, when the shep- 
herds lit heaps of straw and jumped over them as they burned. 
The lighting of the bonfires in Christian festivals was significant 
of the compromise made with the heathen by the early Church. 
In Cornwall bonfires are lighted on the eve of St John the Baptist 
and St Peter's day, and midsummer is thence called in Cornish 
Goluan, which means both " light " and " festivity." Some- 
times effigies are burned in these fires, or a pretence is made of 
burning a living person in them, and there are grounds for believ- 
ing that anciently human sacrifices were actually made in the 
bonfires. Spring and midsummer are the usual times at which 
these bonfires are lighted, but in some countries they are made at 
Hallowe'en (October 31) and at Christmas. In spring the 1st 
Sunday in Lent, Easter eve and the 1st of May are the commonest 
dates. 

See J. G. Frazer, Golden Bough, vol. iii., for a very full account of 
the bonfire customs of Europe, &c. 

BONGARS, JACQUES (1554-1612), French scholar and diplo- 
matist, was born at Orleans, and was brought up in the reformed 
faith. He obtained his early education at Marburg and Jena, 
and returning to France continued his studies at Orleans and 
Bourges. After spending some time in Rome he visited eastern 
Europe, and subsequently made the acquaintance of Segur 
Pardaillan, a representative of Henry, king of Navarre, after- 
wards Henry IV. of France. He entered the service of Pardaillan, 
and in 1587 was sent on a mission to many of the princes of 
northern Europe, after which he visited England to obtain help 
from Queen Elizabeth for Henry of Navarre. He continued 
to serve Henry as a diplomatist, and in 1593 became the repre- 
sentative of the French king at the courts of the imperial princes. 
Vigorously seconding the efforts of Henry to curtail the power 
of the house of Habsburg, he spent health and money ungrudg- 
ingly in this service, and continued his labours until the king's 
murder in 1610. He then returned to France, and died at 
Paris on the 29th of July 161 2. Bongars wrote an abridgment 
of Justin's abridgment of the history of Trogus Pompeius under 
the title Juslinus, Tragi Pompeii Historiarum Philip picarum 
epitoma de manuscriptis codicibus emendatior et prologis auctior 
(Paris, 1581). He collected the works of several French writers 
who as contemporaries described the crusades, and published 
them under the title Gesta Dei per Francos (Hanover, 161 1). 
Another collection made by Bongars is the Rerum Hungaricarum 
scriptores varii (Frankfort, 1600). His Epistolae were published 
at Leiden in 1647, and a French translation at Paris in 1668- 
1670. Many of his papers are preserved in the library at Bern, 
to which they were presented in 1632, and a list of them was 
made in 1634. Other papers and copies of instructions are now 
in several libraries in Paris; and copies of other instructions 
are in the British Museum. 

See H. Hagen, Jacobus Bongarsius (Bern, 1874) ; L. Anquez, 
Henri IV et VAllemagne (Paris, 1887). 



BONGHI, RUGGERO (1828-1895), Italian scholar, writer 
and politician, was born at Naples on the 20th of March 1828. 
Exiled from Naples in consequence of the movement of 1848, he 
took refuge in Tuscany, whence he was compelled to flee to 
Turin on account of a pungent article against the Bourbons. 
At Turin he resumed his philosophic studies and his translation 
of Plato, but in 1858 refused a professorship of Greek at Pavia, 
under the Austrian government, only to accept it in 1859 from 
the Italian government after the liberation of Lombardy. In 
i860, with the Cavour party, he opposed the work of Garibaldi, 
Crispi and Bertani at Naples, and became secretary of Luigi 
Carlo Farini during the latter's lieutenancy, but in 1865 assumed 
contemporaneously the editorship of the Perseveranza of Milan 
and the chair of Latin literature at Florence. Elected deputy 
in i860 he became celebrated by the biting wit of his speeches, 
while, as journalist, the acrimony of his polemical writings made 
him a redoubtable adversary. Though an ardent supporter of 
the historic Right, and, as such, entrusted by the Lanza cabinet 
with the defence of the law of guarantees in 1870, he was no 
respecter of persons, his caustic tongue sparing neither friend nor 
foe. Appointed minister for public instruction in 1873, he, 
with feverish activity, reformed the Italian educational system, 
suppressed the privileges of the university of Naples, founded 
the Vittorio Emanuele library in Rome, and prevented the 
establishment of a Catholic university in the capital. Upon the 
fall of the Right from power in 1876 he joined the opposition, 
and, with characteristic vivacity, protracted during two months 
the debate on Baccelli's University Reform Bill, securing, 
single-handed, its rejection. A bitter critic of King Humbert, 
both in the Perseveranza and in the Nuova Antologia, he was, in 
1893, excluded from court, only securing readmission shortly 
before his death on the 22nd of October 1895. In foreign 
policy a Francophil, he combated the Triple Alliance, and took 
considerable part in the organization of the inter-parliamentary 
peace conference. (H. W. S.) 

BONGO (Dor or Deran), a tribe of Nilotic negroes, probably 
related to the Zandeh tribes of the Welle district, inhabiting 
the south-west portion of the Bahr-el-Ghazal province, Anglo- 
Egyptian Sudan. G. A. Schweinfurth, who lived two years 
among them, declares that before the advent of the slave-raiders, 
c. 1850, they numbered at least 300,000. Slave-raiders, and 
later the dervishes, greatly reduced their numbers, and it was 
not until the establishment of effective control by the Sudan 
government (1904-1906) that recuperation was possible. The 
Bongo formerly lived in countless little independent and peaceful 
communities, and under the Sudan government they again 
manage their own affairs. Their huts are well built, and some- 
times 24 ft. high. The Bongo are a race of medium height, 
inclined to be thick-set, with a red-brown complexion — "like 
the soil upon which they reside " — and black hair. Schweinfurth 
declares their heads to be nearly round, no other African race, 
to his knowledge, possessing a higher cephalic index. The 
women incline to steatopygia in later life, and this deposit of fat, 
together with the tail of bast which they wore, gave them, as 
they walked, Schweinfurth says, the appearance of " dancing 
baboons." The Bongo men formerly wore only a loin-cloth, 
and many dozen iron rings on the arms (arranged to form a sort 
of armour), while the women had simply a girdle, to which was 
attached a tuft of grass. Both sexes now largely use cotton 
cloths as dresses. The tribal ornaments consist of nails or plugs 
which are passed through the lower lip. The women often wear 
a disk several inches in diameter in this fashion, together with 
a ring or a bit of straw in the upper lip, straws in the alae of the 
nostrils, and a ring in the septum. The Bongo, unlike other of 
the upper Nile Negroes, are not great cattle-breeders, but 
employ their time in agriculture. The crops mostly cultivated 
are sorghum, tobacco, sesame and durra. The Bongo eat the 
fruits, tubers and fungi in which the country is rich. They also 
eat almost every creature— bird, beast, insect and reptile, 
with the exception of the dog. They despise no flesh, fresh or 
putrid. They drive the vulture from carrion, and eat with 
relish the intestinal worms of the ox. Earth-eating, too, is 



BONGO— BONI 



205 



common among them. They are particularly skilled in the 
smelting and working of iron. Iron forms the currency of the 
country, and is extensively employed for all kinds of useful and 
ornamental purposes. Bongo spears, knives, rings, and other 
articles are frequently fashioned with great artistic elaboration. 
They have a variety of musical instruments — drums, stringed 
instruments, and horns — in the practice of which they take 
great delight; and they indulge in a vocal recitative which 
seems intended to imitate a succession of natural sounds. 
Schweinfurth says that Bongo music is like the raging of the 
elements. Marriage is by purchase; and a man is allowed to 
acquire three wives, but not more. Tattooing is partially 
practised. As regards burial, the corpse is bound in a crouching 
position with the knees drawn up to the chin; men are placed 
in the grave with the face to the north, and women with the 
face to the south. The form of the grave is peculiar, consisting 
of a niche in a vertical shaft, recalling the mastaba graves of 
the ancient Egyptians. The tombs are frequently ornamented 
with rough wooden figures intended to represent the deceased. 
Of the immortality of the soul they have no defined notion; 
and their only approach to a knowledge of a beneficent deity con- 
sists in a vague idea of luck. They have, however, a most intense 
belief in a great variety of petty goblins and witches, which are 
essentially malignant. Arrows, spears and clubs form their 
weapons, the first two distinguished by a multiplicity of barbs. 
Euphorbia juice is used as a poison for the arrows. Shields are 
rare. Their language is musical, and abounds in the vowels 
and a; its vocabulary of concrete terms is very rich, but the 
same word has often a great variety of meanings. The gram- 
matical structure is simple. As a race the Bongo are gentle and 
industrious, and exhibit strong family affection. 

See G. A. Schweinfurth, The Heart of Africa (London, 1873) ; 
VV. Junker, Travels in Africa (Eng. edit., London, 1890-1892). 

BONGO {Boocercus eurycerus), a West African bushbuck, the 
largest of the group. The male is deep chestnut, marked on the 
body with narrow white stripes, on the chest with a white 
crescent, and on the face by two white spots below the eye. 
In the East African bongo {B. e. Isaaei) the body hue is stronger 
and richer. There is, as yet, no evidence as to whether the 
females of the true bongo bear horns, though it is probable they 
do; but as the horns are present in both sexes of the East 
African form, Mr Oldfield Thomas has made that the type of the 
genus. 1 

BONHAM, a town and the county-seat of Fannin county, 
Texas, U.S.A., about 14 m. S. of the Red river, in the north-east 
part of the state, and 70 m. N. of Dallas. Pop. (1890) 3361; 
(1900)5042 (1223 being negroes); (1910), 4844. It is served by the 
Missouri, Kansas & Texas, and the Texas & Pacific railways. 
Bonham is the seat of Carlton College (Christian), a woman's 
college founded in 1867; and its high school is one of the best 
in the state. It is a trading and shipping centre of an extensive 
farming territory devoted to the raising of live-stock and to the 
growing of cotton, Indian corn, fruit, &c. It has large cotton 
gins and compresses, a large cotton mill, flour mills, canning 
and ice factories, railway repair shops, planing mills and carriage 
works. The town was named in honour of J. B. Bonham, a native 
of South Carolina, who was killed in the Alamo. The first settle- 
ment here was made in 1836. The town was incorporated in 
1850, and was reincorporated in 1886. 

BONHEUR [Makie Rosalie], ROSA (1822-1899), French 
painter, was born at Bordeaux on the 22nd of March 1822. 
She was of Jewish origin. Jacques Wiener, the Belgian medallist, 
a native of Venloo, says that he and Raymond Bonheur, Rosa's 
father, used to attend synagogue in that town; while another 
authority asserts that Rosa used to be known in common parlance 
by the name of Rosa Mazeltov (a Hebrew term for " good luck," 
Gallicf Bonheur). She was the eldest of four children, all of 
whom were artists — Auguste (1824-1884) painted animals and 
landscape; Juliette (1830-1891) was " honourably mentioned " 
at the exhibition of 1855; Isidore, born in 1827, was a sculptor 
of animals. Rosa at an early age was taught to draw by her 
1 Annals and Mag. Nat. Hist. vol. x. (seventh series), p. 309. 



father (who died in 1849), and he, perceiving her very remarkable 
talent, permitted her to abandon the business of dressmaking, 
to which, much against her will, she had been put, in order to 
devote herself wholly to art. From 1840 to 1845 she exhibited 
at the salon, and five times received a prize; in 1848 a medal 
was awarded to her. Her fame dates more especially from the 
exhibition of 1855; from that time Rosa Bonheur's works were 
much sought after in England, where collectors and public 
galleries competed eagerly for them. What is chiefly remark- 
able and admirable in her work is that, like her contemporary, 
Jacques Raymond Brascassat (1804-1867), she represents 
animals as they really are, as she saw them in the country. 
Her gift of accurate observation was, however, allied to a certain 
dryness of style in painting; she often failed to give a perfect 
sense of atmosphere. On the other hand, the anatomy of her 
animals is always faultlessly true. There is nothing feminine 
in her handling; her treatment is always manly and firm. 
Of her many works we may note the following: — " Ploughing 
in the Nivernais " (1848), in the Luxembourg gallery; " The 
Horse Fair " (1853), one of the two replicas of which is in the 
National Gallery, London, the original being in the United 
States; and " Hay Harvest in Auvergne " (1835). She was 
decorated with the Legion of Honour by the empress Eugenie, 
and was subsequently promoted to the rank of " officer " of the 
order. After 1867 Rosa Bonheur exhibited but once in the salon, 
in 1899, a few weeks before her death. She lived quietly at her 
country house at By, near Fontainebleau, where for some years 
she had held gratuitous classes for drawing. She left at her 
death a considerable number of pictures, studies, drawings and 
etchings, which were sold by auction in Paris in the spring of 
1900. (H. Fr.) 

BONHEUR DU JOUR, the name for a lady's writing-desk, 
so called because, when it was introduced in France about 1760, 
it speedily became intensely fashionable. The bonheur du jour 
is always very light and graceful; its special characteristic 
is a raised back, which may form a little cabinet or a nest of 
drawers, or may simply be fitted with.a mirror. The top, often 
surrounded with a chased and gilded bronze gallery, serves for 
placing small ornaments. Beneath the writing surface there is 
usually a single drawer. The details vary greatly, but the 
general characteristics are always traceable. The bonheur 
du jour has never been so delicate, so charming, so coquettish 
as in the quarter of a century which followed its introduction. 
The choicer examples of the time are inlaid with marqueterie, 
edged with exotic woods, set in gilded bronze, or enriched with 
panels of Oriental lacquer. 

BONI {Bone), a vassal state of the government of Celebes, 
Dutch East Indies, in the south-west peninsula of Celebes, on 
the Gulf of Boni. Area, 2600 sq. m. It produces rice, tobacco, 
coffee, cotton and sugar-cane, none of them important as ex- 
ports. The breeds of buffaloes and horses in this state are highly 
esteemed. The chief town, Boni, lies 80 m. N.E. of Macassar, 
and 2\ m. from the east coast of the peninsula. The native race 
of Bugis (q.v.), whose number within this area is about 70,000, 
is one of the most interesting in the whole archipelago. 

Boni was once the most powerful state of Celebes, all the 
other princes being regarded as vassals of its ruler, but its history 
is not known in detail. In 1666 the rajah Palakkah, whose 
father and grandfather had been murdered by the family of 
Hassan, the tyrant of Sumatra, made common cause with the 
Dutch against that despot. From that date till the beginning 
of the 19th century Dutch influence in the state remained un- 
disputed. In 1814, however, Boni fell into the hands of the 
British, who retained it for two years; but by the European 
treaties concluded on the downfall of Napoleon it reverted to 
its original colonizers. Their influence, however, was resisted 
more than once by the natives. An expedition in 1825, under 
General van Geen, was not fully successful in enforcing it; 
and in 1858 and the following year two expeditions were 
necessary to oppose an attempt by the princess regent towards 
independence. In i860 a new prince, owning allegiance to the 
EPuttfh, was se't up. As in other native states in Celebes, 



2o6 



BONIFACE 



succession to the throne in the female line has precedence over 
the male line. 

For the wars in Boni, see Perelaer, De Bonische expedition, 1859- 
1860 (Leiden, 1872) ; and Meyers, in the Militaire Spectator (1880). 

BONIFACE, SAINT (680-754), the apostle of Germany, whose 
real name was Wynfrith, was born of a good Saxon family at 
Crediton or Kirton in Devonshire. While still young he became 
a monk, and studied grammar and theology first at Exeter, then 
at Nutcell near Winchester, under the abbot Winberht. He 
soon distinguished himself both as scholar and preacher, and had 
every inducement to remain in his monastery, but in 716 he 
followed the example of other Saxon monks and set out as 
missionary to Frisia. He was soon obliged to return, however, 
probably owing to the hostility of Radbod, king of the Frisians, 
then at war with Charles Martel. At the end of 717 he went to 
Rome, where in 719 Pope Gregory II. commissioned him to 
evangelize Germany and to counteract the influence of the Irish 
monks- there. Crossing the Alps, Boniface visited Bavaria and 
Thuringia, but upon hearing of the death of Radbod he hurried 
again to Frisia, where, under the direction of his countryman 
Willibrord (d. 738), the first bishop of Utrecht, he preached 
successfully for three years. About 722 he visited Hesse and 
Thuringia, won over some chieftains, and converted and baptized 
great numbers of the heathen. Having sent special word to 
Gregory of his success, he was summoned to Rome and conse- 
crated bishop on the 30th of November 722, after taking an oath 
of obedience to the pope. Then his mission was enlarged. He re- 
turned with letters of recommendation to Charles Martel, charged 
not only to convert the heathen but to suppress heresy as well. 

Charles's protection, as he himself confessed, made possible 
his great career. Armed with it he passed safely into heathen 
Germany and began a systematic crusade, baptizing, overturning 
idols, founding churches and monasteries, and calling from 
England a band of missionary helpers, monks and nuns, some of 
whom have become famous: St Lull, his successor in the see at 
Mainz; St Burchard, bishop of Wiirzburg; St Gregory, abbot at 
Utrecht; Willibald, his biographer; St Lioba, St Walburge, St 
Thecla. In 732 Boniface was created archbishop. In 738 for 
the third time he went to Rome. On his return he organized the 
church in Bavaria into the four bishoprics of Regensburg, Freising, 
Salzburg and Passau. Then his power was extended still further. 
In 741 Pope Zacharias made him legate, and charged him with the 
reformation of the whole Frankish church. With the support of 
Carloman and Pippin, who had just succeeded Charles Martel as 
mayors of the palace, Boniface set to work. As he had done 
in Bavaria, he organized the east Frankish church into four 
bishoprics, Erfurt, Wiirzburg, Buraburg and Eichstadt, and set 
over them his own monks. In 742 he presided at what is generally 
counted as the first German council. At the same period he 
founded the abbey of Fulda, as a centre for German monastic 
culture, placing it under the Bavarian Sturm, whose biography 
gives us so many picturesque glimpses of the time, and making 
its rule stricter than the Benedictine. Then came a theological 
and disciplinary controversy with Virgil, the Irish bishop of 
Salzburg, who held, among other heresies, that there were other 
worlds than ours. Virgil must have been a most remarkable 
man; in spite of his leanings toward science he held his own 
against' Boniface, and was canonized after his death. Boniface 
was more successful in France. There a certain Adalbert or 
Aldebert, a Frankish bishop of Neustria, had caused great 
disturbance. He had been performing miracles, and claimed to 
have received his relics, not from Rome like those of Boniface, 
but directly from the angels. Planting crosses in the open fields 
he drew the people to desert the churches, and had won a great 
following throughout all Neustria. Opinions are divided as to 
whether he was a Culdee, a representative of a national Frankish 
movement, or simply the charlatan that Boniface paints him. 
At the instance of Pippin, Boniface secured Adalbert's condemna- 
tion at the synod of Soissons in 744; but he, and Clement, a 
Scottish missionary and a heretic on predestination, continued to 
find followers in spite of legate, council and pope, for three or 
four years more. 



Between 746 and 748 Boniface was made bishop of Mainz, and 
became metropolitan over the Rhine bishoprics and Utrecht, as 
well as over those he had established in Germany — thus founding 
the pre-eminence of the see of Mainz. In 747 a synod of the 
Frankish bishops sent to Rome a formal statement of their 
submission to the papal authority. The significance of this act 
can only be realized when one recalls the tendencies toward the 
formation of national churches, which had been so powerful 
under the Merovingians. Boniface does not seem to have taken 
part in the anointing of Pippin as king of the Franks in 752. In 
7 54 he resigned his archbishopric in favour of Lull, and took up 
again his earliest plan of a mission to Frisia; but on the 5th of 
June 754 he and his companions were massacred by the heathen 
near Dockum. His remains were afterwards taken to Fulda. 

St Boniface has well been called the proconsul of the papacy. 
His organizing genius, even more than his missionary zeal, left its 
mark upon the German church throughout all the middle ages. 
The missionary movement which until his day had been almost 
independent of control, largely carried on by schismatic Irish 
monks, was brought under the direction of Rome. But in so 
welding together the scattered centres and binding them to the 
papacy, Boniface seems to have been actuated by simple zeal for 
unity of the faith, and not by a conscious political motive. 

Though pre-eminently a man of action, Boniface has left several 
literary remains. We have above all his Letters (Epistolae) , 
difficult to date, but extremely important from the standpoint of 
history, dogma, or literature; see Dummler's edition in the 
Monumenta Germaniae historica, 1892. Besides these there are 
a grammar {De octo partibus orationibus, ed. Mai, in Classici 
Auctores, t. vii.), some sermons of contested authenticity, some 
poems {Aenigmata, ed. Diimmler, Poetae latini aevi Carolini, i. 
1881), a penitential, and some Dicta Bonifacii (ed. Nurnberger 



in Theologische Quartalschrift, Tubingen, vol. 70, 1888), the 
authenticity of which it is hard to prove or to refute. Migne 
in his Patrologia Latina (vol. 89) has reproduced the edition of 
Boniface's works by Giles (London, 1844). 

There are very many monographs on Boniface and on different 
phases of his life (see Potthast, Bibliotheca medii aevi, and Ulysse 
Chevalier's Bibliographic, 2nd ed. for indications), but none that is 
completely satisfactory. Among recent studies are those of B. 
Kuhlmann, Der heilige Bonijatius, Apostel der Deutschen (Paderborn, 
1895), and of G. Kurth, Saint Boniface (2nd ed., 1902). W. Levison 
has edited the Vitae sancti Bonifatii (Hanover, 1905). (J. T. S.*) 

BONIFACE (Bonifacius) , the name of nine of the popes. 

Boniface I., bishop of Rome from 418 to 422. At the death 
of Pope Zosimus, the Roman clergy were divided into two 
factions, one of which elected the deacon Eulalius, and the 
other the priest Boniface. The imperial government, in the 
interests of public order, commanded the two competitors to 
leave the town, reserving the decision of the case to a council. 
Eulalius having broken his ban, the emperor Honorius decided 
to recognize Boniface, and the council was countermanded. 
But the faction of Eulalius long continued to foment disorders, 
and the secular authority was compelled to intervene. 

Boniface II., pope from 530 to 532, was by birth a Goth, 
and owed his election to the nomination of his predecessor, 
Felix IV., and to the influence of the Gothic king. The Roman 
electors had opposed to him a priest of Alexandria called 
Dioscorus, who died a month after his election, and thus left 
the position open for him. Boniface endeavoured to nominate 
his own successor, thus transforming into law, or at least into 
custom, the proceeding by which he had benefited; but the 
clergy and the senate of Rome forced him to cancel this 
arrangement. 

Boniface III. was pope from the 15th of February to the 
1 2th of November 606. He obtained from Phocas recognition 
of the " headship of the church at Rome," which signifies, no 
doubt, that Phocas compelled the patriarch of Constantinople 
to abandon (momentarily) his claim to the title of oecumenical 
patriarch. 

Boniface IV. was pope from 608 to 615. He received from 
the emperor Phocas the Pantheon at Rome, which was converted 
into a Christian church. 



BONIFACE OF SAVOY— BONIFACIO 



207 



Boniface V., pope from 619 to 625, did much for the christian- 
izing of England. Bede mentions (Hist. Eccl.) that he wrote 
encouraging letters to Mellitus, archbishop of Canterbury, and 
Justus, bishop of Rochester, and quotes three letters — to Justus, 
to Eadwin, king of Northumbria, and to his wife jEthelberga. 
William of Malmesbury gives a letter to Justus of the year 625, 
in which Canterbury is constituted the metropolitan see of 
Britain for ever. 

Boniface VI. was elected pope in April 896, and died fifteen 
days afterwards. 

Boniface VII. was pope from August 984 to July 985. His 
family name was Franco. In 974 he was substituted by Cres- 
centius and the Roman barons for Benedict VI., who had been 
assassinated. He was ejected by Count Sicco, the representative 
of the emperor Otto II., and fled to Constantinople. On the 
death of Otto (983) he returned, seized Pope John XIV., threw 
him into prison, and installed himself in his place. (L. D.*) 

Boniface VIII. (Benedetto Gaetano), pope from 1294 to 
1303, was born of noble family at Anagni, studied canon and 
civil law in Italy and possibly at Paris. After being appointed 
to canonicates at Todi (June 1260) and in France, he became 
an advocate and then a notary at the papal court. With 
Cardinal Ottoboni, who was to aid the English king, Henry III., 
against the bishops of the baronial party, he was besieged in the 
Tower of London by the rebellious earl of Gloucester, but was 
rescued by the future Edward I., on the 27th of April 1267. 
Created cardinal deacon in 1281, and in 1291 cardinal priest 
(SS. Sylvestri et Martini), he was entrusted with many diplo- 
matic missions and became very influential in the Sacred College. 
He helped the ineffective Celestine V. to abdicate, and was him- 
self chosen pope at Naples on the 24th of December 1294. 
Contrary to custom, the election was not made unanimous, 
probably because of the hostility of certain French cardinals. 
Celestine attempted to rule in extreme monastic poverty and 
humility; not so Boniface, who ardently asserted the lordship 
of the papacy over all the kingdoms of the world. He was 
crowned at Rome in January 1295 with great pomp. He 
planned to pacify the West and then recover the Holy Land 
from the infidel; but during his nine years' reign, so far from 
being a peacemaker, he involved the papacy itself in a series 
of controversies with leading European powers. Avarice, lofty 
claims and frequent exhibitions of arrogance made him many 
foes. The policy of supporting the interests of the house of 
Anjou in Sicily proved a grand failure. The attempt to build 
up great estates for his family made most of the Colonna his 
enemies. Until 1303 he refused to recognize Albert of Austria 
as the rightful German king. Assuming that he was overlord 
of Hungary, he declared that its crown should fall to the house 
of Anjou. He humbled Eric VI. of Denmark, but was unsuccess- 
ful in the attempt to try Edward I., the conqueror of Scotland, 
on the charge of interfering with a papal fief; for parliament 
declared in 1301 that Scotland had never been a fief of Rome. 
The most noted conflict of Boniface was that with Philip IV. 
of France. In 1 296, by the bull Clericis laicos, the pope forbade 
the levying of taxes, however disguised, on the clergy without 
his consent. Forced to recede from this position, Boniface 
canonized Louis IX. (1297). The hostilities were later renewed; 
in 1302 Boniface himself drafted and published the indubitably 
genuine bull Unam sanctum, one of the strongest official state- 
ments of the papal prerogative ever made. The weight of 
opinion now tends to deny that any part of this much-discussed 
document save the last sentence bears the marks of an infallible 
utterance. The French vice-chancellor Guillaume de Nogaret 
was sent to arrest the pope, against whom grave charges had 
been brought, and bring him to France to be deposed by an 
oecumenical council. The accusation of heresy has usually 
been dismissed as a slander; but recent investigations make 
it probable, though not quite certain, that Boniface privately 
held certain Averroistic tenets, such as the denial of the immor- 
tality of the soul. With Sciarra Colonna, Nogaret surprised 
Boniface at Anagni, on the 7th of September 1303, as the latter 
was about to pronounce the sentence of excommunication 



against the king. After a nine-hours' truce the palace was 
stormed, and Boniface was found lying in his bed, a cross 
clasped to his breast; that he was sitting in full regalia on the 
papal throne is a legend. Nogaret claimed that he saved the 
pope's life from the vengeful Colonna. Threatened, but not 
maltreated, the pope had remained three days under arrest 
when the citizens of Anagni freed him. He was conducted to 
Rome, only to be confined in the Vatican by the Orsini. He 
died on the nth or 12th of October 1303, not eighty-six years 
old, as has commonly been believed, but perhaps under seventy, 
at all events not over seventy-five. " He shall come in like a 
fox, reign like a lion, die like a dog," is a gibe wrongly held to be 
a prophecy of his unfortunate predecessor. Dante, who had 
become embittered against Boniface while on a political mission 
in Rome, calls him the " Prince of the new Pharisees " (Inferno, 
27, 85), but laments that " in his Vicar Christ was made a cap 
tive," and was "mocked a second time" (Purgatory, 20, 87 f.). 
Authorities. — Digard, Faucon and Thomas, Les Registres de 
Boniface VIII (Paris, 1884 ff.); Wetzcr and Welte, Kirckenlexikon, 
vol. ii. (2nd ed., Freiburg, 1883), 1037-1062; Herzog-Hauck, 
Realencyklopddie, vol. iii. (3rd ed., Leipzig, 1897), 291-300, contains 
an elaborate bibliography; J. Loserth, Geschickte des spdteren 
Miltelalters (Munich, 1903), 206-232; H. Finke, Aus den Tagen 
Bonifaz VIII. (Minister, 1902) is dreary but. epoch-making; Gottin- 
giscke gelehrte Anzeigen, Jahrgang 166, 857-869 (Berlin, 1904); 
R. Scholz, Die Publizisiik zur Zeit Philipps des Schonen und Bonifaz 
VIII. (Stuttgart, 1903); K. Wenck, "War Bonifaz VIII. ein 
Ketzer?" in von Sybel's Historische Zeitschrift, vol. xciv. (Munich, 
I 9°5)> 1-66. Special literature on Unam Sanclam: C. Mirbt, 
Quellen zur Geschickte des Papsttums (2nd ed., Tubingen, 1901), 
148 f. ; Kirckenlexikon, xii. (1901), 229-240, an exhaustive discus- 
sion; H. Finke, 146-190; J. H. Robinson, Readings in European 
History, vol. i. (Boston, 1904), 346 ff. On Clericis laicos: Gee and 
Hardy, Documents Illustrative of English Church History (London, 
1896), 87 ff. (W. W. R.*) 

Boniface IX. (Piero Tomacelli), pope from 1389 to 1404, 
was born at Naples of a poor but ancient family. Created 
cardinal by Urban VI., he was elected successor to the latter 
on the 2nd of November 1389. In 1391 he canonized Birgitta 
of Sweden. He was able to restore Roman authority in the 
major part of the papal states, and in 1398 put an end to the 
republican liberties of the city itself. Boniface won Naples, 
which had owed spiritual allegiance to the antipopes Clement VII. 
and Benedict XIII. of Avignon, to the Roman obedience. In 
1403 he ventured at last to confirm the deposition of the emperor 
Wenceslaus and the election of Rupert. Negotiations for the 
healing of the Great Schism were without result. In spite of 
his inferior education, the contemporaries of Boniface trusted 
his prudence and moral character; yet when in financial straits 
he sold offices, and in 1399 transformed the annates into a per- 
manent tax. In 1390 he celebrated the regular jubilee, but a 
rather informal one held in 1400 proved more profitable. 
Though probably not personally avaricious, he was justly 
accused of nepotism. He died on the 1st of October 1404, being 
still under sixty years of age. (W. W. R.*) 

BONIFACE OF SAVOY (d. 1270), archbishop of Canterbury, 
became primate in 1243, through the favour of Henry III., of 
whose queen, Eleanor of Provence, he was an uncle. Boniface, 
though a man of violent temper and too often absent from his 
see, showed some sympathy with the reforming party in the 
English church. Though in 1250 he provoked the English 
bishops by claiming the right of visitation in their dioceses, he 
took the lead at the council of Merton (1258) in vindicating the 
privileges of his order. In the barons' war he took the royalist 
side, but did not distinguish himself by great activity. 

See Matthew Paris, Chronica Majora; Francois Mugnier, Les 
Savoyards en Angleterre (Chambery, 1890). 

BONIFACIO, a maritime town at the southern extremity of 
Corsica, in the arrondissement of Sartene, 87 m. S.S.E. of Ajaccio 
by road. Pop. (1906) 2940. Bonifacio, which overlooks the 
straits of that name separating Corsica from Sardinia, occupies 
a remarkable situation on the summit of a peninsula of white 
calcareous rock, extending parallel to the coast and enclosing 
a narrow and secure harbour. Below the town and in the cliffs 
facing it the rock is hollowed into caverns accessible only by boat. 



208 



BONIFACIUS— BONITZ 



St Dominic, a church built in the 13th century by the Templars, 
and the cathedral of Santa Maria Maggiore which belongs mainly 
to the 1 2th century, are the chief buildings. The fortifications 
and citadel date from the 16th and 17th centuries. A massive 
medieval tower serves as a powder-magazine. The trade of Boni- 
facio, which is carried on chiefly with Sardinia, is in cereals, wine, 
cork and olive-oil of fine quality. Cork-cutting, tobacco-manu- 
facture and coral-fishing are carried on. The olive is largely culti- 
vated in the neighbourhood and there are oil-works in the town. 

Bonifacio was founded about 828 by the Tuscan marquis 
whose name it bears, as a defence against the Saracen pirates. 
At the end of the nth century it became subject to Pisa, and 
at the end of the 12th was taken and colonized by the Genoese, 
whose influence may be traced in the character of the population. 
In 1420 it heroically withstood a protracted siege by Alphonso V. 
of Aragon. In 1554 it fell into the hands of the Franco-Turkish 
army. 

BONIFACIUS (d. 432), the Roman governor of the province 
of Africa who is generally believed to have invited the Vandals 
into that province in revenge for the hostile action of Placidia, 
ruling in behalf of her son the emperor Valentinian III. (428-429). 
That action is by Procopius attributed to his rival Aetius, but 
the earliest authorities speak of a certain Felix, chief minister 
of Placidia, as the calumniator of Bonifacius. Whether he really 
invited the Vandals or not, there is no doubt that he soon turned 
against them and bravely defended the city of Hippo from their 
attacks. In 432 he returned to Italy, was received into favour 
by Placidia, and appointed master of the soldiery. Aetius, how- 
ever, resented his promotion, the two rivals met, perhaps in 
single combat, and Bonifacius, though victorious, received a 
wound from the effects of which he died three months later. 

The authorities for the extremely obscure and difficult history of 
these transactions are well discussed by E. A. Freeman in an article 
in the English Historical Review, July 1887, to which the reader is 
referred. But compare also Gibbon, Decline and Fall of the Roman 
Empire, vol. iii. pp. 505-506, edited by J. B. Bury (London, 1897). 

BONIN ISLANDS, called by the Japanese Ogasawara-jima, 
a chain of small islands belonging to Japan, stretching nearly 
due north and south, a little east of 142 E., and from 26° 35' 
to 27° 45' N., about 500 m. from the mainland of Japan. They 
number twenty, according to Japanese investigations, and have 
a coast-line of 174-65 m. and a superficies of 28-82 sq. m. Only 
ten of them have any appreciable size, and these are named — 
commencing from the north — Muko-shima (Bridegroom Island), 
Nakadachi-shima (Go-between Island 1 ), Yome-shima (Bride 
Island), Ototo-jima (Younger-brother Island), Ani-shima (Elder- 
brother Island), Chichi-jima (Father Island), Haha-jima (Mother 
Island), Mei-jima (Niece Island), Ani-jima (Elder-sister Island) 
and Imoto-jima (Younger-sister Island) . European geographers 
have been accustomed to divide the islands into three groups for 
purposes of nomenclature, calling the northern group the Parry 
Islands, the central the Beechey Islands and the southern the 
Coffin or Bailey Islands. The second largest of all, Chichi-jima, 
in Japanese cartography was called Peel Island in 1827 by 
Captain Beechey, and the same officer gave the name of Stapleton 
Island to the Ototo-jima of the Japanese, and that of Buckland 
Island to their Ani-jima. To complete this account of Captain 
Beechey's nomenclature, it may be added that he called a large 
bay on the south of Peel Island Fitton Bay, and a bay on the 
south-west of Buckland Island Walker Bay. 2 Port Lloyd, the 
chief anchorage (situated on Peel Island), is considered by 
Commodore Perry — who visited the islands in 1853 and strongly 
urged the establishment of a United States coaling station there 
— to have been formerly the crater of a volcano from which the 
surrounding hills were thrown up, the entrance to the harbour 
being a fissure through which lava used to pour into the sea. 
The islands are, indeed, plainly volcanic in their nature. 

History. — The diversity of nomenclature indicated above 

1 Referring to the Japanese custom of employing a go-between to 
arrange a marriage. 

2 These details are taken from The Bonin Islands by Russell 
Robertson, formerly H.B.M. consul in Yokohama, who visited the 
islands in 1875. 



suggests that the ownership of the islands was for some time 
doubtful. According to Japanese annals they were discovered 
towards the close of the 16th century, and added to the fief of 
a Daimyo, Ogasawa Sadayori, whence the name Ogasawara- 
jima. They were also called Bunin-jima (corrupted by foreigners 
into Bonin) because of their being without (bu) inhabitants (nin). 
Effective occupation did not take place, however, and com' 
munications with the islands ceased altogether in 1635, as was a 
natural consequence of the Japanese government's veto against 
the construction of sea-going vessels. In 1728 fitful communica- 
tion was restored by the then representative of the Ogasawara 
family, only to be again interrupted until 1861, when an unsuc- 
cessful attempt was made to establish a Japanese colony at Port 
Lloyd. Meanwhile, Captain Beechey visited the islands in the 
" Blossom," assigned names to some of them, and published a 
description of their features. Next a small party consisting of 
two British subjects, two American citizens, and a Dane, sailed 
from the Sandwich Islands for Port Lloyd in 1830, taking with 
them some Hawaiian natives. These colonists hoisted the 
British flag on Peel Island (Chichi-jima), and settled there. 
When Commodore Perry arrived in 1853, there were on Peel 
Island thirty-one inhabitants, four being English, four American, 
one Portuguese and the rest natives of the Sandwich Islands, the 
Ladrones, &c. ; and when Mr Russell Robertson visited the place 
in 1875, the colony had grown to sixty-nine, of whom only five 
were pure whites. Mr Robertson found them without education, 
without religion, without laws and without any system of govern- 
ment, but living comfortably on clearings of cultivated land. 
English was the language of the settlers, and they regarded 
themselves as a British colony. But in 1861 the British govern- 
ment renounced all claim to the islands in recognition of Japan's 
right of possession. There is now regular steam communication; 
the affairs of the islands are duly administered, and the popula- 
tion has grown to about 4500. There are no mountains of any 
considerable height in the Ogasawara Islands, but the scenery 
is hilly with occasional bold crags. The vegetation is almost 
tropically luxuriant — palms, wild pineapples, and ferns growing 
profusely, and the valleys being filled with wild beans and patches 
of taro. Mr Robertson catalogues a number of valuable timbers 
that are obtained there, among them being Tremana, cedar, 
rose-wood, iron-wood (red and white), box- wood, sandal and 
white oak. The kekop tree, the orange, the laurel, the jumper, 
the wild cactus, the curry plant, wild sage and celery flourish. 
No minerals have been discovered. The shores are covered 
with coral; earthquakes and tidal waves are frequent, the latter 
not taking the form of bores, but of a sudden steady rise and 
equally sudden fall in the level of the sea; the climate is rather 
tropical than temperate, but sickness is almost unknown among 
the residents. (F. By.) 

BONITZ, HEBMANN (1814-1888), German scholar, was born 
at Langensalza in Saxony on the 29th of July 1814. Having 
studied at Leipzig under G. Hermann and at Berlin under 
Bockh and Lachmann, he became successively teacher at the 
Blochmann institute in Dresden (1836), Oberlehrer at the 
Friedrich-Wilhelms gymnasium (1838) and the Graues Kloster 
(1840) in Berlin, professor at the gymnasium at Stettin (1842), 
professor at the university of Vienna (1849), member of the 
imperial academy (1854), member of the council of education 
(1864), and director of the Graues Kloster gymnasium (1867). 
He retired in 1888, and died on the 25th of July in that year at 
Berlin. He took great interest in higher education, and was 
chiefly responsible for the system of teaching and examination 
in use in the high schools of Prussia after 1882. But it is as a 
commentator on Plato and Aristotle that he is best known 
outside Germany. His most important works in this connexion 
are: Disputationes Platonicae Duae (1837); Platonische Studien 
(3rd ed., 1886); Observationes Criticae in Aristotelis Libros 
Metaphysicos (1842); Observationes Criticae in Aristotelis quae 
feruntur Magna M or alia et Ethica Eudemia (1844); Alexandri 
Aphrodisiensis Commentarius in Libros Metaphysicos Aristotelis 
(1847); Aristotelis Metaphysica (1848-1849); tjber die Kate- 
goriendesA.(i&53); Aristotelische Studien (1862-1867); Index 



BONIVARD— BONN 



209 



Aristotelicus (1870). Other works: Uber den Ursprung der 
homerischen Gedichte (5th ed., 1881); Beitrdge zur Erklarung des 
Thukydides (1854), des Sophokles (1856-1857). He also wrote 
largely on classical and educational subjects, mainly for the 
Zeitschrift fiir die bsterreichischen Gymnasien. 

A full list of his writings is given in the obituary notice by T. 
Gompertz in the Biographisches Jahrbuchfiir Altertumskunde (1890). 

BONIVARD, FRANCOIS (1493-1570), the hero of Byron's 
poem, The Prisoner of Chillon, was born at Seyssel of an old 
Savoyard family. Bonivard has been described as " a man of 
the Renaissance who had strayed into the age of the Reforma- 
tion." His real character and history are, however, widely 
different from the legendary account which was popularized by 
Byron. In 15 10 he succeeded his uncle, who had educated him, 
as prior of the Cluniac priory of St Victor, close to Geneva. 
He naturally, therefore, opposed the attempts of the duke of 
Savoy, aided by his relative, the bishop of the city, to maintain 
his rights as lord of Geneva. He was imprisoned by the duke 
at Gex from 1519 to 1521, lost his priory, and became more and 
more anti-Savoyard. In 1530 he was again seized by the duke 
and imprisoned for four years underground, in the castle of 
Chillon, till he was released in 1536 by the Bernese, who then 
wrested Vaud from the duke. He had been imprisoned for 
political reasons, for he did not become a Protestant till after 
his release, and then found that his priory had been destroyed 
in 1534. He obtained a pension from Geneva, and was four 
times married, but owing to his extravagances was always in 
debt. He was officially entrusted in 1542 with the task of 
compiling a history of Geneva from the earliest times. In 1551 
his MS. of the Chroniques de Geneve (ending in 1530) was sub- 
mitted to Calvin for correction, but it was not published till 
1831. The best edition is that of 1867. The work is uncritical 
and partial, but is his best title to fame. 

BONN, a town of Germany, in the Prussian Rhine province, 
on the left bank of the Rhine, 15 m. S. by E. from Cologne, on 
the main line of railway to Mainz, and at the junction of the 
lines to the Eif el and (by ferry) to the right bank of the Rhine. 
Pop. (1885) 35,989; (1905) 81,997. The river is here crossed 
by a fine bridge (1896-1898), 1417 ft. in length, flanked by 
an embankment 2 m. long, above and parallel with which is 
the Coblenzer-strasse, with beautiful villas and pretty gardens 
reaching down to the Rhine. The central part of the town is 
composed of narrow streets, but the outskirts contain numerous 
fine buildings, and the appearance of the town from the river 
is attractive. There are six Roman Catholic and two Protestant 
churches, the most important of which is the Munster (minster), 
an imposing edifice of grey stone, in the Romanesque and 
Transition styles, surmounted by five towers, of which the 
central, rising to a height of 315 ft., is a landmark in the Rhine 
valley. The church dates from the nth, 12th and 13th centuries, 
was restored in 1875 and following years and in 1 890-1 894 was 
adorned with paintings. Among other churches are the Stifts- 
kirche (monasterial church), rebuilt 1879-1884; the Jesuiten- 
kirche (1693); the Minoritenkirche (1278-1318), the Herz 
Jesu-kirche (1862) and the Marienkirche (1892). There is also 
a synagogue, and the university chapel serves as an English 
church. The town also possesses a town hall situate on the 
market square and dating from 1737, a fine block of law-court 
buildings, several high-grade schools and a theatre. 

By far the finest of the buildings, however, is the famous 
university, which occupies the larger part of the southern 
frontage of the town. The present establishment only dates 
from 1818, and owes its existence to King Frederick William III. 
of Prussia; but as early as 1786 the academy which had been 
founded about nine years before was raised by Archbishop 
Maximilian Frederick of Cologne to the rank of a university, 
and continued to exercise its functions till 1794, when it was 
dissolved by the last elector. The building now occupied by the 
university was originally the electoral palace, constructed about 
1717 out of the materials of the old fortifications. It was 
remodelled after the town came into Prussian possession. There 
are five faculties in the university — a legal, a medical,, and a 



philosophic, and one of Roman Catholic and another Protestant 
theology. The library numbers upwards of 230,000 volumes; 
and the antiquarian museum contains a valuable collection of 
Roman relics discovered in the neighbourhood. Connected with 
the university are also physiological, pathological and chemical 
institutes, five clinical departments and a laboratory. An 
academy of agriculture, with a natural history museum and 
botanic garden attached, is established in the palace of Clemens- 
ruhe at Poppelsdorf, which is reached by a fine avenue about a 
mile long, bordered on both sides by a double row of chestnut 
trees. A splendid observatory, long under the charge of Friedrich 
Wilhelm Argelander, stands on the south side of the road. The 
Roman Catholic archiepiscopal theological college, beautifully 
situated on an eminence overlooking the Rhine, dates from 1892. 

Beethoven was born in Bonn, and a statue was erected to him 
in the Miinster-platz in 1845. B. G. Niebuhr is buried in the 
cemetery outside of the Sterntor, where a monument was placed 
to his memory by Frederick William IV. Here are also the 
tombs of A. W. von Schlegel, the diplomatist Christian Karl 
von Bunsen, Robert Schumann, Karl Simrock, E. M. Arndt 
and Schiller's wife. The town is adorned with a marble monu- 
ment commemorating the war of 1870-71, a handsome fountain, 
and a statue of the Old Catholic bishop Reinkens. In 1889 a 
museum of Beethoven relics was opened in the house in which 
the composer was born. There are further a municipal museum, 
arranged in a private house since 1882, an academic art museum 
(1884), with some classic originals, a creation of F. G. Welcker, 
and the provincial museum, standing near the railway station, 
which contains a collection of medieval stone monuments and 
works of art, besides a small picture gallery. 

One of the most conspicuous features of Bonn, viewed from 
the river, is the pilgrimage (monastic) church of Kreuzberg 
(1627), behind and above Poppelsdorf; it has a flight of 28 
steps, which pilgrims used to ascend on their knees. " Der alte 
Zoll," commanding a magnificent view of the Siebengebirge, is 
the only remaining bulwark of the old fortifications, the Sterntor 
having been removed in order to open up better communication 
with the rapidly increasing western suburbs and the terminus 
of the light railway to Cologne. 

But for its university Bonn would be a place of comparatively 
little importance, its trade and commerce being of moderate 
dimensions. Its principal industries are jute spinning and 
weaving, and the manufacture of porcelain, flags, machinery 
and beer, and it has some trade in wine. There are considerable 
numbers of foreign residents, notably English, attracted by the 
natural beauty of the place and by the educational facilities it 
affords. 

Bonn (Bonna or Castro, Bonnensia) , originally a town of the 
Ubii, became at an early period the site of a Roman military 
settlement, and as such is frequently mentioned by Tacitus. 
It was the scene, in a.d. 70, of a battle in which the Romans 
were defeated by Claudius Civilis, the valiant leader of the 
Batavians. Greatly reduced by successive barbarian inroads, it 
was restored about 359 by the emperor Julian. In the centuries 
that followed the break-up of the Roman empire it again suffered 
much from barbarian attacks, and was finally devastated in 
889 by bands of Norse raiders who had sailed up the Rhine. 
It was again fortified by Konrad von Hochstaden, archbishop 
of Cologne (1 238-1 261), whose successor, Engelbert von Falken- 
burg (d. 1274), driven out of his cathedral city by the towns- 
people, established himself here (1265); from which time until 
1 794 it remained the residence of the electors of Cologne. During 
the various wars that devastated Germany in the 16th, 17th and 
18th centuries, the town was frequently besieged and occupied by 
the several belligerents, but continued to belong to the electors 
till 1794, when the French took possession of it. At the peace of 
Luneville they were formally recognized in their occupation; 
but in 181 5 the town was made over by the congress of Vienna 
to Prussia. The fortifications had been dismantled in 17 17. 

See F. Ritter, Entstehung der drei dltesten Siadte am Rhein: Koln, 
Bonn und Mainz (Bonn, 1851); H. von Sybel, Die Grilndung der 
Unvoersitat Bonn (1868) ; and Fuhrer von Hesse (10th ed., 1901). 



2IO 



BONNAT— BONNER 



BONNAT, LEON JOSEPH FLORENTIN (1833- ), French 
painter, was born at Bayonne on the 20th of June 1833. He was 
educated in Spain, under Madrazo at Madrid, and his long series 
of portraits shows the influence of Velasquez and the Spanish 
realists. In 1869 he won a medal of honour at Paris, where he 
became one of the leading artists of his day, and in 1888 he 
became professor of painting at the Ecole des Beaux Arts. In 
May 1905 he succeeded Paul Dubois as director. His vivid 
portrait-painting is his most characteristic work, but his subject 
pictures, such as the " Martyrdom of St Denis " in the Pantheon, 
are also famous. 

BONNE-CARRERE, GUILLAUME DE (1754-1825), French 
diplomatist, was born at Muret in Languedoc on the 13th of 
February 1754. He began his career in the army, but soon 
entered the diplomatic service under Vergennes. A friend of 
Mirabeau and of Dumouriez, he became very active at the Revolu- 
tion, and Dumouriez re-established for him the title of director- 
general of the department of foreign affairs (March 1792). He 
remained at the ministry, preserving the habits of the diplomacy 
of the old regime, until December 1792, when he was sent to 
Belgium as agent of the republic, but he was involved in the 
treason of Dumouriez and was arrested on the 2nd of April 1793. 
To justify himself, he published an account of his conduct from 
the beginning of the Revolution. He was freed from prison in 
July 1794. Napoleon did not trust him, and gave him only 
some unimportant missions. After 181 5 Bonne-Carrere retired 
into private life, directing a profitable business in public carriages 
between Paris and Versailles. 

BONNER, EDMUND (i5oo?-is69), bishop of London, was 
perhaps the natural son of George Savage, rector of Davenham, 
Cheshire, by Elizabeth Frodsham, who was afterwards married 
to Edmund Bonner, a sawyer of Hanley in Worcestershire. 
This account, which was printed with many circumstantial 
details by Strype (Eccles. Mem. III. i. 172-173), was disputed by 
Strype's contemporary, Sir Edmund Lechmere, who asserted on 
not very satisfactory evidence (ib. Annals, I. ii. 300) that Bonner 
was of legitimate birth. He was educated at Broadgates Hall, 
now Pembroke College, Oxford, graduating bachelor of civil 
and canon law in June 15 19. He was ordained about the same 
time, and admitted D.C.L. in 1525. In 1529 he was Wolsey's 
chaplain, and he was with the cardinal at Cawood at the time of 
his arrest. Subsequently he was transferred, perhaps through 
Cromwell's influence, to the service of the king, and in January 
1532 he was sent to Rome to obstruct the judicial proceedings 
against Henry in the papal curia. In October 1533 he was en- 
trusted with the unmannerly task of intimating to Clement VII., 
while he was the guest of Francis I. at Marseilles, Henry's appeal 
from the pope to a general council; but there seems to be no 
good authority for Burnet's story that Clement threatened to 
have him burnt alive. For these and other services Bonner 
had been rewarded by- the grant of several livings, and in 1535 
he was made archdeacon of Leicester. 

Towards the end of that year he was sent to further what he 
called "the cause of the Gospel" (Letters and Papers, 1536, 
No. 469) in North Germany; and in 1536 he wrote a preface to 
Gardiner's De vera Obedientia, which asserted the royal, denied 
the papal, supremacy, and was received with delight by the 
Lutherans. After a brief embassy to the emperor in the spring of 
1 538, Bonner superseded Gardiner at Paris, and began his mission 
by sending Cromwell a long list of accusations against his pre- 
decessor (ib. 1538, ii. 144). He was almost as bitter against 
Wyatt and Mason, whom he denounced as a " papist," and the 
violence of his conduct led Francis I. to threaten him with a 
hundred strokes of the halberd. He seems, however, to have 
pleased his patron, Cromwell, and perhaps Henry, by his energy 
in seeing the king's " Great " Bible in English through the press 
in Paris. He was already king's chaplain; his appointment 
at Paris had been accompanied by promotion to the see of 
Hereford, and before he returned to take possession he was trans- 
lated to the bishopric of London (October 1539). 

Hitherto Bonner had been known as a somewhat coarse and 
unscrupulous tool of Cromwell^a sort of ecclesiastical Wriothesley, 



He is not known to have protested against any of the changes 
effected by his masters; he professed to be no theologian, and 
was wont, when asked theological questions, to refer his inter- 
rogators to the divines. He had graduated in law, and not in 
theology. There was nothing in the Reformation to appeal 
to him, except the repudiation of papal control; and he was 
one of those numerous Englishmen whose views were faithfully 
reflected in the Six Articles. He became a staunch Conservative, 
and, apart from his embassy to the emperor in 15 24-1 543, was 
mainly occupied during the last years of Henry's reign in 
brandishing the " whip with six strings." 

The accession of Edward VI, opened a fresh and more credit- 
able chapter in Bonner's career. Like Gardiner, he could 
hardly repudiate that royal supremacy, in the establishment 
of which he had been so active an agent; but he began to doubt 
that supremacy when he saw to what uses it could be put by 
a Protestant council, and either he or Gardiner evolved the 
theory that the royal supremacy was in abeyance during a royal 
minority. The ground was skijfully chosen, but it was not 
legally nor constitutionally tenable. Both he and Gardiner 
had in fact sought fresh licences to exercise their ecclesiastical 
jurisdiction from the young king; and, if he was supreme enough 
to confer jurisdiction, he was supreme enough to issue the injunc- 
tions and order the visitation to which Bonner objected. More- 
over, if a minority involved an abeyance of the royal supremacy in 
the ecclesiastical sphere, it must do the same in the temporal 
sphere, and there could be nothing but anarchy. It was on this 
question that Bonner came into conflict with Edward's govern- 
ment. He resisted the visitation of August 1547, and was 
committed to the Fleet; but he withdrew his opposition, and 
was released in time to take an active part against the govern- 
ment in the parliament of November 1547. In the next session, 
November 1548-March 1549, he was a leading opponent of the 
first Act of Uniformity and Book of Common Prayer. When 
these became law, he neglected to enforce them, and on the 
1st of September 1549 he was required by the council to main- 
tain at St Paul's Cross that the royal authority was as great 
as if the king were forty years of age. He failed to comply, 
and after a seven days' trial he was deprived of his bishopric 
by an ecclesiastical court over which Cranmer presided, and 
was sent to the Marshalsea. The fall of Somerset in the following 
month raised Bonner's hopes, and he appealed from Cranmer 
to the council. After a struggle the Protestant faction gained 
the upper hand, and on the 7th of February 1550 Bonner's 
deprivation was confirmed by the council sitting in the Star 
Chamber, and he was further condemned to perpetual 
imprisonment. 

He was released by Mary's accession, and was at once restored 
to his see, his deprivation being regarded as invalid and Ridley 
as an intruder. He vigorously restored Roman Catholicism in 
his diocese, made no difficulty about submitting to the papal 
jurisdiction which he had forsworn, and in 1555 began the 
persecution to which he owes his fame. His apologists explain 
that his action was merely " official," but Bonner was one of those 
who brought it to pass that the condemnation of heretics to the 
fire should be part of his ordinary official duties. The enforce- 
ment of the first Book of Common Prayer had also been part of 
his official duties; and the fact that Bonner made no such 
protest against the burning of heretics as he had done in the 
former case shows that he found it the more congenial duty. 
Tunstal was as good a Catholic as Bonner; he left a different 
repute behind him, a clear enough indication of a difference in 
their deeds. 

On the other hand, Bonner did not go out of his way to perse- 
cute; many of his victims were forced upon him by the council, 
which sometimes thought that he had not been severe enough 
(see Acts of the P.C. 1554-1556, pp. 115, 139; 1556-1558, 
pp. 18, 19, 216, 276). So completely had the state dominated 
the church that religious persecutions had become state perse- 
cutions, and Bonner was acting as an ecclesiastical sheriff in 
the most refractory district of the realm. Even Foxe records 
instances in which Bonner failed to persecute. But he had 



BONNET, C— BONNET 



211 



no mercy for a fallen foe; and he is seen at his worst in his 
brutal jeers at Cranmer, when he was entrusted with the duty 
of degrading his former chief. It is a more remarkable fact that, 
in spite of his prominence, neither Henry VIII. nor Mary should 
ever have admitted him to the privy council. He seems to 
have been regarded by his own party as a useful instrument, 
especially in disagreeable work, rather than as a desirable 
colleague. 

On her accession Elizabeth refused to allow him to kiss her 
hand; but he sat and voted in the parliament and convocation 
of 1559. In May he refused to take the oath of supremacy, 
acquiring like his colleagues consistency with old age. He was 
sent to the Marshalsea, and a few years later was indicted on 
a charge of praemunire on refusing the oath when tendered 
him by his diocesan, Bishop Home of Winchester. He challenged 
the legality of Home's consecration, and a special act of parlia- 
ment was passed to meet the point, while the charge against 
Bonner was withdrawn. He died in the Marshalsea on the 5th 
of September 1569, and was buried in St George's, Southwark, at 
midnight to avoid the risk of a hostile demonstration. 

See Letters and Papers of Henry VIII. vols, iv.-xx. ; Acts of the 
Privy Council (1542-1569); Lords' Journals, vol. i. ; Wilkins' 
Concilia; Foxe's Acts and Monuments, ed. Townsend; Burnet, ed. 
Pocock; Strype's Works; Gough's Index to Parker Soc. Publ.; 
S. R. Maitland's Essays on the Ref. ; Froude's and R. W. Dixon's 
Histories; Pollard's Cranmer and England under Somerset; other 
authorities cited in Diet. Nat. Biogr. (A. F. P.) 

BONNET, CHARLES (1720-1793), Swiss naturalist and 
philosophical writer, was born at Geneva on the 13 th of March 
1720, of a French family driven into Switzerland by the re- 
ligious persecution in the 16th century. He made law his 
profession, but his favourite pursuit was the study of natural 
science. The account of the ant-lion in N. A. Pluche's Spectacle 
de la nature, which he read in his sixteenth year, turned his 
attention to insect life. He procured R. A. F. de Reaumur's 
work on insects, and with the help of live specimens succeeded 
in adding many observations to those of Reaumur and Pluche. 
In 1 740 Bonnet communicated to the academy of sciences a paper 
containing a series of experiments establishing what is now 
termed parthenogenesis in aphides or tree-lice, which obtained 
for him the honour of being admitted a corresponding member 
of the academy. In 1741 he began to study reproduction by 
fusion and the regeneration of lost parts in the freshwater hydra 
and other animals; and in the following year he discovered 
that the respiration of caterpillars and butterflies is performed 
by pores, to which the name of stigmata has since been given. 
In 1743 he was admitted a fellow of the Royal Society; and in 
the same year he became a doctor of laws — his last act in 
connexion with a profession which had ever been distasteful 
to him. 

His first published work appeared in 1745, entitled Traitl 
d'insectologie, in which were collected his various discoveries 
regarding insects, along with a preface on the development of 
germs and the scale of organized beings. Botany, particularly 
the leaves of plants, next attracted his attention; and after 
several years of diligent study, rendered irksome by the increas- 
ing weakness of his eyesight, he published in 1754 one of the 
most original and interesting of his works, Recherches sur Pusage 
des feuilles dans les pi antes; in which among other things he 
advances many considerations tending to show (as has quite 
recently been done by Francis Darwin) that plants are endowed 
with powers of sensation and discernment. But Bonnet's eye- 
sight, which threatened to fail altogether, caused him to turn 
to philosophy. In 1754 his Essai de psychologie was published 
anonymously in London. This was followed by the Essai 
analytique sur les facultis de I'dme (Copenhagen, 1760), in which 
he develops his views regarding the physiological conditions of 
mental activity. He returned to physical science, but to the 
speculative side of it, in his Considerations sur les corps organises 
(Amsterdam, 1762), designed to refute the theory of epigenesis, 
and to explain and defend the doctrine of pre-existent germs. 
In his Contemplation de la nature (Amsterdam, 1 764-1 765; 
translated into Italian, German, English and Dutch), one of his 



most popular and delightful works, he sets forth, in eloquent 
language, the theory that all the beings in nature form a gradual 
scale rising from lowest to highest, without any break in its 
continuity. His last important work was the Palinginisie 
philosophique (Geneva, 1769-1770); in it he treats of the past 
and future of living beings, and supports the idea of the survival 
of all animals, and the perfecting of their faculties in a future 
state. 

Bonnet's life was uneventful. He seems never to have left 
Switzerland, nor does he appear to have taken any part in public 
affairs except for the period between 1752 and 1768, during which 
he was a member of the council of the republic. The last twenty 
five years of his life he spent quietly in the country, at Genthod, 
near Geneva, where he died after a long and painful illness on 
the 20th of May 1793. His wife was a lady of the family of 
De la Rive. 

They had no children, but Madame Bonnet's nephew, the 
celebrated H. B. de Saussure, was brought up as their son. 

Bonnet's philosophical system may be outlined as follows. 
Man is a compound of two distinct substances, mind and body, 
the one immaterial and the other material. All knowledge 
originates in sensations; sensations follow (whether as physical 
effects or merely as sequents Bonnet will not say) vibrations in 
the nerves appropriate to each; and lastly, the nerves are made 
to vibrate by external physical stimulus. A nerve once set in 
motion by a particular object tends to reproduce that motion; 
so that when it a second time receives an impression from the 
same object it vibrates with less resistance. The sensation 
accompanying this increased flexibility in the nerve is, according 
to Bonnet, the condition of memory. When reflection — that is, 
the active element in mind — is applied to the acquisition and 
combination of sensations, those abstract ideas are formed 
which, though generally distinguished from, are thus merely 
sensations in combination only. That which puts the mind 
into activity is pleasure or pain; happiness is the end of human 
existence. Bonnet's metaphysical theory is based on two 
principles borrowed from Leibnitz — first, that there are not 
successive acts of creation, but that the universe is completed 
by the single original act of the divine will, and thereafter moves 
on by its own inherent force; and secondly, that there is no 
break in the continuity of existence. The divine Being origin- 
ally created a multitude of germs in a graduated scale, each 
with an inherent power of self-development. At every suc- 
cessive step in the progress of the universe, these germs, as 
progressively modified, advance nearer to perfection; if some 
advanced and others did not there would be a gap in the con- 
tinuity of the chain. Thus not man only but all other forms of 
existence are immortal. Nor is man's mind alone immortal; 
his body also will pass into the higher stage, not, indeed, the 
body he now possesses, but a finer one of which the germ at 
present exists within him. It is impossible, however, to reach 
absolute perfection, because the distance is infinite. In this 
final proposition Bonnet violates his own principle of continuity, 
by postulating an interval between the highest created being 
and the Divine. It is also difficult to understand whether the 
constant advance to perfection is performed by each individual, 
or only by each race of beings as a whole. There seems, in fact, 
to be an oscillation between two distinct but analogous doctrines 
— that of the constantly increasing advancement of the individual 
in future stages of existence, and that of the constantly increas- 
ing advancement of the race as a whole according to the succes- 
sive evolutions of the globe. 

Bonnet's complete works appeared at Neuchatel in 1779-1783, 
partly revised by himself. An English translation of certain portions 
of the Palingenesie. philosophique was published in 1787, under the 
title. Philosophical and Critical Inquiries concerning Christianity. 
See also A. Lemoine, Charles Bonnet (Paris, 1850) ; the due de 
Caraman, Charles Bonnet, philosophe et naturaliste (Paris, 1859) '< 
Max Offner, Die Psychologie C. B. (Leipzig, 1893) ; Toh. Speck, in 
Arch. f. Gesch. d. Philos. x. (1897), xi. (1897), pp. 58 foil., xi. (1898) 
pp. 1-211 ; J. Trembley, Vie privee et litteraire de C. B. (Bern, 1794). 

BONNET (from Lat. bonetum, a kind of stuff, then the cap 
made of this stuff), originally a soft cap or covering for the head, 



212 



BONNEVAL— BONNIVET 



the common term in English till the end of the 17th century; 
this sense survives in Scotland, especially as applied to the cap 
known as a " glengarry." The " bonnet " of a ship's sail now 
means an additional piece laced on to the bottom, but it seems 
to have formerly meant a piece laced to the top, the term " to 
vail the bonnet " being found at the beginning of the 16th 
century to mean " strike sail " (from the Fr. avaler), to let down. 
In modern times " bonnet " has come to be used of a type of 
head-covering for women, differentiated from " hat " by fitting 
closely to the head and often having no brim, but varying 
considerably in shape according to the period and fashion. 
The term, by a natural extension,, is also applied to certain 
protective devices, as in a steam-engine or safety-lamp, or in 
slang use to a gambler's accomplice, a decoy. 

BONNEVAL, CLAUDE ALEXANDRE, Comte de (1675- 
1747), French adventurer, known also as Ahmed Pasha, was the 
descendant of an old family of Limousin. He was born on the 
14th of July 1675, and at the age of thirteen joined the Royal 
Marine Corps. After three years he entered the army, in which 
he rose to the command of a regiment. He served in the Italian 
campaigns under Catinat, Villeroi and Vendome, and in the 
Netherlands under Luxemburg, giving proofs of indomitable 
courage and great military ability. His insolent bearing towards 
the minister of war was made matter for a court-martial (1704). 
He was condemned to death, but saved himself by flight to 
Germany. Through the influence of Prince Eugene he obtained 
a general's command in the Austrian army, and fought with 
great bravery and distinction against France, and afterwards 
against Turkey. He was present at Malplaquet, and was severely 
wounded at Peterwardein. The proceedings against him in 
France were then allowed to drop, and he visited Paris, and 
married a daughter of Marshal de Biron. He returned, however, 
after a short time to the Austrian army, and fought with dis- 
tinction at Belgrade. He might now have risen to the highest 
rank, had he not made himself disagreeable to Prince Eugene, 
who sent him as master of the ordnance to the Low Countries. 
There his ungovernable temper led him into a quarrel with the 
marquis de Prie, Eugene's deputy governor in the Netherlands, 
who answered his challenge by placing him in confinement. 
A court-martial was again held upon him, and he was con- 
demned to death; but the emperor commuted the sentence 
to one year's imprisonment and banishment. Bonneval, soon 
after his release, offered his services to the Turkish government, 
professed the Mahommedan faith, and took the name of Ahmed. 
He was made a pasha, and appointed to organize and command 
the artillery. He rendered valuable services to the sultan in 
his war with Russia, and with the famous Nadir Shah. As a 
reward he received the governorship of Chios, but he soon fell 
under the suspicion of the Porte, and was banished for a time 
to the shores of the Black Sea. He was meditating a return to 
Europe and Christianity when he died at Constantinople on the 
23rd of March 1747. 

The Memoirs published under his name are spurious. See Prince 
de Ligne, Memoire sur le comte de Bonneval (Paris, 1817); and A. 
Vandal, Le Pacha Bonneval (Paris, 1885). 

BONNEVILLE, BENJAMIN L. E. (1795-1878), American 
military engineer and explorer, was born in France about 1795. 
He emigrated to the United States in early youth, and graduated 
at the United States Military Academy at West Point in 181 5. 
He was engaged in the construction of military roads in the 
south-west, and became a captain of infantry in 1825. In 
1831-1836, having obtained leave of absence from the army, 
he conducted, largely on his own responsibility, an exploring 
expedition to the Rocky Mountains, proceeding up the Platte 
river through parts of the later states of Colorado and Wyoming 
into the Great Salt Lake basin and thence into California. After 
being absolutely cut off from civilization for several years, and 
having his name struck from the army list, he returned with an 
interesting and valuable account of his adventures, which was 
edited and amplified by Washington Irving and published under 
the title The Rocky Mountains: or Scenes, Incidents, and Adven- 
tures in the Far West; from the Journal of Captain Benjamin 



L. E. Bonneville of the Army of the United States (2 vols., 1837), 
subsequent editions bearing the title The Adventures of Captain 
Bonneville, U.S.A., in the Rocky Mountains and the Far West. 
Bonneville became a major in 1845, and was breveted lieutenant- 
colonel for gallantry in the battles of Contreras and Churubusco 
during the Mexican War. He became a colonel in 1855, com- 
manded the Gila river expedition against the Apaches in 1857, 
and from 1858 to 1861 commanded the department of New 
Mexico. He was retired in 1861, but served during the Civil 
War as recruiting officer and commandant of barracks at 
St Louis, Missouri, receiving the brevet rank of brigadier- 
general in 1865. He died at Fort Smith, Arkansas, on the 12th 
of June 1878. The extinct glacial lake which once covered 
what is now north-western Utah has been named in his honour. 

BONNEY, THOMAS GEORGE (1833- ), English geologist, 
eldest son of the Rev. Thomas Bonney, master of the grammar 
school at Rugeley, was born in that town on the 27th of July 
1833. Educated at Uppingham and St John's College, Cam- 
bridge, he graduated as 12th wrangler in 1856, and was ordained 
in the following year. From 1856 to 1861 he was mathematical 
master at Westminster school, and geology was pursued by him 
only as a recreation, mainly in Alpine regions. In 1868 he was 
appointed tutor at St John's College and lecturer in geology. 
His attention was specially directed to the study of the igneous 
and metamorphic rocks in Alpine regions and in various parts of 
England, in the Lizard, at Salcombe, in Charnwood Forest, in 
Wales and the Scottish Highlands. In 1877 he was chosen 
professor of geology in University College, London. He became 
secretary and afterwards president of the Geological Society 
(1884-1886), secretary of the British Association (1881-1885), 
president of the Mineralogical Society and of the Alpine Club. 
He was also in 1887 appointed honorary canon of Manchester. 
His purely scientific works are: Cambridgeshire Geology (1875); 
The Story of our Planet (1893) ; Charles Lyell and Modem Geology 
(1895); Ice Work, Past and Present (1896); Volcanoes (1899). 
In addition to many papers published in the Quarterly Journal 
of the Geological Society and Geological Magazine, he wrote 
several popular works on Alpine Regions, on English and Welsh 
scenery, as well as on theological subjects. 

See Geological Magazine for September 1901 (with bibliography). 

BONNIER, ANGE ELISABETH LOUIS ANTOINE (1749- 
1799), French diplomatist, was a member of the Legislative 
Assembly and of the Convention, where he voted with the 
majority. During the Directory he was charged with diplo- 
matic missions, first to Lille and then to the congress of Rastadt 
(October 1797), where the negotiations dragged wearily along 
and were finally broken. On the 28th of April 1799 the pleni- 
potentiaries on leaving Rastadt were assailed at the gates of 
the town by Hungarian hussars, probably charged to secure their 
papers. Bonnier and one of his colleagues, Claude Roberjot, 
were killed. The other, Jean Debry, was wounded. 

See Huefer, Der Rastadtergesandtenmord (Bonn, 1896). 

BONNIVET, GUILLAUME GOUFFIER, Seigneur de (c. 
1488-1525), French soldier, was the younger brother of Artus 
Gouffier, seigneur de Boisy, tutor of Francis I. of France. 
Bonnivet was brought up with Francis, and after the young 
king's accession he became one of the most powerful of the 
royal favourites. In 151 5 he was made admiral of France. In 
the imperial election of 15 19 he superintended the candidature 
of Francis, and spent vast sums of money in his efforts to secure 
the votes of the electors, but without success. He was the 
implacable enemy of the constable de Bourbon and contributed 
to his downfall. In command of the army of Navarre in 1521, 
he occupied Fuenterrabia and was probably responsible for its 
non-restoration and for the consequent renewal of hostilities. 
He succeeded Marshal Lautrec in 1523 in the command of the 
army of Italy and entered the Milanese, but was defeated and 
forced to effect a disastrous retreat, in which the chevalier 
Bayard perished. He was one of the principal commanders of 
the army which Francis led into Italy at the end of 1524, and 
died at the battle of Pavia on the 24th of February 1525. Bran- 
t6me says that it was at Bonnivet's suggestion that the battle 



BONOMI— BONPLAND 



213 



of Pavia was fought, and that, seeing the disaster he had caused, 
he courted and found death heroically in the fight. In spite of 
his failures as a general and diplomatist, his handsome face 
and brilliant wit enabled him to retain throughout his life the 
intimacy and confidence of his king. He was a man of licentious 
life. According to Brantome he was the successful rival of the 
king for the favours of Madame de Chateaubriand, and if we 
may believe him to have been — as is very probable — the hero 
of the fourth story of the Heptameron, Marguerite d'Angouleme 
had occasion to resist his importunities. 

Authorities. — Bonnivet's correspondence in the Bibliotheque 
Nationale, Paris ; memoirs of the time ; complete works of Brant6me, 
vol. iii., published by Ludovic Lalanne for the Societe de l'Histoire 
de France (1864 seq.). See also Ernest Lavisse, Histoire de France, 
vol. v., by H. Lemonnier (1903-1904). 

BONOMI, GIUSEPPI (173 0-1808), English architect, was 
born at Rome on the 19th of January 1739. After attaining 
a considerable reputation in Italy, he came in 1767 to England, 
and finally settled in practice there. He was the innocent cause 
of the retirement of Sir Joshua Reynolds from the presidency 
of the Royal Academy. Sir Joshua wished him to become a 
full Academician, regarding him as a fitting occupant of the then 
vacant chair of perspective. But the majority of the Acade- 
micians were opposed to this suggestion, and Bonomi was elected 
an associate only, and that merely by the president's casting 
vote. Bonomi was largely responsible for the revival of classical 
architecture in England. His most famous work was the Italian 
villa at Roseneath, Dumbartonshire, designed for the duke of 
Argyll. In 1804 he was appointed honorary architect to St Peter's 
at Rome. He died in London on the 9th of March 1808. 

His son, GiuSEPPi Bonomi (1796-1878), studied art in London 
at the Royal Academy, and became a sculptor, but is best known 
as an illustrator of the leading Egyptological publications of his 
day. From 1824 to 1832 he was in Egypt, making drawings 
of the monuments in the company of Burton, Lane and Wilkin- 
son. In 1833 he visited the rnosque of Omar, returning with 
detailed drawings, and from 1842 to 1844 was again in Egypt,. 
attached to the Prussian government exploration expedition 
under Lepsius. He assisted in the arrangement of the Egyptian 
court at the Crystal Palace in 1853, and in 1861 was appointed 
curator of the Soane Museum. He died on the 3rd of March 
1878. 

BONONCINI (or Buononcini), GIOVANNI BATTISTA (1672?- 
1750?), Italian musical composer, was the son of the composer 
Giovanni Maria Bononcini, best known as the author of a treatise 
entitled II Musico Prattico (Bologna, 1673), and brother of the 
composer Marc' Antonio Bononcini, with whom he has often 
been confused. He is said to have been born at Modena in 
1672, but the date of his birth must probably be placed some 
ten years earlier. He was a pupil of his father and of Colonna, 
and produced his first operas, Tullo Ostilio and Serse, at Rome 
in 1694. In 1696 he was at the court of Berlin, and between 
1700 and 1720 divided his time between Vienna and Italy. 
In 1720 he was summoned to London by the Royal Academy 
of Music, and produced several operas, enjoying the protection 
of the Marlborough family. About 1731 it was discovered 
that he had a few years previously palmed off a madrigal by 
Lotti as his own work, and after a long correspondence he was 
obliged to leave the country. He remained for several years in 
France, and in 1 748 was summoned to Vienna to compose music 
in honour of the peace of Aix-la-Chapelle. He then went to 
Venice as a composer of operas, and nothing more is known of 
his life. 

Bononcini's rivalry with Handel will always ensure him 
immortality, but he was in himself a musician of considerable 
merit, and seems to have influenced the style, not only of Handel 
but even of Alessandro Scarlatti. Either he or his brother (our 
knowledge of the two composers' lives is at present not sufficient 
to distinguish their works clearly) was the inventor of that 
sharply rhythmical style conspicuous in II Trionfo di Camilla 
(1697), the success of which at Naples probably induced Scar- 
latti to adopt a similar type of melody. It is noticeable in the 
once popular air of Bononcini, L'esperto nocchiero, and in the air 



Vado ben spesso, long attributed to Salvator Rosa, but really 
by Bononcini. 

BONONIA (mod. Bologna), the chief town of ancient Aemilia 
(see Aemilia, Via), in Italy. It was said by classical writers 
to be of Etruscan origin, and to have been founded, under the 
name Felsina, from Perusia by Aucnus or Ocnus. Excavations 
of recent years have, however, led to the discovery of some 
600 ancient Italic (Ligurian?) huts, and of cemeteries of the 
same and the succeeding (Umbrian) periods (800-600? B.C.), 
of which the latter immediately preceded the Etruscan civil- 
ization (c. 600-400 B.C.). An extensive Etruscan necropolis, 
too, was discovered on the site of the modern cemetery (A. 
Zannoni, Scavi della Certosa, Bologna, 1876), and others in the 
public garden and on the Arnoaldi Veli property (Notizie degli 
Scavi, indice 1876-1900, s.v. "Bologna"). In 196 B.C., when 
the town first appears in history, it was already in the possession 
of the Boii, and had probably by this time changed its name, 
and in 189 B.C. it became a Roman colony. After the conquest 
of the mountain tribes, its importance was assured by its position 
on the Via Aemilia, by which it was connected in 187 B.C. with 
Ariminum and Placentia, and on the road, constructed in the 
same year, to Arretium; while another road was made, perhaps 
in 175 B.C., to Aquilelia. It thus became the centre of the road 
system of north Italy. In 90 B.C. it acquired Roman citizenship. 
In 43 B.C. it was used as his base of queries against Decius
Brutus by Mark Antony, who settled colonists here; Augustus 
added others later, constructing a new aqueduct from the Letta, 
a tributary of the Rhenus, which was restored to use in 1881 
(G. Gozzadini in Notizie degli Scavi, 1881, 162). After a fire in 
a.d. 53 the emperor Claudius made a subvention of 10 million 
sesterces (£1,087,500). Bononia seems, in fact, to have been 
one of the most important cities of ancient Italy, as Bologna is 
of modern Italy. It was able to resist Alaric in 410 and to 
preserve its existence during the general ruin. It afterwards 
belonged to the Greek exarchate of Ravenna. Of remains of 
the Roman period, however, there are none above ground, 
though various discoveries have been made from time to time 
within the city walls, the modern streets corresponding more or 
less, as it seems, with the ancient lines. Remains of the bridge 
of the Via Aemilia over the Rhenus have also been found — 
consisting of parts of the parapets on each side, in brick-faced 
concrete which belong to a restoration, the original construction 
(probably by Augustus in 2 B.C.) having been in blocks of 
Veronese red marble — and also of a massive protecting wall 
slightly above it, of late date, in the construction of which a large 
number of Roman tombstones were used. The bed of the river 
was found to have risen at least 20 ft. since the collapse of this 
bridge (about a.d. 1000), the total length of which must have 
been about 650 ft. and the width between the parapets 385- ft. 
See E. Brizio in Notizie degli Scavi (1896), 125, 450; (1897) 330; 
(1898)4651(1902)532. (T. As.) 

BONPLAND, AIMS' JACQUES ALEXANDRE (1773-1858), 
French traveller and botanist, whose real name was Goujand, 
was born at La Rochelle on the 22nd of August 1773. After 
serving as a surgeon in the French army and studying under J. 
N. Corvisart at Paris, he accompanied A. von Humboldt during 
five years of travel in Mexico, Colombia and the districts border- 
ing on the Orinoco and Amazon. In these explorations he 
collected and classified about 6000 plants till then mostly un- 
known in Europe, which he afterwards described in Plantes 
equinoxiales, &c. (Paris, 1808-1816). On returning to Paris he 
received a pension and the superintendence of the gardens at 
Malmaison, and published Monographie des Me'lastomi'es (1806), 
and Description des plantes rares de Navarre (181 3). In 1816 
he set out, taking with him various European plants, for Buenos 
Aires, where he was elected professor of natural history, an office 
which he soon quitted in order to explore central South America. 
While journeying to Bolivia he was arrested in 1821, by command 
of Dr Francia, the dictator of Paraguay, who detained him until 
1831. On regaining liberty he resided at San Borga in the pro- 
vince of Corrientes, until his removal in 1853 to Santa Anna, 
where he died on the 4th of May 1858. 



214 



BONSTETTEN— BOOK 



BONSTETTEN, CHARLES VICTOR DE (1745-1832), Swiss 
writer, an excellent type of a liberal patrician, more French than 
Swiss, and a good representative of the Gallicized Bern of the 
1 8th century. By birth a member of one of the great patrician 
families of Bern, he was educated in his native town, at Yverdon, 
and ( 1 763-1 766) at Geneva, where he came under the influence of 
Rousseau and of Charles Bonnet, and imbibed liberal sentiments. 
Recalled to Bern by his father, he was soon sent to Leiden, 
and then visited (1769) England, where he became a friend of 
the poet Gray. After his father's death (1770) he made a long 
journey in Italy, and on his return to Bern (1774) entered poli- 
tical life, for which he was unfitted by reason of his liberal ideas, 
which led him to patronize and encourage Johannes Muller, the 
future Swiss historian. In 1779 he was named the Bernese 
bailiff of Saanen or Gessenay (here he wrote his Lettres pastorales 
sur une contree de la Suisse, published in German in 1781), and in 
1787 was transferred in a similar capacity to Nyon, from which 
post he had to retire after taking part (1791) in a festival to 
celebrate the destruction of the Bastille. From 1795 to 1797 he 
governed (for the Swiss Confederation) the Italian-speaking 
districts of Lugano, Locarno, Mendrisio and Val Maggia, of which 
he published (1797) a pleasing description, and into which he 
is said to have introduced the cultivation of the potato. The 
French revolution of 1798 in Switzerland drove him again into 
private life. He spent the years 1798 to 1801 in Denmark, with 
his friend Fredirika Brun, and then settled down in 1803 in 
Geneva for the rest of his life. There he enjoyed the society of 
many distinguished persons, among whom was (1809-1817) 
Madame de Stael. It was during this period that he published 
his most celebrated work, L' Homme du midi et I'homme du nord 
(1824), a study of the influence of climate on different nations, 
the north being exalted at the expense of the south. Among 
his other works are the Recherches sur la nature el les lots de 
I' imagination (1807), and the Etudes de I'homme, ou Recherches 
sur les facultSs de penser et de sentir (1821), but he was better as 
an observer than as a philosopher. 

Lives by A. Steinlen (Lausanne, i860), by C. Morell (Winterthur, 
1861), and by R. Willy (Bern, 1898). See also vol. xiv. of Sainte- 
Beuve's Causeries du Lundi. (W. A. B. C.) 

BONUS (a jocular application of the Lat. bonus, for bonum, 
" a good thing "), a sum paid to shareholders in a joint-stock 
company, as an addition to the ordinary dividend, and generally 
given out of accumulated profits, or out of profits gained from 
exceptional transactions. As used by insurance companies, the 
word denotes the addition made to the amount of a policy by 
a distribution pro rata of accumulated profits or surplus. In 
a more general sense, bonus is any payment or remuneration over 
and above what is due and promised. 

BONZE (from Japanese bonzo, probably a mispronunciation 
of Chinese fan sung, " religious person "), the European name 
for the members of the Buddhist religious orders of Japan and 
China. The word is loosely used of all the Buddhist priests in 
those and the neighbouring countries. 

BOOK, the common name for any literary production of some 
bulk, now applied particularly to a printed composition forming 
a volume, or, if in more than one volume, a single organic 
literary work. The word is also used descriptively for the 
internal divisions or sections of a comprehensive work. 

The word " book " is found with variations of form and gender 
in all the Teutonic languages, the original form postulated for 
it being a strong feminine Boks, which must have been used in 
the sense of a writing-tablet. The most obvious connexion of this 
is with the old English boc, a beech tree, and though this is not 
free from philological difficulties, no probable alternative has 
been suggested. 

As early as 2400 B.C., in Babylonia, legal decisions, revenue 
accounts, &c. were inscribed in cuneiform characters on clay 
tablets and placed in jars, arranged on shelves and labelled by 
clay tablets attached by straws. In the 7th century B.C. a 
library of literary works written on such tablets existed at 
Nineveh, founded by Sargan (721-705 B.C.). As in the case of 
the " Creation " series at the British Museum the narrative was 



sometimes continued from one tablet to another, and some of 
the tablets are inscribed with entries forming a catalogue of the 
library. These clay tablets are perhaps entitled to be called 
books, but they are out of the direct ancestry of the modern 
printed book with which we are here chiefly concerned. One 
of the earliest direct ancestors of this extant is a roll of eighteen 
columns in Egyptian hieratic writing of about the 25th century 
B.C. in the Musee de Louvre at Paris, preserving the maxims 
of Ptah-hetep. Papyrus, the material on which the manuscript 
(known as the Papyrus Prisse) is written, was made from the pith 
of a reed chiefly found in Egypt, and is believed to have been in 
use as a writing material as early as about 4000 B.C. It continued 
to be the usual vehicle of writing until the early centuries of the 
Christian era, was used for pontifical bulls until a.d. 1022, and 
occasionally even later; while in Coptic manuscripts, for which 
its use had been revived in the 7 th century, it was employed as 
late as about a.d. 1250. It was from the name by which they 
called the papyrus, fivpXos or /3tj3Xos, that the Greeks formed 
PifiXiov, their word for a book, the plural of which (mis- 
taken for a feminine singular) has given us our own word Bible. 
In the 2nd century B.C. Eumenes II., king of Pergamus, 
finding papyrus hard to procure, introduced improvements into 
the preparations of the skins of sheep and calves for writing 
purposes, and was rewarded by the name of his kingdom being 
preserved in the word pergamentum, whence our " parchment," 
by which the dressed material is'known. In the 10th century the 
supremacy which parchment had gradually established was 
attacked by the introduction from the East of a new writing 
material made from a pulp of linen rags, and the name of the 
vanquished papyrus was transferred to this new rival. Paper- 
mills were set up in Europe in the 12th century, and the use of 
paper gained ground, though not very rapidly, until on the 
invention of printing, the demand for a cheap material for books, 
and the ease with which paper could be worked on a press, gave 
it a practical monopoly. This it preserved until nearly the end 
of the 19th century, when substances mainly composed of wood- 
pulp, esparto grass and clay largely took its place, while continu- 
ing, as in the transition from papyrus to linen-pulp, to pass under 
the same name (see Paper). 

So long as the use of papyrus was predominant the usual form 
of a book was that of the volumen or roll, wound round a stick, 
or sticks. The modern form of book, called by the Latins codex 
(a word originally used for the stump of a tree, or block of wood, 
and thence for the three-leaved tablets into which the block was 
sawn) was coming into fashion in Martial's time at Rome, and 
gained ground in proportion as parchment superseded papyrus. 
The volumen as it was unrolled revealed a series of narrow 
columns of writing, and the influence of this arrangement is 
seen in the number of columns in the earliest codices. Thus in 
the Codex Sinaiticus and Codex Vaticanus of the Bible, both of 
the 4th century, there are respectively four and three columns 
to a page; in the Codex Alexandrinus (5th century) only two; 
in the Codex Bezae (6th century) only one, and from this date 
to the invention of printing, while there were great changes 
in handwriting, the arrangement of books changed very little, 
single or double columns being used as was found convenient. 
In the external form of books there was much the same conserva- 
tism. In the Codex Amiatinus written in England in the 8th 
century one of the miniatures shows a book in a red leather cover, 
and the arrangement of the pattern on this curiously resembles 
that of the' 15th-century red leather bindings predominant 
in the Biblioteca Laurenziana at Florence, in which the codex 
itself is preserved. In the same way some of the small stamps 
used in Oxford bindings in the 15th century are nearly indistin- 
guishable from those used in England three centuries earlier. 
Much fuller details as to the history of written books in these as 
well as other respects will be found in the article Manuscript, 
to which the following account of the fortunes of books after the 
invention of printing must be regarded as supplementary. 

Between a manuscript written in a formal book-hand and an 
early printed copy of the same work, printed in the same district 
as the manuscript had been written, the difference in general 



BOOK 



215 



appearance was very slight. The printer's type (see Typography) 
would as a rule be based on a handwriting considered by the 
scribes appropriate to works of the same class; the chapter 
' headings, headlines, initial-letters, paragraph marks, and in some 
cases illustrations, would be added by hand in a style which might 
closely resemble the like decorations in the manuscript from which 
the text was being printed; there would be no title-page, and 
very probably no statement of any kind that the book was 
printed, or as to where, when or by whom it was produced. 
Information as to these points, if given at all, was reserved for 
a paragraph at the end of the book, called by bibliographers 
a colophon (q.v.), to which the printer often attached a device 
consisting of his arms, or those of the town in which he worked, 
or a fanciful design. These devices are sometimes beautiful and 
often take the place of a statement of the printer's name. Many 
facsimiles or copies of them have been published. 1 The first 
dated title-page known 2 is a nine-line paragraph on an otherwise 
blank page giving the title of the book, Sermo ad populum 
predicabilis in festo presentations Beatissime Marie Semper 
Virginis, with some words in its praise, the date 1470 in roman 
numerals, and a reference to further information on the next 
page. The book in which this title-page occurs was printed by 
Arnold ther Hoernen at Cologne. Six years later Erhard Rat- 
dolt and his partners at Venice printed their names and the date, 
together with some verses describing the book, on the title- 
page of a Latin calendar, and surrounded the whole with a border 
in four pieces. For another twenty years, however, when title- 
pages were used at all, they usually consisted merely of the short 
title of the book, with sometimes a woodcut or the printer's 
(subsequently the publisher's) device beneath it, decoration being 
more often bestowed on the first page of text,which was some- 
times surrounded by an ornamental border. Title-pagescompleted 
by the addition of the name and address of printer or publisher, 
and also by the date, did not become common till about 1520. 

While the development of the title-page was thus slow the 
completion of the book, independently of handwork, in other 
respects was fairly rapid. Printed illustrations appear first in the 
form of rude woodcuts in some small books produced at Bam- 
berg by Albrecht Pfister about 1461. Pagination and headlines 
were first used by ther Hoernen at Cologne in 1470 and 147 1; 
printed signatures to guide binders in arranging the quires cor- 
rectly (see Bibliography and Bibliology) by Johann Koelhoff , 
also at Cologne in 1472. Illustrations abound in the books 
printed at Augsburg in the early 'seventies, and in the 'eighties 
are common in Germany, France and the Low Countries,while 
in Italy their full development dated from about 1490. Ex- 
periments were made in both Italy and France with illustrations 
engraved on copper, but in the 15th century these met with no 
success. 

Bound with wooden boards covered with stamped leather, 
or with half of the boards left uncovered, many of the earliest 
printed books are immensely large and heavy, especially the great 
choir-books, the Bibles and the Biblical and legal commentaries, 
in which a great mass of notes surrounds the text. The paper 
on which these large books were printed was also extraordinarily 
thick and strong. For more popular books small folio was at 
first a favourite size, but towards the end of the century small 
thin quartos were much in vogue. Psalters, books of hours, 

1 Works especially devoted to these facsimiles are:— Berjeau's 
Early Dutch, German and English Printers' Marks (London, 1866) ; 
W. Roberts's Printers' Marks (London, 1893); Silvestre's Marques 
typographiques (French; Paris, 1853-1867); Die Biichermarken 
oder Buchdrucker und Verlegerzeichen (Strassburg, 1 892-1 898), the 
successive parts containing the devices used in Alsace, Italy, Basel, 
Frankfort, Mainz and Cologne; and Marques typographiques des 
imprimeurs el libr aires qui ont exerce dans les Pays-Bas (Gand, 1894). 
Numerous devices are also reproduced in histories of printing and 
in volumes of facsimiles of early types. 

2 An edition of a bull of Pope Pius II. in the John Rylands library, 
Manchester, in types used by Fust and Schoeffer at Mainz, bears 
printed on the top of the first page the words " Dis ist die bul zu 
dutsch die unser allerheiligster vatter der bapst Pius herusgesant 
hait widder die snoden ungleubigen turcken." This is attributed 
to the year 1463, and is claimed as the first book with a printed 
title-page. 



and other prayer-books were practically the only very small 
books in use. Owing to changes, not only in the value of money 
but in the coinage, the cost of books in the 15th century is ex- 
tremely difficult to ascertain. A vellum copy of the first printed 
Bible (Mainz, c. 1455) in two large folio volumes, when rubricated 
and illuminated, is said to have been worth 100 florins. In 1467 
the bishop of Aleria writing to Pope Paul II. speaks of the 
introduction of printing having reduced prices to one-fifth of 
what they had previously been. Fifteen " Legends " bequeathed 
by Caxton to St Margaret's, Westminster, were sold at prices 
varying from 6s. 8d. to 5s. This would be cheap for a large work 
like the Golden Legend, but the bequest was more probably of 
copies of the Sarum Legenda, or Lectionary, a much smaller book. 

16th Century. — The popularization of the small octavo by Aldus 
at Venice in 1501 and the introduction in these handy books of 
a new type, the italic, had far-reaching consequences. Italics 
grew steadily in favour during the greater part of the century, and 
about 1570 had almost become the standard vernacular type of 
Italy. In France also they were very popular, the attempt to 
introduce a rival French cursive type {lettres de civilite) attaining 
no success. In England they gained only slight popularity, 
but roman type, which had not been used at all in the 15th 
century, made steady progress in its contest with black letter, 
which by the end of the century was little used save for Bibles 
and proclamations. The modern practice in the use of i and 
j, u and v dates from about 1580, though not firmly established 
till the reign of Charles I. 

In the second quarter of the 16th century the French printers 
at Paris and Lyons halved the size of the Aldine octavos in their 
small sextodecimos, which found a ready market, though not 
a lasting one, the printers of Antwerp and Leiden ousting them 
with still smaller books in 24mo or small twelves. These little 
books were printed on paper much thinner than had previously 
been used. The size and weight of books was also reduced by 
the substitution of pasteboards for wooden sides. Gold tooling 
came into use on bindings, and in the second half of the century 
very elaborate decoration was in vogue in France until checked 
by a sumptuary law.. On the other hand a steady decline in the 
quality of paper combined with the abandonment of the old 
simple outline woodcuts for much more ambitious designs made 
it increasingly difficult for printers to do justice to the artists' 
work, and woodcuts, at first in the Low Countries and afterwards 
in England and elsewhere, were gradually superseded by copper- 
plates printed separately from the text. At the beginning of this 
century in England a ballad or Christmas carol sold for a halfpenny 
and thin quarto chapbooks for 4d. (a price which lasted through 
the century), the Great Bible of 1541 was priced at 10s. in sheets 
and 12s. bound, Edward VI.'s prayer-book (1549) at 2s. 2d. 
unbound, and 3s. 8d. in paste or boards; Sidney's Arcadia and 
other works in 1 598 sold for 9s. 

17th Century. — Although the miniature editions issued by the 
Elzevirs at Leiden, especially those published about 1635, have 
attracted collectors, printing in the 17 th century was at its worst, 
reaching its lowest depths in England in the second quarter. 
After this there was a steady improvement, partly due to 
slight modifications of the old printing presses, adopted first in 
Holland and copied by the English printers. In the first half 
of the century many English books, although poorly printed, 
were ornamented with attractive frontispieces, or portraits, 
engraved on copper. During the same period, English prayer- 
books and small Bibles and New Testaments were frequently 
covered with gay embroideries in coloured silks and gold or silver 
thread. In the second half of the century the leather bindings 
of Samuel Mearne, to some extent imitated from those of the 
great French binder Le Gascon, were the daintiest England had 
yet produced. For trade bindings rough calf and sheepskin 
were most used, and the practice of lettering books on the back, 
instead of on the sides or fore-edges or not at all, came gradually 
into favour. Owing to the increase of money, and in some cases 
to the action of monopolists, in others to the increased payments 
made to authors, book-prices rather rose than fell. Thus church 
Bibles, which had been sold at 10s. in 1541, rose successively to 



BOOKBINDING 



Platf 




Fig. i.— WINCHESTER DOMES- 
DAY BOOK OF THE 12TH 
CENTURY. 

Dark brown morocco, blind 
stamped. 





Fig. 2.— ST. CUTIIBERT'S GOSPELS. 
Red leather with repousse design, prob- 
ably the work of the 7th or 8th century. 
The fine lines are impressed by hand, and 
painted blue and yellow r . 



Fig. 4.— BINDING MADE FOR 
JAMES I. 
Dark blue morocco, gold tooled. 
The red in the coat-of-arms inlaid 
with red morocco. 





Fig. 3.- 



-BINDING MADE FOR JEAN GROLIER. 
Pale brown morocco, gold tooled. 



Fig. 

Srn< 




5.— COMMON PRAYER (LONDON, 1678), 
:oth red morocco, gold tooled with black fillets. 
Bound by Samuel Mearne. 



Fig. 6.— IE LIVRE DES STA- 
TUTS ET ORDONNANCES 
DE UORDRE DU BENVIST 
SAINCT ESPRIT (PARIS, 1578). 
Brown morocco, gold tooled, arms 

of Henry III., King of France. Bound 

by Nicholas Eve. 





Fig. 7.— CATALOGUE OF THE 
PICTURES AT HAGLEY 
HALL. 

Red niger morocco, gold tooled. 
Bound by Douglas Cockerell. 



Fig. 8.— WALTON'S COMPLEAT 
ANGLER (1772). 

Golden brown morocco, gold tooled. 
Bound by Miss E. M. MacColl. 



2l6 



BOOKBINDING 



25s., 30s. and (in 1641) to 40s. Single plays in quarto cost 
6d. each in Shakespeare's time, is. after the Restoration. The 
Shakespeare folio of 1623 is said to have been published at £1. 
Bishop Walton's polyglot Bible in six large volumes was sold 
for £10 to subscribers, but resulted in a heavy loss. Izaak 
Walton's Compleat Angler was priced at is. 6d. in sheepskin, 
Paradise Lost at 3s., The Pilgrim's Progress at is. 6d.; Dryden's 
Virgil was published by subscription at £s : 5 s - It was a hand- 
some book, ornamented with plates; but in the case of this and 
other subscription books a desire to honour or befriend the author 
was mainly responsible for the high price. 

18th Century. — During this century there was a notable im- 
provement alike in paper, type and presswork in both France 
and England, and towards the end of the century in Germany 
and Italy also. Books became generally neat and sometimes 
elegant. Book-illustration revived with the French livres-a- 
vignettes, and English books were illustrated by Gravelot and other 
French artists. In the last quarter of the century the work of 
Bewick heralded a great revival in woodcut illustrations, or as 
the use of the graver now entitled them to be called, wood 
engravings. The best 18th-century binders, until the advent of 
Roger Payne, were inferior to those of the 17th century, but the 
technique of the average work was better. In trade bindings 
the use of sheepskin and calf became much less common, and 
books were mostly cased in paper boards. The practice of pub- 
lishing poetry by subscription at a very high price, which Dryden 
had found lucrative, was followed by Prior and Pope. Single 
poems by Pope, however, were sold at is. and is. 6d. Novels 
were mostly in several volumes. The price at the beginning of the 
century was mostly is. 6d. each. It then remained fairly steady 
for many years, and at the close of the century rose again. Thus 
Miss Burney's Evelina (3 vols., 1778) sold for 7S. 6d., her Cecilia 
(5 vols., 1782) for 12s. 6d., and her Camilla (5 vols., 1796) for £1 :is. 
Johnson's Dictionary (2 vols, folio, 1755) cost £4:43. in sheets, 
£4 :15s. in boards. 

19th Century. — A great change in the appearance of books was 
caused by the use first of glazed calico (about 1820), afterwards 
(about 1830) of cloth for the cases of books as issued by their 
publishers. At first the lettering was printed on paper labels, 
but soon it was stamped in gilt on the cloth, and in the last quarter 
of the century many very beautiful covers were designed for 
English and American books. The designs for leather bindings 
were for many years chiefly imitated from older work, but to- 
wards the end of the 'eighties much greater originality began 
to be shown. Book illustrations passed through many phases. 
As subsidiary methods colour-prints, line engravings, lithographs 
and etchings were all used during the first half of the century, 
but the main reliance was on wood-engraving, in which extra- 
ordinary technical skill was developed. In the 'sixties and the 
years which immediately preceded and followed them many 
of the chief English artists supplied the engravers with drawings. 
In the last decade of the century wood-engraving was practically 
killed by the perfection attained by photographic methods of 
reproduction (see Process), the most popular of these methods 
entailing the use of paper heavily coated with china clay. During 
the century trade-printing, both in England and America, steadily 
improved, and the work done by William Morris at his Kelmscott 
Press (1891-1896), and by other amateur printers who imitated 
him, set a new standard of beauty of type and ornament, and 
of richness of general effect. On the other hand the demand 
for cheap reprints of famous works induced by the immense 
extension of the reading public was supplied by scores of pretty 
if flimsy editions at is. 6d. and is. and even less. The problem 
of how to produce books at moderate prices on good paper and 
well sewn, was left for the 20th century to settle. About 1894 
the number of such medium-priced books was greatly increased 
in England by the substitution of single-volume novels at 6s. 
each (subject to discount) for the three-volume editions at 31s. 6d. 
The preposterous price of 10s. 6d. a volume had been adopted 
during the first popularity of the Waverly Novels, and despite the 
example of France, where the standard price was 3 fr. 50, had 
continued in force for the greater part of the century. Even after 



novels were sold at reasonable rates artificial prices were main- 
tained for books of travel and biographies, so that the circu- 
lating libraries were practically the only customers for the first 
editions. (See Publishing and Bookselling). (A. W. Po.) 

BOOKBINDING. Bindings or covers to protect written or 
printed matter have always followed the shapes of the material 
on which the writing or printing was done. Very early inscrip- 
tions on rocks or wood needed no coverings, and the earliest 
instances of protective covers are to be found among the smaller 
Assyrian tablets of about the 8th century B.C. These tablets, 
with cuneiform inscriptions recording sales of slaves, loans of 
money and small matters generally, are often enclosed in an 
outer shell of the same shape and impressed with a short title. 
Egyptian papyrus rolls were generally kept in roll form, bound 
round with papyrus tape and often sealed with seals origins 
of Nile mud; and the rolls in turn were often preserved 
in rectangular hollows cut in wood. The next earliest material 
to papyrus used for writing upon was tree bark. Bark books, 
still commonly used by uncultured nations, often consisting of 
collections of magical formulae or medical receipts, are generally 
rolls, folded backwards and forwards upon themselves like the 
sides of a concertina. At Pompeii in 1875 several diptychs were 
found, the wooden leaves hollowed on the inner sides, filled with 
blackened wax, and hinged together at the back with leather 
thongs. Writings were found scratched on the wax, one of them 
being a record of a payment to Umbricia Januaria in a.d. 55. 
This is the earliest known Latin manuscript. The diptychs are 
the prototypes of the modern book. From about the 1st to 
the 6th century, ornamental diptychs were made of carved ivory, 
and presented to great personages by the Roman consuls. 

Rolls of papyrus, vellum or paper were written upon in three 
ways. (1) In short lines, at right angles to the length of the roll. 
(2) In long lines each the entire length of the roll. (3) In short 
lines parallel to the length of the roll, each column or page of 
writing having a space left on each side of it. Rolls written in the 
first of these ways were simply rolled up and kept in cylinders 
of like shape, sometimes several together, with a title tag at 
the end of each, in a box called a scrinium. In the case of the 
second form, the most obvious instances of which are to be found 
in the Buddhist prayer-wheels, the rolls were and are kept in 
circular boxes with handles through the centres so that. they can 
revolve easily. In the third manner of arranging the manuscript 
the page forms-show very clearly, and it is still used in the scrolls 
of the law in Jewish synagogues, kept on two rollers, one at each 
end. But this form of writing also developed a new method 
for its own more convenient preservation. A roll of this kind can 
be folded up, backwards and forwards, the bend coming in the 
vacant spaces between the columns of writing. When ihis is done 
it at once becomes a book, and takes the Chinese and Japanese 
form known as orihon—aM the writing, on one side of the roll 
or strip of paper and all the other side blank. Some books of this 
kind are simply guarded by two boards, but generally they are 
fastened together along one of the sides, which then becomes 
the back of the book. The earliest fastening of such books 
consists of a lacing with some cord or fibre run through holes 
stabbed right through the substance of the roll, near the edge. 
Now the orihon is complete, and it is the link between the roll 
and the book. This " stabbed " form of binding is the earliest 
method of keeping the leaves of a book together; it occurs in 
the case of a Coptic papyrus of about the 8th century found at 
Thebes, but it is rarely used in the case of papyrus, as the material 
is too brittle to retain the .threads properly. 

The method of folding vellum into pages seems to have been 
first followed about the 5th century. The sheets" were folded 
once, and gatherings of four or more folded sheets were made, 
so that stitches through the fold at the back would hold all the 
sheets together and each leaf could be conveniently turned over. 
Very soon an obvious plan of fixing several of these gatherings, 
or quires, together was followed by the simple expedient of 
fastening the threads at the back round a strong strip of leather 
or vellum held at right angles to the line of the backs. This early 
plan of " sewing " books is to-day used in the case of valuable 



BOOKBINDING 



217 



books; it is known as " flexible " work, and has never been 
improved upon. 

As soon as the method of sewing quires together in this way 
became well understood, it was found that the projecting bands 
at the back needed protection, so that when all the quires were 
joined together and, so far, finished, strips of leather were fastened 
all over the back. But it was also found that vellum leaves were 
apt to curl strongly, ahd to counteract this tendency strong 
wooden boards were put on each side. The loose ends of the 
bands were fastened to the boards, which hinged upon them, 
and the protecting strip of leather at the back was drawn over 
the boards far enough to cover the hinge. So we get the medieval 
" half-binding " which shows the strip of leather over the back 
of the book, projecting for a short way over the boards, the rest of 
which is left uncovered. The boards were usually kept closed by 
means of clasps in front. 

The leather strip soon developed, and covered the whole of 
the boards, " whole " binding as it is called, and it was quickly 
found that these fine flat pieces of leather offered a splendid field 
for artistic decoration. 

The first ornamentation on leather bindings was probably 
made by means of impressions from small metal points or lines, 
pressed upon the leather. This in time led to the 
T*r« S tf purposeful cutting of small decorative stamps to be 
binding. used in the same way. It is considered that English 
binders excelled in this art of " blind'" stamping, that 
is, without the use of gold leaf. Most of the stamps were cut 
intaglio, so that their impressions are in cameo form. Such 
bindings were made to perfection during the 12th and 13th 
centuries at Durham, Oxford, Cambridge, London and other 
places. One of the most charming examples left is the binding 
of the Winchester Domesday Book of the 12th century (Plate, 
fig. 1), now belonging to the Society of Antiquaries of London. 

From about the 7 th to the 16th century illuminated manuscripts 
were held in the greatest esteem. Among them can be found not 
only exquisite calligraphy but exquisite miniature painting. 
Moreover, the gorgeousness of the illuminations inside suggested 
gorgeousness of the outside coverings, so we find splendid work 
in metals with jewels, enamels and carved ivory, dating from the 
7th-century Gospels of Theodolinda at Monza, the Irish cumdach 
of the Slowe Missal, the Lindau Gospels now in America, and the 
Gospels of Charlemagne in the Victoria and Albert Museum at 
South Kensington, to the magnificent bindings of 14th-century 
Limoges enamel in the British Museum. Such English bindings 
of this kind — intrinsically precious — as may have existed have 
all disappeared, — most likely they were melted up by Henry 
VIII. or Edward VI.; but at Stonyhurst there is a book known 
as St Cuthbert's Gospels, which is bound in red leather with a 
repousse design upon it, and is probably the work of the 7th or 
8th century (Plate, fig. 2). 

When printing was introduced into Europe about the middle 
of the 15th century, there was very soon a reaction against the 
large, beautiful and valuable illuminated MSS. and their equally 
precious covers. Printing brought small books, cheap books, 
ugly books, generally bound in calf, goatskin or sheepskin, 
and ornamented with large panel stamps in blind. But a new 
art came into birth very shortly, namely the art of gold tooling 
on leather, which in capable hands is almost a great art, and 
specimens of the work of the few great masters that have prac- 
tised it are now much sought after and likely to increase in 
estimation and value. All this, as usual, brings a school of skilled 
faussaires into the field, and already the collector of fine bindings 
must be wary, or he may easily give thousands of pounds for 
forged or made-up objects that are worth but little. 

In the matter of leather bindings with gold tooling, an art 
which was probably brought to Venice from the East, the finest 
examples are to be found in late 15th-century Italian work. The 
art quickly spread, and Thomas Berthelet, Royal Binder to 
Henry VIII., seems to have been the first binder who practised 
it in England. Berthelet's work is strongly Italian in feeling, 
especially at first, and it is likely that he was taught the new 
art by an Italian master; he worked until about 1558. 



During the late 1 5th and the 16th century in England, numbers 
of fine printed books were bound in velvet and satin, sometimes 
set with enamels, sometimes embroidered. These books, having 
strong threads of metal freely used upon them, have lasted 
much better than would be expected, and instances of such 
work made for Henry VIII. are still in excellent condition, 
and most decorative. 

The fashion of ornamenting English royal books with heraldic 
designs, which is considered to have begun in the reign of Edward 
IV., has continued without break. The same fashion in books 
belonging to private owners was first followed during the later 
Tudor period, and then numbers were made, and have been, more 
or less, ever since. 

During the whole Tudor period several small bindings of gold 
ornamented with enamels were made. Some of these still exist, 
and they are charming little jewels. They were always provided 
with a ring at the top, no doubt for attaching to the girdle. 

Aldus Manutius, the great Venetian printer, had several of 
his books charmingly bound in dark morocco with " Aldine " 
knot leaves and small dolphins both in blind and gold tooling; 
and Giunta, a Florentine printer, had his books bound in a 
similar way but without the dolphins. Many early Venetian 
bindings have recessed panels, made by the use of double boards, 
the upper of which is pierced, finished in true oriental fashion. 

Jean Grolier, viscount d'Aguisy, treasurer of France in 1545, 
was a great collector of fine books, most of which were bound for 
himself, and bear upon them his legend, Portio mea domine sit 
in terra viventium, and also his name, Io Grolierii et Amicorum 
(Plate, fig- 3) . Tommaso Maioli, an Italian collector of about the 
same time, used the same form of legend. Books bound for him 
are curiously marked with atoms of gold remaining in the irregu- 
larities of the leather. 

Demetrio Canevari, physician to Pope Urban VIII., had his 
books bound in dark green or deep red morocco, and upon them 
is a fine cameo stamp with a design of Apollo driving a chariot 
with one white horse and one black horse towards a mountain 
on which is a silver Pegasus. The stamp was coloured, but in 
most cases the colour has now worn off. Round the stamp is 
the legend 0P6Q2 KAI MH AOSK2S. 

The Italian bindings which were made for popes and cardinals 
are always of much interest and often of high merit, but as a 
rule later Italian bindings are disappointing. 

Geoffrey Tory, printer and engraver to Francis I. of France, 
designed some fine bindings, some for himself and quite possibly 
some for Jean Grolier. 

For Henry II. of France much highly decorative work in bind- 
ing was done, richly gilded and coloured. These bindings have 
upon them the king's initials, the initials of his queen, Catherine 
de' Medici, and the emblems of crescents and bows. Henry's 
device was a crescent with the legend, Donee impleat totum orbem. 
Bindings of similar style were made for Diane de Poitiers, duchesse 
de Valentinois, with her initials and the same devices of crescents 
and bows. They are always fine work. 

German bindings are mostly in pigskin, finely stamped in 
blind. Several are, however, in calf. Gilding, when it exists, 
is generally bad. 

In England during the 17th century much fine work was done 
in binding, most of it in morocco, but Henry, prince of Wales, 
always had his books bound in calf. The Jacobean style is 
heraldic, with semis of small stamps and heavy corners, but 
James I. has left some very fine bindings in another style 
(Plate, fig. 4), very possibly done for him by John Gibson, who 
bound the royal books while James was king of Scotland only. 
During the reign of Charles I. Nicholas Ferrar founded his curious 
establishment at Little Gidding, and there his niece Mary Collet 
and her sisters set up a bindery. They made large scrap-books, 
harmonies of the Gospels and other parts of the Bible, with 
illustrations, and bound them magnificently in velvet stamped 
in gold and silver. They were taught by a binder who worked 
for John and Thomas Buck, printers to the university of Cam- 
bridge, and the Little Gidding stamps are often identical with 
Buck's. 



2l8 



BOOKBINDING 



Samuel Mearne (d. 1683) was royal binder to Charles II., and 
invented the cottage style of decoration, a style which has lasted 
till the present day; the Bible on which Edward VII. took the 
coronation oath was ornamented in that way. An inner rectangle 
is run parallel to the edges of the book, and the upper and lower 
lines are broken outwards into the outline of a gable roof. 
Mearne's work as a binder (Plate, fig. 5) is of the highest merit. 
Many of his books have their fore-edge painted in such a way that 
the work is invisible when the book is shut, and only shows when 
the edges are fanned out. 

In France 16th- and 17th-century binding is distinguished by 
the work of such masters as Nicholas Eve, who bound the beauti- 
ful Livre des Statuts et Ordonnances de I'ordre du Benvist Sainct 
Esprit for Henry III. (Plate, fig. 6) ; Clovis Eve, who is credited 
with the invention of the style known as " fanfare," a delicate 
tracery over the boards of a book, filled out with spirals of leafy 
stems; and Le Gascon, who invented the dotted work which has 
been used more or less ever since. Le Gascon caused his small 
gilding tools — curves ana arabesques — to be scored across, so 
that when impressions were made from them a dotted line 
showed instead of a right line. Florimond Badier worked in a 
style very similar to that of Le Gascon and sometimes signed his 
work, which Le Gascon never did. Le Gascon had many imita- 
tors, the best and closest being Poncyn and Magnus, Dutch 
binders who worked at Amsterdam in che 17th century, and his 
style has been continuously followed to .he present day. 

The bindings of Padeloup le Jeune often have small tickets 
with his name upon them; they usually have borders of lace- 
like gold tooling known as " dentelle " and are often inlaid. 
He belonged to a family of binders, all of whom were excellent 
workmen, and lived in the 17th and 18th centuries. 

The Deromes were another of the great French families of 
binders; the most celebrated was Nicholas Denis, called " Le 
Jeune," born in 1731. He used dentelle borders resembling 
those of Padeloup, but with little birds interspersed among the 
arabesques — " dentelles a. l'oiscau." 

Among the many French binders of the 18th century who used 
delicate inlays of coloured leathers, Jean Charles le Monnier was 
perhaps the most skilled. He often signed his bindings in small 
capitals impressed in gold somewhere about the inlaid part. 

Eliot and Chapman bound the library of Robert Harley, 
earl of Oxford, about the middle of the 18th century. The bind- 
ings are in morocco, with broad, richly gold-tooled borders, and 
usually a diamond-shaped centre-piece. This is known as the 
Harleian style. 

Thomas Hollis had his books bound in fine red morocco, 
ornamented with small, well-cut stamps engraved by Thomas 
Pingo, the medallist. These stamps comprise a cap of liberty, 
a figure of liberty, a figure of Britannia and several smaller ones. 

Towards the end of the 18th century, when binding in England 
was decoratively at a low level, Roger Payne, a native of Windsor, 
came to London and set up as a bookbinder. He was a splendid 
workman, and introduced richly gold-tooled corner-pieces, 
ornamental " doublures " or inside linings, and also invented the 
graining of morocco, graining it, however, in one direction only, 
known as the " straight grain." It is said that Payne cut his own 
binding tools of iron; they certainly are exquisitely made, and 
in many of his bindings he has put a written description of 
loving work he has done upon them. Payne was, unfortunately, 
a drunkard, but he has in spite of this rendered an immortal 
service to the art of bookbinding in England. 

In 1785 John Edwards of Halifax patented a method of making 
vellum transparent, and using it as a covering over delicate 
paintings. He also painted pictures on the fore-edges of many 
of his books in the same manner as that followed by Samuel 
Mearne in the 17th century, so that they did not show until the 
book was opened. John Whitaker used calf for his bindings, 
but ornamented the calf in a curious way with strong acids and 
with prints from engraved metal plates. Both Edwards and 
Whitaker liked classical borders and ornaments, -and their 
bindings are in consequence often known as " Etruscan." 

The main styles used in England at the beginning of the 19th 



century were nothing more than distant imitations of Roger 
Payne. Kalthoeber, Staggemeier, Walther and Hering were all 
disciples of this master, but Charles Lewis worked on original 
lines. He developed arabesques and paid particular attention 
to richly gold-tooled doublures. He also used gold end papers, 
and the bands at the back of his bindings are often double 
and always broad, flat and gold-tooled. His workmanship is 
excellent ; he worked largely for Thomas' Gren ville and other great 
collectors. 

French binding of the 19th century is remarkable for wonderful 
technical excellence in every part. Among the most skilled of 
these admirable workmen and artists may be particularly men- 
tioned Thouvenin, Bauzonnet, Lortic, Niedree, Cape and Duru, 
and fortunately they generally sign their work in small gold 
lettering either on the back of their bindings or inside along the 
lower edge. 

Recent years have witnessed a marked revival of interest in 
the art of bookbinding, but modem binders have two serious 
difficulties to contend with. One of these is the pre- 
valence of bad paper, overladen with clay and with methods 
wood pulp, and also the fact that many of the modern 
leathers are badly prepared and dangerously treated with 
sulphuric acid, which in time inevitably rots the fibre. The 
Society of Arts has appointed committees of experts to report 
upon both of these evils, and the published accounts of both 
inquiries are of much value, and it is to be hoped that the results 
may be beneficial. Concurrently with the revival of the artistic 
side of the subject, there has also arisen a remarkable development 
in the technical processes, owing to the invention of ingenious 
and delicate machinery which is capable of executing the work 
which had hitherto been always laboriously done by hand. The 
processes of folding the printed sheets, and sewing them together 
on bands, rounding the backs when sewn, and of making the 
outer cases, covering them with cloth or leather and stamping 
designs upon them, can now all be efficiently executed by means 
of machines. The saving in time and labour thus effected is very 
great, although it must be said that the old methods of carrying 
out the process of sewing and rounding the backs of books by 
hand labour were safer and stronger, as well as being much less 
liable to bruise and injure the paper. These processes unfortun- 
ately are not only slow but also necessitate highly skilled labour. 
Already the larger trade binders utilize machines extensively 
and advantageously, but exclusively high-class trade binders 
do not as yet materially depart from the older methods. Private 
binders have naturally no reason to use machines at all. Fine 
and delicate examples of large metal blocks or dies have been 
very successfully used for the decoration of covers measuring 
about 1 1 5 by 8 in. 

Besides the large trade binders working mainly by the help 
of machinery, and producing a great quantity of bound work 
which is not expected to last long, there also exists in London, 
Paris, New York and other large cities, a small class of art 
binders who work throughout upon the principles which have 
been continuously in use for first-class work ever since about 
the 5th century. The initial impetus to this school can be 
traced to William Morris, who himself made some beautiful 
designs for bookbindings, to be executed both in gold and in 
blind. Although he probably did not fully appreciate either the 
peculiar limitations or the possibilities of the art of gold-tooling 
on leather, nevertheless his genius guided him truly as to the 
spirit in which the designs should be conceived. The revived art 
soon reached its first stage of development under the guidance 
of Mr T. J. Cobden-Sanderson, who may fairly be considered 
as the founder of the modern school of design for gold-tooling 
on book-covers, the pre-eminence and individuality of his work 
in this direction being proved by the number of his imitators. 
Among the most successful of his pupils is Mr Douglas Cockerell, 
whose work (Plate, fig. 7) is distinguished by a marked originality 
of treatment, while it shows a scholarly appreciation of ancient 
methods. Mr Alfred de Sauty has succeeded in developing a 
new and admirable style in inlaid leathers, combined with deli- 
cate pointille work. A number of women artists, both in England 



BOOKBINDING 



219 



and in America, have already discovered in bookbinding a fitting 
and lucrative field for their energies. One, Miss Sarah Prideaux, 
is not only skilled and original in her own work, but she has also 
given us much valuable literature on her subject. Miss E. M. 
MacColl may claim to be the inventor of the small curved gold 
line produced by means of a tiny wheel, for though the possibility 
of producing such a line in blind was known for a long time, 
it was rarely used. The graceful curves and lines found on Miss 
MacColl's work have been designed for her by her brother, 
Mr D. S. MacColl (Plate, fig. 8). Miss Joanna Birkenruth 
recalls the highly decorative medieval binding by her use of 
jewels cut en cabochon, but set in morocco instead of gold or 
silver, and there are many others who are working well and 
earnestly at art binding with delicate skill and taste. Outside 



full advantage of them can only be taken where there is a large 
edition of one book. 

Book-sewing machines (fig. 9) are of two kinds: one sews the books 
on bands, either flat or round, and the other supplies the place of 
bands by a kind of chain stitch. The band-working „ 
machines bring the return thread back by pulling it ew ag ' 

through the upper and lower edges of the back of each section, there- 
by to some extent weakening each section, but at the same time 
this weakening can be to some extent neutralized by careful head- 
banding. The other system, where the band is replaced by a chain 
stitch, brings back the return thread inside each section ; the objec- 
tion to this is that there is a flattening out of the back of the book, 
which becomes a difficulty when the subsequent operation of cover- 
ing the book begins. The sections are sewn continuously in a long 
line, and are afterwards cut apart. The threads catch into hooked 
needles and are drawn through holes made by piercers set to a certain 
distance; a shuttle like that used in an ordinary sewing-machine 




Fig. 9. — Book-sewing Machine. 



the inner circle of professional bookbinders there has grown 
up a new profession, that of the designer for pictorial book- 
covers, especially those intended to be shown in colour on cloth 
or paper. Among notable designers may be mentioned Lewis 
F. Day, A. A. Turbayne, Walter Crane and Charles Ricketts. 

Machine-bindine. — The principal types of machine for commercial 
binding are described below. They are almost all due to American 
or German ingenuity. It may be noted that, while books sewn by 
hand on bands have the loose ends of the bands actually drawn 
through the boards and strongly fastened to them through their 
substance, no machines for covering sewn books will do this so 
effectively. All they will do as a rule is to paste down to the inner 
surfaces of the boards the loose ends of the tapes on which the 
sewing is done. So that, although it may last a long time if not 
much used, a " cased " book is likely to slip out of its cover as soon 
as the paste fixing it perishes. Modern bookbinding machines of all 
kinds are_ usually driven by power, and in consequence of the neces- 
sary setting of most of them accurately to some particular size of 
book, they are not suitable for binding books of different sizes; the 



sews the inner thread backwards and forwards. Each section is 
placed upon a sort of metal saddle by the hand of the operator, one 
after the other, the machine working continuously unless the action 
is cut off or controlled by a foot-lever or pedal. This machine is 
much quieter to work, and although the inner threads are too bulky 
to be quite satisfactory, this is not a serious matter like the cutting 
of the upper and lower edges of the back already described, and, 
moreover, is probably capable of being either improved away or so 
minimized that it will become of small importance. 

The Martini book-sewing machine, which sews books on tape 
without cutting up head or tail — a most important improvement — 
and also forms complete Kettle stitches, will sew books of any size 
up to 18 in. The needles are straight, and the necessary adjustments 
for various sizes of books are very simple. 

The machine for rounding and backing sewn books requires a 
rather elaborate and very careful setting of several parts to the 
exact requirement of each size to be worked. The sewn Oaundlnv 
book with the back glued is caught in a clip and forced be- * ad g 
tween two tight rollers, the result being that the hitherto backloe 
flat back is automatically turned into a rounded shape 
(figs. 10 and 11). The book is then drawn forward, by a continuance 



220 



BOOKBINDING 



of the onward movement, until it reaches the rounding plate, which 
is a block of steel with a polished groove a little larger than the size 
required. This rounding plate moves within a small arc by means 
of heavy counter-weights, and on the back of the book being strongly 
pressed against it, it receives the permanent form of the groove cut 
in it, at the same time a strong grip on each side of the book causes 
the ledge to rise up along each outer edge of the back. This ledge it 
is which enables the boards to be subsequently fixed in such a way 
as to hinge on a line outside the actual and natural boundary of the 
book. Before the discovery of the possibility of producing this ledge, 
the boards of books hinged upon a line coincident with the inner 
edges of the back, the result of which was that when the book was 
opened there was an invariable tendency to open and pull away the 
few outer sections of the paper or vellum itself — a destructive and 
disagreeable peculiarity. These machines are capable, after they 
are properly set, of rounding and backing about 750 volumes of the 
same size within an hour. 

The machine for making cases, or "case" covers (fig. 12), for books 
is large and complicated, but beautifully effective. It contains alto- 
gether over fifty springs, some of which are very small, like watch 





Fig. 10. — Section of back of Fig. ii. — Section of same book after 
book sewn on bands. it has passed through the machine 

for rounding and backing. 

fittings, while others are large and powerful. The machine is fed 
with pieces of cardboard cut exactly to the sizes of the required 
boards, other pieces cut to the size of the back, and a long roll of the 
cloth with which the cases are to be covered, and when set working 
the roll of cloth is gradually unwound and glued by contact with a 
roller, which is drawn along until it reaches a point where the two 
boards are ingeniously dropped upon it one by one, then on again 
to where a long arm swings backwards and forwards, at each move- 
ment picking up a piece of cardboard for the back and placing it 
gently exactly upon the glued bed left for it between the two boards 
already fixed. Next, as the cloth passes along, it comes under the 
sharp influence of two rectangular gouges which cut out the corners, 
the remaining side pieces being gradually but irresistibly turned up 
by hollow raisers and flattened down by small rollers, a very delicate 
piece of machinery finishing the corners in a masterly way. Then, 
lastly, an arrangement of raisers and rollers acting at right angles 
to the last mentioned turn over and press out the remaining pieces 
of cloth. Of course each piece of cloth is cut across at the proper 
point before the turning up begins. This machine is capable, of 



producing 1200 cases in an hour of any size that the machine will 
take. 

The Smyth casing-in machine (fig. 13) pastes the sides of a book 
as required and then attaches the cover over all. Cleverly arranged 
rollers catch the book, and by a carefully regulated pressure fix the 
cover in the proper position. There is a " jointing-in " device which 




Fig. 13. — Smyth Casing-in Machine. 



A. Cases. I. 

B. Side of Case Hopper. 2. 

C. Paste box. 3. 

D. Head Clamp Rod. 

E. Head Clamp. 



1st position. 
2nd position. 

3rd position and finished book. 
When in 2nd position the book 
drops to level of paste box. 



at a critical moment forces the joints in the cover into the joints 
in the book. It will work books from 4 to 22 in. in length and from 
J to 3 in. in thickness, and can cover from 10 to 15 books per minute. 

Here may also be mentioned the Sheridan wrappering machine, 
which covers magazines and pamphlets ranging from 5 to 12 in. 
in length at the rate of 40 a minute. 

Wiring is a cheap method of keeping together thin parts of periodi- 
cals or tracts. The machine that executes it is simple in construction 




Case-making Machine. 



BOOKCASE— BOOK-COLLECTING 



221 



and use. It drives a short wire pin, bent at right angles at each end, 
through the folds of the sections of a book or through the entire 
Whins thickness, sideways, after the manner of stabbing. The 
projecting ends, when through the substance of the paper, 
are bent over and flattened so as to grip firmly. The metal used for 
these pins was at first very liable to rust, and consequently did 
much damage to the paper near it, but this defect has now been 
largely remedied. At the same time the principle of using hard 
metal wire instead of flexible hempen thread is essentially vicious, 
and should only be used as a temporary expedient for publications 
of little value. 

The machines (fig. 14) now used for blocking designs upon book- 
covers are practically the same as have been employed for many 
Bl U <r y ears - Several small improvements have been introduced 

oc as to better inking of the rollers for colour work, and 

better heating of the blocks used for gold work. A blocking press 
is now, in consequence of the size of many of the blocks, a large 
and cumbersome machine. The block itself is fixed firmly in a 
strong metal bed, and a movable table in front of it is fitted with 
gauges which keep the cover exactly in its right place. For gold 




Fig. 14. — Blocking Machine. 

work the block is kept at the proper temperature by means of gas 
jets, and the cover being properly overlaid with gold leaf is passed, 
on its table, directly under the block and then pressed steadily 
upwards against it, lowered, drawn out, and the superfluous gold 
rubbed off. The same process is followed in the case of colour 
blocks, only now the block need not be heated, but is inked by 
means of a roller for each impression. A separate printing is neces- 
sary for each colour. These printings always require great care on 
the part of the operator, who has to watch the working of each pull 
very carefully, and if any readjustment is wanted, to make it at 
once, so that it is difficult to estimate at what rate they can be 
made. In the matter of gold blocking there must be great care 
exercised in the matter of the heat of the block, for if it is too hot 
the gold will adhere where it is not wanted, and if too cool it will 
not adhere where it is required. Great nicety is also necessary as 
to the exact pressure required as well as the precise number of 
moments during which the block should be in contact with the gold, 
hich is fastened to the cloth or leather by means of the solidification 
y heat of egg albumen. Blocking presses are mainly of German 
make, but Scottish and English presses are also largely used. 

Authorities. — See the Anglo-Saxon Review (1899-1901); C. J. 
Davenport, Royal English Bookbindings (1896), Cantor Lectures on 
Bookbinding (1898), English Embroidered Bookbindings (1899), 
Life of Thomas Berthelet (1901), Life of Samuel Mearne (1906); 
W. Y. Fletcher, English Bookbindings in the British Museum (1895), 
Foreign Bookbindings in the British Museum (1896); L. Gruel, 
Manuel de I'amateur de relieures (1887); H. P. Home, The Binding 
of Books (1894); S. T. Prideaux, Historical Sketch of Bookbinding 
(1893); F. Thoinan, Les Relieurs francais (1893); O. Uzanne, La 
Relieure moderne (1887); H. B. Wheatley, Remarkable Bindings in 
the British Museum (1889); J. W. Zaehnsdorf, The Art of Book- 
binding (1880). (C. D.) 

BOOKCASE, an article of furniture, forming a shelved re- 
ceptacle, usually perpendicular or horizontal, for the storage of 
books. When books, being written by hand, were excessively 



t 



scarce,they were kept in small coffers which the great carried about 
with them on their journeys. As manuscript volumes accumulated 
in the religious houses or in regal palaces, they were stored upon 
shelves or in cupboards, and it is from these cupboards that the 
bookcase of to-day directly descends. At a somewhat later date 
the doors were, for convenience' sake, discarded, and the evolution 
of the bookcase made one step forward. Even then, however, 
the volumes were not arranged in the modern fashion. They 
were either placed in piles upon their sides, or if upright, were 
ranged with their backs to the wall and their edges outwards. 
The band of leather, vellum or parchment which closed the 
book was often used for the inscription of the title, which was 
thus on the fore-edge instead of on the back. It was not until the 
invention of printing had greatly cheapened books that it became 
the practice to write the title on the back and place the edges 
inwards. Early bookcases were usually of oak, which is still 
deemed to be the most appropriate wood for a stately library. 
The oldest bookcases in England are those in the Bodleian library 
at Oxford, which were placed in position in the last year or two 
of the 1 6th century; in that library are the earliest extant 
examples of shelved galleries over the flat wall-cases. Long 
ranges of book-shelves are necessarily somewhat severe in 
appearance, and many attempts have been made by means 
of carved cornices and pilasters to give them a more riant 
appearance — attempts which were never so successful as in the 
hands of the great English cabinet-makers of the second "half of 
the 18th century. 

Both Chippendale and Sheraton made or designed great 
numbers of bookcases, mostly glazed with little lozenges encased 
in fret-work frames often of great charm and elegance. The 
alluring grace of some of Sheraton's satinwood bookcases 
has very rarely indeed been equalled. The French cabinet- 
makers of the same period were also highly successful with small 
ornamental cases. Mahogany, rosewood, satinwood and even 
choicer exotic timbers were used; they were often inlaid with 
marqueterie and mounted with chased and gilded bronze. 
Dwarf bookcases were frequently finished with a slab of choice 
marble at the top. In the great public libraries of the 20th 
century the bookcases are often of iron, as in the British Museum 
where the shelves are covered with cowhide, of steel, as in the 
library of Congress at Washington, or of slate, as in the Fitz- 
william library at Cambridge. There are three systems of 
arranging bookcases — flat against the wall; in " stacks " or 
ranges parallel to each other with merely enough space between 
to allow of the passage of a librarian; or in bays or alcoves where 
cases jut out into the room at right angles to the wall-cases. 
The stack system is suitable only for public libraries where 
economy of space is essential; the bay system is not only hand- 
some but utilizes the space to great advantage. The library of 
the city of London at the Guildhall is a peculiarly effective 
example of the bay arrangement. 

The whole question of the construction and arrangement of book- 
cases was learnedly discussed in the light of experience by W. E. 
Gladstone in the Nineteenth Century for March 1890. (J. P.-B.) 

BOOK-COLLECTING, the bringing together of books which 
in their contents, their form or the history of the individual 
copy possess some element of permanent interest, and either 
actually or prospectively are rare, in the sense of being difficult 
to procure. This qualification of rarity, which figufes much too 
largely in the popular view of book-collecting, is entirely sub- 
ordinate to that of interest, for the rarity of a book devoid of 
interest is a matter of no concern. On the other hand so long as 
a book (or anything else) is and appears likely to continue to be 
easilyprocurable at any moment, no one has any reason for collect- 
ing it. The anticipation that it will always be easily procurable is 
often unfounded; but so long as the anticipation exists it restrains 
collecting, with the result that Horn-books are much rarer than 
First Folio Shakespeares. It has even been laid down that 
the ultimate rarity of books varies in the inverse ratio of the 
number of copies originally printed, and though the generaliza- 
tion is a little sweeping, it is not far from the truth. To triumph 
over small difficulties being the chief element in games of skill, the 



222 



BOOK-COLLECTING 



different varieties of book-collecting, which offer almost as many 
varieties of grades of difficulty, make excellent hobbies. But 
in its essence the pastime of a book-collector is identical with the 
official work of the curator of a museum, and thus also with one 
branch of the duties of the librarian of any library of respectable 
age. In its inception every library is a literary workshop, with 
more or less of a garden or recreation ground attached according 
as its managers are influenced by the humanities or by a narrow 
conception of utility. As the library grows, the books and 
editions which have been the tools of one generation pass out of 
use; and it becomes largely a depository or storehouse of a stock 
much of which is dead. But from out of this seemingly dead 
stock preserved at haphazard, critics and antiquaries gradually 
pick out books which they find to be still alive. Of some of 
these the interest cannot be reproduced in its entirety by any mere 
reprint, and it is this salvage which forms the literary museum. 
Book-collectors are privileged to leap at once to this stage in 
their relations with books, using the dealers' shops and catalogues 
as depositories from which to pick the books which will best fit 
with the aim or central idea of their collection. For in the 
modern private collection, as in the modern museum, the need for 
a central idea must be fully recognized. Neither the collector nor 
the curator can be content to keep a mere curiosity-shop. It is 
the collector's business to illustrate his central idea by his 
choice of examples, by the care with which he describes them and 
the skill with which they are arranged. In all these matters many 
amateurs rival, if they do not outstrip, the professional curators 
and librarians, and not seldom their collections are made with a 
view to their ultimate transference to public ownership. In any 
case it is by the zeal of collectors that books which otherwise 
would have perished from neglect are discovered, cared for and 
preserved, and those who achieve these results certainly deserve 
well of the community. 

Whenever a high degree of civilization has been attained 
book-lovers have multiplied, and to the student with his modest 
desire to read his favourite author in a well-written or 
well-printed copy there has been added a class of 
owners suspected of caring more for the externals of books than 
for the enjoyment to be obtained by reading them. But although 
adumbrations of it existed under the Roman empire and towards 
the end of the middle ages, book-collecting, as it is now under- 
stood, is essentially of modern growth. A glance through what 
must be regarded as the medieval text-book on the love of books, 
the Philobiblon, attributed to Richard de Bury (written in 1345), 
shows that it deals almost exclusively with the delights of litera- 
ture, and Sebastian Brant's attack on the book-fool, written a 
century and a half later, demonstrates nothing more than that 
the possession of books is a poor substitute for learning. This 
is so obviously true that before book-collecting in the modern 
sense can begin it is essential that there should be no lack of 
books to read, just as until cups and saucers became plentiful 
there was no room for the collector of old china. Even when 
the invention of printing had reduced the cost of books by some 
80 %, book-collectors did not immediately appear. There is 
a natural temptation to imagine that the early book-owners, 
whose libraries have enriched modern collectors with some of 
their best-known treasures, must necessarily have been collectors 
themselves. This is far from being the case. Hardly a book 
of all that Jean Grolier (1470-1565) caused to be bound so taste- 
fully for himself and his friends reveals any antiquarian instincts 
in its liberal owner, who bought partly to encourage the best 
printers of his day, partly to provide his friends with the most 
recent fruits of Renaissance scholarship. In England Arch- 
bishop Cranmer, Lords Arundel and Lumley, and Henry, prince 
of Wales (1594-1612), in France the famous historian Jacques 
Auguste de Thou (1553-1617), brought together the best books 
of their day in all departments of learned literature, put them 
into handsome leather jackets, and enriched them with their 
coats of arms, heraldic badges or other marks of possession. 
But they brought their books together for use and study, to be 
read by themselves and by the scholars who frequented their 
houses, and no evidence has been produced that they appreciated 



History. 



what a collector might now call the points of a book other than 
its fine condition and literary or informational merits. Again, 
not a few other more or less famous men have been dubbed col- 
lectors on the score of a scanty shelf -full of volumes known to 
have been stamped with their arms. Collecting, as distinct both 
from the formation of working libraries and from casual ownership 
of this latter kind, may perhaps be said to have begun in England 
at the time of the antiquarian reaction produced by the book- 
massacres when the monasteries were dissolved by Henry VIIL, 
and the university and college libraries and the parish service 
books were plundered and stript by the commissioners of Edward 
VI. To rescue good books from perishing is one of the main 
objects of book-collecting, and when Archbishop Parker and Sir 
Robert Cotton set to work to gather what they could of the 
scattered records of English statecraft and literature, and of the 
decorative art bestowed so lavishly on the books of public and 
private devotion, they were book-collectors in a sense and on a 
scale to which few of their modern imitators can pretend. Men 
of more slender purses, and armed with none of Archbishop 
Parker's special powers, worked according to their ability on 
similar lines. Humphrey Dyson, an Elizabethan notary, who 
collected contemporary proclamations and books from the early 
English presses, and George Thomason (d. 1666), the bookseller 
who bought, stored and catalogued all the pamphlet literature 
of the Civil War, were mindful of the future historians of the days 
in which they lived. By the end of the 1 7th century book-collect- 
ing was in full swing all over Europe, and much of its apparatus 
had come into existence. In 1676 book auctions were introduced 
into England from Holland, and soon we can trace in priced cata- 
logues the beginning of a taste for Caxtons, and the books prized 
by collectors slowly fought their way up from amid the heavy 
volumes of theology by which they were at first overwhelmed. 

While book-collecting thus came into existence it was rather 
as an added grace in the formation of a fine library than as a 
separate pursuit. Almost all the large book-buyers of the 16th, 
17 th and 1 8th centuries bought with a public object, or were 
rewarded for their zeal by their treasures being thought worthy 
of a public resting-place. Sir Thomas Smith (d.1577) bequeathed 
his books to Queens' College, Cambridge; Archbishop Parker's 
were left under severe restrictions to Corpus Christi College in 
the same university; Sir Thomas Bodley refounded during his 
lifetime the university library at Oxford, to which also Laud 
gave liberally and Selden bequeathed his books. The library 
of Archbishop Williams went to St John's College, Cambridge; 
that of Archbishop Usher was bought for Trinity College, Dublin. 
The mathematical and scientific books of Thomas Howard, earl 
of Norfolk (d. 1646), were given by his grandson to the Royal 
Society; the heraldic collections of Ralph Sheldon (d. 1684) to 
Heralds' College; the library in which Pepys took so much 
pleasure to Magdalene College, Cambridge. Bishop Moore'sbooks, 
including a little volume of Caxton quartos, almost all unique, 
were bought by George I. and presented to the university library 
at Cambridge. Archbishop Marsh, who had previously bought 
Stillingfleet's printed books (his manuscripts went to Oxford), 
founded a library at Dublin. The immense accumulations of 
Thomas Rawlinson (d. 1725) provided materials for a series of 
auctions, and Harley's printed books were sold to Osbourne the 
bookseller. But the trend was all towards public ownership'. 
While Richard Rawlinson (d. 1755) allowed his brother's books to 
be sold, the best of his own were bequeathed to Oxford, and the 
Harleian MSS. were offered to the nation at a sum far below 
their value. A similar offer of the great collections formed by 
Sir Hans Sloane, including some 50,000 printed books, together 
with the need for taking better care of what remained of the 
Cotton manuscripts, vested in trustees for public use in 1702 and 
partially destroyed by fire in 1731, led to the foundation of the 
British Museum in 1753, and this on its opening in 1757 was 
almost immediately enriched by George II. 's gift of the old 
royal library, formed by the kings and queens of England from 
Henry VII. to Charles II., and by Henry, prince of Wales, son 
of James I., who had bought the books belonging to Archbishop 
Cranmer and Lords Arundel and Lumley. A few notable book- 



BOOK-COLLECTING 



223 



buyers could not afford to bequeath their treasures to libraries, 
e.g. Richard Smith, the secondary of the Poultry Compter 
(d. 1675), at whose book-sale (1682) a dozen Caxtons sold for 
from 2s. to 18s. apiece, Dr Francis Bernard (d. 1698), Narcissus 
Luttrell(d. 1732) and Dr Richard Mead (d. 1 7 54) . At the opposite 
end of the scale, in the earls of Sunderland (d. 1722) and Pem- 
broke (d. 1733), we have early examples of the attempts, seldom 
successful, of book-loving peers to make their libraries into 
permanent heirlooms. But as has been said, the drift up to 
1760 was all towards public ownership, and the libraries were for 
the most part general in character, though the interest in typo- 
graphical antiquities was already well marked. 

When George III. came to the throne he found himself book- 
less, and the magnificent library of over 80,000 books and pamph- 
lets and 440 manuscripts which he accumulated shows on a large 
scale the catholic and literary spirit of the book-lovers of his day. 
As befitted the library of an English king it was rich in English 
classics as well as in those of Greece and Rome, and the typo- 
graphical first-fruits of Mainz, Rome and Venice were balanced 
by numerous works from the first presses of Westminster, London 
and Oxford. This noble library passed in 1823 to the British 
Museum, which had already received the much smaller but care- 
fully chosen collection of the Rev. C. M. Cracherode (d. 1799), and 
in 1846 was further enriched by the wonderful library formed by 
Thomas Grenville,thelastofitsgreatbook-loving benefactors, who 
died in that year, aged ninety-one. A few less wealthy men had 
kept up the old public-spirited tradition during George III.'s reign, 
Garrick bequeathing his fine collection of English plays and Sir 
Joseph Banks his natural history books to the British Museum, 
while Capell's Shakespearian treasures enriched Trinity College, 
Cambridge, and those of Malone went to the Bodleian library at 
Oxford, the formation of these special collections, in place of the 
large general library with a sprinkling of rarities, being in itself 
worth noting. But the noble book-buyers celebrated by the Rev. 
Thomas Frognall Dibdin in his numerous bibliographical works 
kept mainly on the old lines, though with aims less patriotic than 
their predecessors. The duke of Roxburghe's books were sold 
in 1812, and the excitement produced by the auction, more 
especially by the competition between Lord Spencer and the 
duke of Marlborough (at that time marquess of Blandford) for an 
edition of Boccaccio printed by Valdarfer at Venice in 147 1, led 
to the formation of the Roxburghe Club at a commemorative 
dinner. In 1819 the duke of Marlborough's books were sold, and 
the Boccaccio for which he had paid £2260 went to Earl Spencer 
(d. 1834) for £750, to pass with the rest of his rare books to Mrs 
Rylands in 1892, and by her gift to the John Rylands library 
at Manchester in 1899. The books of Sir M. M. Sykes were sold 
in 1824, those of J. B.Inglisin 1826 (after which he collected again) 
and those of George Hibbert in 1829. Thei5o,ooovolumes brought 
together by Richard Heber at an expense of about £100,000 were 
disposed of by successive sales during the years 1834-1837 and 
realized not much more than half their cost. The wonderful library 
of William Beckford (d. 1844), especially rich in fine bindings, be- 
queathed to his daughter, the duchessof Hamilton, was sold in 1882, 
with the Hamilton manuscripts, for the most part to the German 
government. Their dispersal was preceded in 1881 by that 
of the Sunderland collection, already mentioned. The 
library of Brian Fairfax (d. 1749), which had passed to the earls 
of Jersey, was sold in 1885, that of Sir John Thorold (d. 1815) 
in 1884, his " Gutenberg " Bible fetching £3900 and his Mainz 
Psalter £4950. The great collection of manuscripts formed by Sir 
Thomas Phillipps (d. 1872) has furnished materials for numerous 
sales. The printed books of the earl of Ashburnham (d. 1878) 
kept the auctioneers busy in 1897 and 1898; his manuscripts 
were sold, some to the British government (the Stowe collec- 
tion shared between the British Museum and Dublin), the Ger- 
man government (part of the Libri and Barrois collection, all, 
save one MS. of 13th century German ballads, resold to France), 
the Italian government (the rest of the Libri collection) 
Mr Yates Thompson (the MSS. known as the Appendix) and 
Mr J. Pierpont Morgan (the Lindau Gospels). The collections 
formed by Mr W, H, Miller (d. 1848, mainly English poetry), the 



duke of Devonshire (d. 1858) and Mr Henry Huth (d. 1878), 
are still intact. 

Among the book-buyers of the reign of George III., John 
Ratcliffe, an ex-coal-merchant, and James West had devoted 
themselves specially to Caxtons (of which the former possessed 
48 and the latter 34) and the products of other early English 
presses. The collections of Capell and Garrick were also small 
and homogeneous. Each section, moreover, of some of the great 
libraries that have just been enumerated might fairly be con- 
sidered a collection in itself, the union of several collections in the 
same library being made possible by the wealth of their purchaser 
and the small prices fetched by most classes of books in com- 
parison with those which are now paid. But perhaps the modern 
cabinet theory of book-collecting was first carried out with 
conspicuous skill by Henry Perkins (d. 1855), whose 865 fine 
manuscripts and specimens of early printing, when sold in 1870, 
realized nearly £26,000. If surrounded by a sufficient quantity 
of general literature the collection might not have seemed 
noticeably different from some of those already mentioned, but 
the growing cost of books, together with difficulties as to house- 
room, combined to discourage miscellaneous buying on a large 
scale, and what has been called the " cabinet " theory of collect- 
ing, so well carried out by Henry Perkins, became increasingly 
popular among book buyers, alike in France, England and the 
United States of America. Henri Beraldi, in his catalogue of his 
own collection (printed 1892), has described how in France a little 
band of book-loving amateurs grew up who laughed at the 
bibliophile de la vicille roche as they disrespectfully called their 
predecessors, and prided themselves on the unity and com- 
pactness of their own treasures. In place of the miscellaneous 
library in which every class of book claimed to be represented, 
and which needed a special room or gallery to house it, they aimed 
at small collections which should epitomize the owner's tastes and 
require nothing bulkier than a neat bookcase or cabinet to hold 
them. The French bibliophiles whom M. Beraldi celebrated 
applied this theory with great success to collecting the dainty 
French illustrated books of the 18th century which were their 
especial favourites. In England Richard Fisher treated his 
fine examples of early book-illustration as part of his collection 
of engravings,etchings and woodcuts(illustrated catalogue printed 
1879), and Frederick Locker (Locker-Lampson) formed in two 
small bookcases such a gathering of first editions of English imagi- 
native literature that the mere catalogue of it (printed in 1886) 
produced the effect of a stately and picturesque procession. Some 
of the book-hoards of previous generations could have spared the 
equivalent of the Locker collection without seeming noticeably 
the poorer, but the compactness and unity of this small collection, 
in which every book appears to have been bought for a special 
reason and to form an integral part of the whole, gave it an artistic 
individuality which was a pleasant triumph for its owner, and 
excited so much interest among American admirers of Mr 
Locker's poetry that it may be said to have set a fashion. As 
another example of the value of a small collection, both for 
delight and for historical and artistic study, mention may be 
made of the little roomful of manuscripts and incunabula which 
William Morris brought together to illustrate the history of the 
bookish arts in the middle ages before the Renaissance introduced 
new ideals. Many living collectors are workin g in a similar spirit, 
and as this spirit spreads the monotony of the old libraries, in 
which the same editions of the same books recurred with weari- 
some frequency, should be replaced by much greater individuality 
and variety. Moreover, if they can be grouped round some 
central idea cheap books may yield just as good sport to the 
collector as expensive ones, and the collector of quite modem 
works may render admirable service to posterity. The only 
limitation is against books specially manufactured to attract him, 
or artificially made rare. A quite wholesome interest in contem- 
porary first editions was brought to nought about 1889 by the 
booksellers beginning to hoard copies of Browning's Asolando 
and Mr Lang's Blue Fairy Book on the day of publication, while 
a graceful but quite minor poet was made ridiculous by £100 
being asked for a set of his privately printed opuscula. The 



224 



BOOK-COLLECTING 



petty gambling in books printed at the Kelmscott and Doves' 
presses, and in the fine paper copies of a certain Life of Queen 
Victoria, for which a premium of 250% was asked before pub- 
lication, is another proof that until the manufacturing stage is 
over collecting cannot safely begin. But with this exception 
the field is open, and the 19th century offers as good a hunting 
ground as any of its predecessors. 

While book-collecting may thus take an endless variety of 
forms the heads under which these may be grouped are few and 
fairly easily defined. They may be here briefly in- 
Objects dkated together with some notes as to the literature 
methods, which has grown up round them. The development 
which bibliographical literature has taken is indeed 
very significant of the changed ideals of collectors. Brunet's 
Manuel du libraire, first published in 1810, attained its fifth 
edition in 1860-1864, and has never since been re-edited (sup- 
plement, 1878-1880). The Bibliographer's Manual of English 
Literature by W. T. Lowndes, first published in 1834, was revised 
by H. G. Bohn in 1857-1864, and of this also no further edition 
has been printed. These two works between them gave all the 
information the old-fashioned collectors required, the Trisor de 
livres rares et precieux by J. G. T. Graesse (Dresden, 1850-1867, 
supplementary volume in 1869) adding little to the information 
given by Brunet. The day of the omnivorous collector being 
past, the place of these general manuals has been taken by 
more detailed bibliographies and handbooks on special books, 
and though new editions of both Lowndes and Brunet would 
be useful to librarians and booksellers no publisher has had the 
courage to produce them. 

To attract a collector a book must appeal to his eye, his mind 
or his imagination, and many famous books appeal to all three. 
A book may be beautiful by virtue of its binding, its illustrations 
or the simple perfection and harmony of its print and paper. 
The attraction of a fine binding has always been felt in France, 
the high prices quoted for Elzevirs and French first editions being 
often due much more to their 17th and 18th century jackets than 
to the books themselves. The appreciation of old bindings has 
greatly increased in England since the exhibition of them at the 
Burlington Fine Arts Club in 1891 (illustrated catalogue printed 
the same year), English blind stamped bindings, embroidered 
bindings, and bindings attributable to Samuel Meame (temp. 
Charles II.) being much more sought after than formerly. 
(See Bookbinding.) 

Illustrated books of certain periods are also much in request, 
and with the exception of a few which early celebrity has pre- 
vented becoming rare have increased inordinately in price. 
The primitive woodcuts in incunabula are now almost too highly 
appreciated, and while the Nuremburg Chronicle (1493) seldom 
fetches more than £30 or the Hypnerotomachia Poliphili (Venice, 
1499) more than £120, rarer books are priced in hundreds. The 
best books on the subject are : for Italy, Lippmann's Wood Engrav- 
ing in Italy in the 15th Century (1888), Kristeller's Early Florentine 
Woodcuts (1897), the due de Rivoli's (Prince d'Essling's) 
Bibliographie des livres a figures vinitiens 1469-1525 (1892, 
new edition 1906); for Germany, Muther's Die deutsche 
Bucherillustration der Gothik und Friihrenaissance (1884); for 
Holland and Belgium, Sir W. M. Conway's The Woodcutters 
of the Netherlands in the 15th Century (1884); for France the 
material will all be found in Claudin's Histoire de V imprimerie 
enFrance (1900, &c). Some information on the illustrated books 
of the early 16th century is given in Butsch's Die Bucherorna- 
mentik der Renaissance (1878), but the pretty French books of 
the middle of the century and the later Dutch and English copper- 
engraved book illustrations (for the latter see Colvin's Early 
Engraving and Engravers inEngland, 1905) have been imperfectly 
appreciated. Thisicannot be said of the French books of the 1 8th 
century chronicled by H. Cohen, Guide de Vamateur de livre 
d gravures du XVIII' siecle (5th ed., 1886), much of the same 
information, with a little more about English books, being 
given in Lewine's Bibliography of Eighteenth Century Art and 
Illustrated Books (1898). English books with coloured illustra- 
tions, for which there has arisen a sudden fashion, are well 



described in Martin Hardie's English Colour Books (1906). 
Bewick's work has been described by Mr Austin Dobson. 

Appreciation of finely printed books has seldom extended much 
beyond the 15th century. In addition to the works mentioned 
in the article on incunabula^. ») ,note may be made of Humphrey's 
Masterpieces of the Early Printers and Engravers (1870), while 
Lippmann's Druckschriften des XV bis XVIII Jahrhunderts 
(1884-1887) covers, though not- very fully, the later period. 

Among books which make an intellectual appeal to the col- 
lectors may be classed all works of historical value which have 
not been reprinted, or of which the original editions are more 
authentic, or convincing, than modem reprints. It is evident that 
these cover a vast field, and that the collector in taking possession 
of any corner of it is at once the servant and rival of historical 
students. Lord Crawford's vast collections of English, Scottish 
and Irish proclamations and of papal bulls may be cited as 
capital instances of the work which a collector may do for the 
promotion of historical research, and the philological library 
brought together by Prince Lucien Bonaparte {An Attempt 
at a Catalogue by V. Collins, published 1894) and the Foxwell 
collection of early books on political economy (presented to the 
university of London by the Goldsmiths' Company) are two 
other instances of recent date. Much collecting of this kind is 
now being carried on by the libraries of institutes and societies 
connected with special professions and studies, but there is ample 
room also for private collectors to work on these lines. 

Of books which appeal to a collector's imagination the most 
obvious examples are those which can be associated with some 
famous person or event. A book which has belonged to a king 
or queen (more especially one who, like Mary queen of Scots, 
has appealed to popular sympathies), or to a great statesman, 
soldier or poet, which bears any mark of having been valued by 
him, or of being connected with any striking incident in his life, 
has an interest which defies analysis. Collectors themselves 
have a natural tenderness for their predecessors, and a copy of 
a famous work is all the more regarded if its pedigree can be 
traced through a long series of book-loving owners. Hence the 
production of such works as Great Book-Collectors by Charles 
and Mary Elton (1893), English Book-Collectors by W. Y. Fletcher 
(1902) and Guigard's Nouvel armorial du bibliophile (1890). 
Books condemned to be burnt, or which have caused the persecu- 
tion of their authors, have an imaginative interest of another 
kind, though one which seems to have appealed more to writers 
of books than to collectors. As has already been noted, most of 
the books specially valued by collectors make a double or triple 
appeal to the collecting instinct, and the desire to possess first 
editions may be accounted for partly by their positive superiority 
over reprints for purposes of study, partly by the associations 
which they can be proved to possess or which imagination creates 
for them. The value set on them is at least to some extent 
fanciful. It would be difficult, for instance, to justify the high 
prices paid by collectors of the days of George III. for the first 
printed editions of the Greek and Latin classics. With few 
exceptions these are of no value as texts, and there are no possible 
associations by which they can be linked with the personality 
of their authors. It may be doubted whether any one now 
collects them save as specimens of printing, though no class of 
books which has once been prized ever sinks back into absolute 
obscurity. On the other hand the prestige of the first editions 
of. English and French literary masterpieces has immensely 
increased. A first folio Shakespeare (1623) was in 1906 sold 
separately for £3000, and the MacGeorge copies of the first four 
folios (1623, 1632, 1663-1664 and 1685) fetched collectively the 
high price of £10,000. The quarto editions of Shakespeare plays 
have appreciated even more, several of these little books, once 
sold at 6d. apiece, having fetched over £1000, while the unknown 
and unique copy of the 1594 edition of Titus Andronicus, dis- 
covered in Sweden, speedily passed to an American collector 
for £2000. Information as to early editions of famous English 
books will be found in Lowndes' Bibliographer's Manual, in 
Hazlitt's Handbook to the Popular Poetical and Dramatic Literature 
of Great Britain from the Invention of Printing to the Restoration 



BOOK-KEEPING 



225 



(1867) and his subsequent Collections and Notes (1876-1903), 
and as to more recent books in Slater's Early Editions, a biblio- 
graphical survey of the works of some popular modern authors 
(1894), while French classics have found an excellent chronicler 
in Jules Le Petit (Bibliographie des principales editions originales 
d'ecrivains franqais du XV au XVIII" Steele, 1888). 

In most cases there is a marked falling off in the interest with 
which early editions other than the first are regarded, and con- 
sequently in the prices paid for them, though important changes 
in the text give to the edition in which they first occur some 
shadow of the prestige attaching to an original issue. One of 
the recognized byways of book-collecting, however, used to be 
the collection of as many editions as possible of the same work. 
When this result in the acquisition of numerous late editions of 
no value for the text its only usefulness would appear to be the 
index it may offer to the author's popularity. But in translations 
of the Bible, inliturgical works, andineditionspublished during the 
author's life the aid offered to the study of the development of the 
final text by a long row of intermediate editions may be very great. 

Another instance in which imagination reinforces the more 
positive interest a book may possess is in the case of editions which 
can be connected with the origin, diffusion or development of 
printing. Piety suggests that book-lovers should take a special 
interest in the history of the art which has done so much for their 
happiness, and in this respect they have mostly shown themselves 
religious. The first book printed in any town is reasonably 
coveted by local antiquaries, and the desire to measure the 
amount and quality of the work of every early printer has caused 
the preservation of thousands of books which would otherwise 
have perished. (See Incunabula.) 

The financial side of book-collecting may be studied in Slater's 
Book-Prices Current, published annually since 1887, and in 
Livingston's American Book Prices Current, and in the same 
author's Auction Prices of Books (1905). While largely influenced 
by fashion the prices given for books are never wholly unreason- 
able. They are determined, firstly by the positive or associative 
interest which can be found in the book itself, secondly by the 
infrequency with which copies come into the market compared 
with the number and wealth of their would-be possessors, and 
thirdly, except in the case of books of the greatest interest and 
rarity, by the condition of the copy offered in respect to com- 
pleteness, size, freshness and absence of stains. (A. W. Po.) 

BOOK-KEEPING, a systematic record of business transactions, 
in a form conveniently available for reference, made by indi- 
viduals or corporations engaged in commercial or financial opera- 
tions with a view to enabling them with the minimum amount 
of trouble and of dislocation to the business itself to ascertain at 
any time (1) the detailed particulars of the transactions under- 
taken, and (2) the cumulative effect upon the business and its 
financial relations to others. Book-keeping, sometimes described 
as a science and sometimes as an art, partakes of the nature of 
both. It is not so much a "discovery as a growth, the crude 
methods of former days having been gradually improved to 
meet the changing requirements of business, and this process 
of evolution is still going on. The ideal of any system of book- 
keeping is the maximum of record combined with the minimum 
of labour, but as dishonesty has to be guarded against, no system 
of book-keeping can be regarded as adequate which does not 
enable the record to be readily verified as a true and complete 
statement of the transactions involved. Such a verification is 
called an audit, and in the case of public and other large con- 
cerns is ordinarily undertaken by professional accountants (q.v.). 
Where the book-keeping staff is large it is usually organized so 
that its members, to some extern at least, check each other's 
work, and to that extent an audit, known as a "staff audit" 
or " internal check," is frequently performed by the book- 
keeping staff itself. 

Formerly, when credit was a considerably less important 
factor than now in commercial transactions, book-keeping was 
frequently limited to an account of receipts and payments of 
money ; and in early times, before money was in use, to an account 
of the receipt and issue of goods of different kinds. Even now 

iv. & 



what may be called the " cash system " of accounts is almost 
exclusively used by governments, local authorities, and charit- 
able and other institutions; but in business it is equally necessary 
to record movements of credit, as a mere statement of receipts 
and payments of money would show only a part of the total 
number of transactions undertaken. As for practical purposes 
some limit must be placed upon the daily record of transac- 
tions, certain classes show only a record of cash receipts 
and payments, which must, when it is desired to ascertain the 
actual position of affairs, be adjusted by bringing into account 
those transactions which have not yet been completed by the 
receipt or payment of money. For instance, it is usual to charge 
customers with goods sold to them at the date when the sale 
takes place, and to give them credit for the amount received in 
payment upon the date of receipt (thus completely recording 
every phase of the transaction as and when it occurs); but in 
connexion (say) with wages it is not usual to give each workman 
credit for the services rendered by him from day to day, but 
merely to charge up the amounts, when paid, to a wages account, 
which thus at any date only shows the amounts which have 
actually been paid, and takes no cognisance of the sums accruing 
due. When, therefore, it is desired to ascertain the actual 
expenditure upon wages for any given period, it is necessary to 
allow for the payments made during that period in respect of 
work previously performed, and to add the value of work 
performed during the current period which remains unpaid. 
In the majority of businesses those accounts which deal with 
various forms of standing expenses are thus dealt with, and in 
consequence the record, as it appears from day to day, is pro 
tanto incomplete. Another very important series of transactions 
which is not included in the ordinary day-to-day record is that 
representing the loss gradually accruing by reason of waste, 
or depreciation, of assets or general equipment of the business; 
proper allowance for these losses must of course be made whenevei 
it is desired to ascertain the true position of affairs. v s 

The origin of book-keeping is lost in obscurity, but recent 
researches would appear to show that some method of keeping 
accounts has existed from the remotest times. Baby- 
Ionian records have been found dating back as far as 
2600 B.C., written with a stylus on small slabs of clay, and it is 
of interest to note {Records of the Past, xi. 89) that these slabs 
or tablets " usually contain impressions from cylinder seals, 
and nail marks, which were considered to be a man's natural 
seal," thus showing that the modern method of identifying 
criminals by finger prints had its counterpart in Babylonia some 
4500 years ago. Egyptian records were commonly written on 
papyrus, and contemporary pictures show a scribe keeping 
account of the quantities of grain brought into and removed from 
the government store-houses. It will thus be seen that some 
form of book-keeping existed long before bound books were 
known, and therefore the more general term accounting would 
seem to be preferable — the more so as the most modern develop- 
ments are in the direction of again abandoning the bound book 
in favour of loose or easily detached sheets of paper or card, thus 
capable of being rearranged as circumstances or convenience 
may dictate. Most of the earlier accounting records are in the 
nature of a mere narrative of events, which — however complete 
in itself — failed to fulfil the second requirement of an adequate 
system of book-keeping already referred to. Prior to the use 
of money nothing in this direction could of course well be at- 
tempted; but for a long time after its employment became 
general money values were recorded in Roman figures, which 
naturally did not lend themselves to ready calculation. 

At the present-time it may be generally stated that all book- 
keeping records are kept in three distinct columns, dealing 
respectively with the date of the transaction, its nature, and its 
money value. The earliest extant example of accounts so kept 
is probably a ledger in the Advocates' library at Edinburgh, 
dated 1697, which, it is of interest to note, is ruled by hand. 
Prior to that time, however, double-entry book-keeping had been 
in general use. The exact date of its introduction is unknown; 
but it was certainly not. as has been frequently stated, the 

II 



226 



BOOK-KEEPING 



Madera 
methods. 



invention of Lucas de Bergo, in or about 1494. This, however, 
is the date of the first issue (at Venice) of a printed book entitled 
Everything about Arithmetic, Geometry and Proportion, by Luca 
Paciolo, which contains inter alia an explanation of book-keeping 
by double-entry as then understood; but in all probability, 
the system had then been in use for something like 200 years. 
It is perhaps unfortunate that from 1494 until comparatively 
recent times the literature of accounting has been provided by 
theorists and students, rather than by practical business men, and 
it may well be doubted, therefore, whether it accurately describes 
contemporary procedure. Another illusion which it is necessary 
to expose in the interests of truth is the value attached to 
Jones's English System of Book-keeping by Single or Double 
Entry, published at Bristol in 1796. Before publishing this 
book, E. T. Jones issued a prospectus, stating that he had 
patented an entirely new and greatly improved system, and that 
subscribers (at a guinea a copy) would be entitled to a special 
licence empowering them to put the new invention into practice 
in their own book-keeping. With this bait he secured thousands 
of subscribers, but so far as can be gathered his system was 
entirely without merit, and it is chiefly of interest as indicating 
the value, even then, of advertising. 

It is impossible here to describe fully all the improvements 
that have been made in methods of accounting during recent 
years, but it is proposed to deal with the more important 
of these improvements, after the general 
principles upon which all systems of book- 
keeping are based have been briefly described. 

The centre of all book-keeping systems is the 
ledger, and it may be said that all other books are 
only kept as a matter of practical convenience — - 
hence the name " subsidiary books " that is 
frequently applied thereto. Inasmuch, however, as 
the transactions are first recorded in these sub- 
sidiary books, and afterwards classified therefrom 
into the ledger, the names books of entry or books 
of first entry are often employed. Subsidiary books 
which do not form the basis of subsequent entries 
into the ledger, but are merely used for statistical 
purposes, are known us statistical or auxiliary books. 
In the early days of book-keeping the ledger com- 
prised merely those accounts which it was thought 
desirable to keep accessible, and was not a complete 
record of all transactions. Thus in many instances 
records were only kept of transactions with other 
business houses, known as personal accounts. In the earliest 
examples transactions tending to reduce indebtedness were 
recorded in order of date, as they occurred underneath 
transactions recording the creation of the indebtedness; and 
the amount of the reduction was subtracted from the sum 
of the indebtedness up to that date. This method was found 
to be inconvenient, and the next step was to keep one 
account of the transactions recording the creation of indebted- 
ness and another account (called the contra account) of those 
transactions reducing or extinguishing it. For convenience 
these two accounts were kept on opposite sides of the ledger, 
and thus was evolved the Dr. and Cr. account as at present 
in general use: — 

Dr. A.B. Contra. Cr. 



but as a matter of convenience is usually ruled off each time 
all indebtedness is extinguished, and also at certain periodical 
intervals, so that the state of the account may then be readily 
apparent. 

A mere collection of personal accounts is, however, obviously a 
very incomplete record of the transactions of any business, 
and does not suffice to enable a statement of its financial 
position to be prepared. So at an early date other Singh- 
accounts were added to the ledger, recording the a" c ^ nte . 
acquisition of and disposal of different classes of 
property, such accounts being generally known as real accounts. 
These accounts are kept upon the same principle as personal 
accounts, in that all expenditure upon the part of the business 
is recorded upon the Dr. side, and all receipts upon the Cr. side; 
the excess of the debit entries over the credit entries thus showing 
the value placed upon those assets that still remain the property 
of the business. With the aid of personal and real accounts 
properly written up to date, it is possible at any time to 
prepare a statement of assets and liabilities showing the financial 
position of a business, and the following is an example of such a 
statement, which shows also how the profit made by the business 
may be thus ascertained, assuming that the financial position 
at the commencement of the current financial period, and the 
movements of capital into and out of the business during the 
period, are capable of being ascertained. 

State of Affairs as at 31ST December 1906 





Liabilities. 








A ssets. 








Trade Creditors . 


£4.96i 


10 





Fixtures, Furni- 








Bills Payable . . 


2,620 


18 


4 


ture, &c. 


£1,269 


4 3 




Balance', being ex- 








Stock on hand 


5,751 


3 10 




cess of assets 








Trade Debtors 


3,842 


7 9 




over liabilities 








Bills Receivable . 


7,468 


H 3 




(or " Capital ") 








Cash at Bank 


4,169 


5 5 




at this date, 
















carried down . 
Amount of Capi- 


14,918 


7 


2 


Balance brought 






£22,500 


15 


6 


£22,500 


15 6 














tal on 1st Jan. 








down 


£14,918 


7 2 




1906. 


£15,010 


1 


7 










Balance, being net 








Amount drawn 








profit for the 








out of business 








year ended this 








during year 








date 


1,408 


5 


7 


ended this date. 


1500 





£16,418 


7 


2 


£16,418 


7 2 



Date. 


Narrative. 


Amount. 


Date. 


Narrative. 


Amount. 






£ *• d. 






£ *. d. 



In this form of account all transactions creating indebtedness 
due from the person named therein to the business — that is to 
say, all benefits received by that person from the business — are 
recorded upon the left-hand, or Dr. side, and per contra all 
transactions representing benefits imparted by him, giving 
rise to a liability on the part of the business, are recorded 
upon the Cr. side. The account may run on indefinitely, 



The method of accounting hitherto described represents 
single-entry, which— ^albeit manifestly incomplete — is still very 
generally used by small business houses, and particularly by 
retail traders. Its essential weakness is that it provides no auto- 
matic check upon the clerical accuracy of the record, and, 
should any mistake be made in the keeping of the books, or in 
the extraction therefrom of the lists of assets and liabilities, 
the statement of assets and liabilities and the profit or loss of the 
current financial period, will be incorrect to an equal extent. 
It was to avoid this obvious weakness of single-entry that the 
system of double-entry was evolved. 

The essential principle of double-entry is that it constitutes 
a complete record of every business transaction, and as these 
transactions are invariably cross-dealings — involving 
simultaneously the receipt of a benefit by some one 
antl the imparting of a benefit by some one — a complete 
record of transactions from both points of view necessitates an 
entry of equal amount upon debit and credit sides of the ledger. 
Hence it follows that, if the clerical work be correctly performed, 
the aggregate amount entered up upon the debit side of the ledger 
must at all times equal the aggregate amount entered up upon 
the credit side; and thus a complete list of all ledger balances 
will show an agreement of the total debit balances with the total 
credit balances. Such a list is called a trial balance, an example 
of which is given below. It should be observed, however, that 
the test supplied by the trial balance is a purely mechanical 
one, and does not prove the absolute accuracy of the ledger as 



Doable 
entry. 



BOOK-KEEPING 



227 



a record of transactions. Thus transactions which have 
actually taken place may have been omitted from the books 
altogether, or they may have been recorded to the wrong 
accounts, or the money values attached to them may be 
incorrect; or, yet again, fictitious records may be entered 

Trial Balance, 31ST December 1906 







Dr. 






Cr. 


I 


Capital account 








£15,010 1 7 


5 


Drawings 


1,500 










20 


Trade creditors 








4,961 10 


24 


Fixtures, furniture, &c. 


1,269 


4 


3 




27 


Bills payable . 








2,620 18 4 


40 


Bad debts 


7i 


4 


2 




44 


Stock 1st Jan. 1906 . 


4,078 


16 


4 




,SO 


Discounts allowed 


975 


3 


3 




53 


Trade debtors . 


3.842 


7 


9 




60 


Discounts received . 








1,117 J 7 8 


65 


Wages and salaries . 


1,865 


12 







75 


Depreciation . 


141 





5 




7« 


Rent, rates and taxes 


1,242 


13 


8 




82 


General expenses 


1,087 


8 







qo 


Bills receivable 


7,468 


H 


3 




97 


Purchases 


44,731 


2 


10 




IOO 


Sales . 








48,732 4 9 


C56 


Cash at bank . 


4,169 


5 


5 






£72,442 


12 


4 


£72,442 12 4 



in the ledger of transactions which have never taken place. 
A trial balance is thus no very adequate safeguard against fraud, 
nor does it bring to light mistakes in the monetary value attach- 
ing to the various transactions recorded. This last point is of 
especial importance, in that the monetary value of transactions 
may have been correctly recorded in the first instance, but owing 
to altered circumstances may have become inaccurate at a later 
date. This of course means that the altered circumstances 
constitute an additional " transaction " which has been omitted. 
It will be observed, therefore, that in order to complete the 
record of the transactions by double-entry, it has become 



necessary to introduce into the ledger a third class of accounts, 
known as impersonal or nominal accounts. These accounts record 
the transferences of money, or of money's worth, which, so far 
from representing a mere reshuffling of assets and liabilities, 
involve an increase in or a reduction of the amount invested in 
the business, i.e. a profit or a loss. Transactions representing 
profits are recorded upon the Cr. side of nominal accounts, and 
those representing losses (including expenses) upon the Dr. side. 
This is consistent with the rules already laid down in connexion 
with real and nominal accounts, inasmuch as expenditure which 
does not result in the acquisition of an asset is a loss, whereas 
receipts which do not involve the creation of liabilities represent 
profits. All debit balances therefore that are not assets are 
losses, and per contra all credit balances that are not liabilities 
are profits. So that, inasmuch as double-entry provides inter 
alia a complete statement under suitable headings of all profits 
and all losses, it is possible by aggregating these results to 
deduce therefrom the net profit or loss of carrying on the business 
• — and that by a method entirely distinct from that previously 
described in connexion with single-entry, thus constituting a 
valuable additional check. Taking the trial balance shown above, 
the following represent the trading account, profit and loss account, 
and balance sheet compiled therefrom. The trading 
account may be variously regarded as the account 
recording the movements of goods which represent the 
stock-in-trade, and as a preliminary to (or a subdivision of) the 
profit and loss account. The balance sheet is a statement of 
the assets and liabilities; but — inasmuch as, by transferring the 
balance of the profit and loss account to the capital account, it is 
possible to bring the latter account up to date and to show the 
credit balance representing the surplus of assets over liabilities 
to date — the balance sheet, instead of showing a difference, or a 
" balance," representing what is assumed to be the amount of the 
capital to date, shows an absolute agreement of assets upon the 
one hand and of liabilities plus capital upon the other. The two 
sides of the account thus balance — hence the name. 



Balance 
sheet. 



Dr. 


Trading Account for the Year ended 31st December 1906 




Cr. 




To Stock on hand, 1st Jan. 1906 
,, Purchases ..... 
,, Gross Profit, transferred to Profit 
and Loss account 


£4,078 16 4 
44,731 2 10 

5-673 9 5 




By Sales . 
,, Stock on hand, 


31st Dec. 1906 


£48,732 4 9 
5,751 3 10 




£54,483 8 7 


£54,483 8 7 



Dr. 



Profit and Loss Account for the Year ended 31st December 1906 



Cr. 



To Rent, rates and taxes £1242 13 8 
,, Salaries and wages 1865 12 o 
,, General expenses . 1087 8 o 



Discounts allowed . 
Bad debts .... 
Depreciation .... 
Net Profit for the year transferred 
to Capital account 



£4195 13 8 

975 3 3 

71 4 2 

141 o 5 

1408 5 7 



£6791 7 1 



By Gross Profit as per Trading Account 
,, Discount received 



£5673 9 5 
1117 17 8 



£6791 7 1 



Dr. 



Balance Sheet as at 31st December 1906 



Cr. 



To A. B., Capital account 
„ Trade creditors 
„ Bills payable . 



£i4,9l8 
4,961 
2,620 



7 2 
10 o 
18 4 



£22,500 15 6 



By Fixtures, furniture, &c 
,, Stock on hand 
,, Trade debtors 
„ Bills receivable . 
„ Cash at bank 



£1,269 
5,751 
3,842 
7,468 
4,169 



3 
10 

9 
3 
5 



£22,500 15 6 



Dr. 




A.B., Capital Account 




Cr. 


1906. 
Dec. 31 


To Drawings account 
„ Balance carried down 


£1,500 
14,918 7 2 


1906. 
Jan. 1 
Dec. 31 

1907. 
Jan. 1 


By Balance from last account 
,, Profit and Loss account, being net 
profit for the year ended this date 

By Balance brought down.' 


£15.010 1 7 
1,408 5 7 




£16,418 7 2 


£16,418 7 2 






£14,918 7 a 



228 



BOOK-KEEPING 



Journal. 



In the foregoing example the customary method has been 
followed of deducting withdrawals of capital from the capital 
account and of adding profits thereto. Sometimes, however, the 
balance of the capital account remains constant, and the draw- 
ings and net profits are transferred to a separate account called 
current account. This plan is but rarely observed in the case 
of undertakings owned by individuals, or private firms, but is 
invariably adopted in connexion with joint-stock companies, 
although in such cases the name appropriation of profit account is 
generally employed. 

Although it is now usual to employ several books of first-entry, 
in the case of comparatively small businesses one such book is 
sufficient for all purposes, in that it is practicable for 
one person to record all the transactions that take 
place as and when they occur. A book of this description is 
called the journal, and for many years represented the only book 
of first-entry employed in book-keeping. An example of the 
journal is given below. The entries appearing therein are such 
as would be necessary to prepare the trading and profit and loss 
accounts from the trial balance shown above, and to bring the 
capital account up to date. 

In modern times, however, with the growth of business, it 
was soon found impracticable to keep one book of first-entry for 
all transactions, and accordingly it became necessary either to 
treat the journal as an intermediate book, in which the trans- 
actions might be brought together and focused as a preliminary 
to being recorded in the ledger, or else to split up the journal 
into numerous books of first-entry, each of which might in that 
case be employed for the record of a particular class of transaction. 
The first method has been generally adopted in the continental 
countries of Europe, as will be shown later on, whereas in Great 
Britain and in North America the latter method more generally 
obtains; that is, instead of having one journal in which all classes 
of transactions are recorded in the first instance, it is usual to 
employ several journals, as follows: — a sales journal, sales book 
or day book, to record particulars of goods sold; a bought journal, 

Journal 1906 



now generally kept in sections. Thus the cash account and the 
bank account are frequently bound together in one separate 
book called the cash book, showing in parallel columns the move- 
ments of office cash and of cash at the bank, and by the addition 
Day Book 1906 





Forward 
- 27th December.- 



A. Brown, 

492 New Street, Walworth — 
2 doz. V.C. port 31/- 

1 ,, A.C. pale brandy 49/- 

-28 th December. 



Fredk. Newton, 

Farleigh House, Epsom- 

1 gall. E. Pale sherry 

2 doz. O.B. Heidsieck 

1892 
2 gall. P. Scotch 



13/6 

160/- 

21/- 



Robert French, 

214 High Road, Sutton — 
6 doz. F. D.Pommard, 1899 30/- 

1 „ M.F. Margaux, 1893 66/- 

2 „ A. Niersteiner 24/- 



£320 
290 



£013 6 

16 o o 
220 



£900 
360 
280 



£376i 7 8 



5 11 o 



18 15 6 



14 14 o 



£3800 8 2 




Dec. 31 


Trading account 
To Stock account . 
,, Purchases account 




no 

44 
97 

100 

44 
no 

no 
120 

120 

78 
65 
82 

50 
40 

75 

60 
120 

120 
1 

1 

5 


Dr. 

£48,809 19 2 

48,732 4 9 
5,75i 3 10 

5,673 9 5 

5,383 1 6 

1,117 17 8 
1,408 5 7 
1,500 


Cr. 

£4,078 16 4 
44,731 2 10 

54,483 8 7 
5,673 9 5 

1,242 13 8 
1,865 12 
1,087 8 

975 3 3 

71 4 2 

141 5 

1,117 17 8 

1,408 5 7 

1,500 


•• 


Sales account . 
Stock account . 
To Trading account 




>i 


Trading account 

To Profit and Loss account 




i» 


Profit and Loss account 
To Rent, rates and taxes 
,, Salaries and wages 
,, General expenses 
,, Discounts allowed 
,, Bad debts 
,, Depreciation 




»* 


Discounts received . 

To Profit and Loss account 




it 


Profit and Loss account 
To A.B., Capital account 






A.B., Capital account 
To Drawings account 










£118,376 1 11 


£118,376 1 11 



invoice book or purchases book, to record particulars of goods pur- 
chased; a returns inwards book, to record particulars of goods sold 
but subsequently returned by customers; a returns outwards book, 
to record the like particulars with regard to goods purchased and 
subsequently returned; a bills receivable book, to record particulars 
of bills of exchange received from debtors; and a bills payable 
booh, to record particulars of bills of exchange given to creditors. 
With a view still further to split up the work, thus enabling a 
large staff to be simultaneously engaged, the ledger itself is 



of a third column for discounts the necessity of keeping an 
additional book of first entry as a discount journal may also be 
avoided. Of late years, however, most businesses pay all moneys 
received into their bankers without deduction, and pay all 
accounts by cheque; the necessity of an account for office cash 
thus no longer exists, save in connexion with petty payments, 
which are recorded in a separate book called the petty cash book. 
With regard to the remaining ledger 
accounts, personal accounts— which are the 
most numerous — are frequently separated 
from the real and nominal accounts, and 
are further subdivided so that customers' 
accounts are kept separate from the 
accounts of trade creditors. The customers' 
accounts are kept in a ledger (or, if need be, 
in several ledgers) called sales ledgers, or 
sold ledgers; while the accounts of trade 
creditors are similarly kept in purchases 
ledgers or bought ledgers. The nominal and 
real accounts, if together, are kept in what 
is called the general ledger; but this may 
be further subdivided into a nominal 
ledger and a private ledger. This last sub- 
division is, however, rarely made upon a 
scientific basis, for such accounts as the 
profit and loss account and trading account 
are generally kept in the private ledger 
although strictly speaking nominal accounts ; 
while the bills receivable account and the 
bills payable account are generally kept in 
the nominal ledger, so as to reduce to a 
minimum the amount of clerical work in 
connexion with the private ledger, which 
is kept either by the principal himself or 
by his confidential employee. By the employment of adjust- 
ment accounts, which complete the double-entry record in each 
ledger, these various ledgers may readily be made self-balancing, 
thus enabling clerical errors to be localized and responsibility 
enforced. 

Of recent years considerable attention has been devoted to 
further modifications of book-keeping methods with a view to 
reducing clerical work, increasing the speed with which results 
are available, and enabling them to be handled more quickly 



BOOK-KEEPING 



229 



and with greater certainty. Tabular book-keeping is a device to 
achieve one or more of these ends by the substitution of books 
ruled with numerous columns for the more usual 
7afc»/ar f orm . The system may be applied either to books of 
keeping. ^ rst entry or to ledgers. As applied to books of first- 
entry it enables the same book to deal conveniently 
with more than one class of transaction; thus if the trad- 
ing of a business is divided into several departments, by 
providing a separate column for the sales of each depart- 



computed; after which they are filed away in a form convenient 
for reference. Sometimes the process is carried a step further, 
and the original slips, filed away with suitable guide-cards 
indicating the nature of the account, themselves constitute the 
ledger record — which in such cases is to be found scattered over a 
number of sheets, one for each transaction, instead of, as in the 
case of the ordinary book ledger, a considerable number of transac- 
tions being recorded upon a single page. This adaptation of the 
slip system is impracticable except in cases where the transactions 



Reference 
No. 



Name of 
Debtor. 



Amount 

due on 

1st Oct. 

1906. 



Charges 

for 
Current 
Quarter. 



Total 
Debit. 



Date 
received. 



Amount 
received. 



Discounts. 



Allowances. 



Bad 
Debts. 



Amount 

due on 

31st Dec. 

1906. 



Re- 
marks. 



£ s. d. 



£ s. d. 



£ s. d. 



ment it is possible readily to arrive at separate totals for 
the aggregate sales of each, thus simplifying the preparation 
of departmental trading accounts. As applied to ledgers, the 
application of the system may be best described by the aid 
of the above example (the proceedings of the columns being 
given only), which shows how a very large number of personal 
accounts may be recorded upon a single opening of a ledger 
provided the number of entries to be made against each 
individual be few. 




Fig. 1. — Card-Ledger Tray (Library Bureau System). 

Another important application of modern methods consists 
of what may be described as the slip system, which is in many 
respects a reversion to the method of keeping records 
system. upon movable slabs or tablets, as in the Babylonian ac- 
counts referred to at the beginning of this article. This 
system may be applied to books of first-entry, or to ledgers, or to 
both. As applied to books of first-entry it aims at so modifying 
the original record of the transaction — whether it represents an 
invoice for goods sold or an acknowledgment given for money 
received — that a facsimile duplicate may be taken of the original 
entry by the aid of a carbon sheet, which instead of being 
immovably bound up in a book is capable of being handled 
separately and placed in any desired order or position, and thus 
more readily recorded in the ledger. Postings are thus made 
direct from the original slips, which have been first sorted out 
into an order convenient for that purpose, and afterwards re- 
sorted so that the total sales of each department may be readily 



£ s. d. 



£ s. d. 



£ s. d. 



£ s. d. 



£ s. d. 



with each individual are few in number, and is not worth adoption 
unless the exceedingly large number of personal accounts makes it 
important as far as possible to avoid all duplication of clerical 
work. The more usual adaptation of the slip system to ledgers 
is to be found in the employment of card ledgers or loose-leaf 
ledgers. With card ledgers (fig. 1) each ledger account is upon 
an independent sheet of cardboard suitably arranged in drawers 
or cabinets. The system is advantageous as allowing all dead 
matter to be eliminated from the record continuously in use, and 
as permitting the order in which the accounts stand to be varied 
from time to time as convenience dictates, thus (if necessary) 
enabling the accounts to be always kept in alphabetical order 
in spite of the addition of new accounts and the dropping out 
of old ones. An especial convenience of the card system is that 
in times of pressure any desired number of book-keepers may be 
simultaneously employed, whereas the maximum number that 
can be usefully employed upon any bound book is two. The 
loose-leaf ledger (fig. 2) may be described as midway between 




Fig. 2. — Loose-Leaf Ledger (Library Bureau System). 

card and bound ledgers. It consists of a number of sheets in 
book form, so bound as to be capable of being readily separated 
when desired. The loose-leaf ledger thus embraces most of the 
advantages of the card ledger, while remaining sufficiently like 
the more old-fashioned book ledger as to enable it to be readily 
handled by those whose previous experience has been confined 
to the latter. Both the card and loose-leaf systems will be 
frequently found of value for records in connexion with cost 
and stores accounts, quite irrespective of their advantages in 
connexion with the book-keeping records pure and simple of 
certain businesses. 

All book-keeping methods rest upon the same fundamental 
principles, but their development in practice in different countries 
is to some extent influenced by the manner in which 
business is there conducted, and by the legislative Legislative 



require- 
ments. 



requirements imposed by the several states. In France 
traders are required by the Code of Commerce to keep 
three books — a journal, an inventory and a letter book, some- 
what elaborate provisions being made to identify these books, 
and to prevent substitution. The compulsory journal makes 
the employment of numerous books of first-entry impossible 
without an undesirable amount of duplication, and wherever 



230 



BOOK-PLATES 



this provision obtains the book-keeping methods are in an 
accordingly comparatively backward state. The inventory book 
comprises periodical lists of ledger balances and the balance 
sheet, records which are invariably kept under every adequate 
system, although not always in a book specially set aside for that 
purpose. In Germany the statutory requirements are similar 
to those in France, save that the journal is not compulsory; 
but there is an additional provision that the accounts are to 
be kept in bound books with the pages numbered consecutively— 
a requirement which makes the introduction of card or loose- 
leaf ledgers of doubtful legality. A balance sheet must be drawn 
up every year; but where a stock-in-trade is from its nature 
or its size difficult to take, it is sufficient for an inventory to 
be taken every two years. In Belgium the law requires every 
merchant to keep a journal recording his transactions from 
day to day, which (with the balance book) must be initialled by 
a prescribed officer. All letters and telegrams received, and 
copies of all such sent, must be preserved for ten years. The 
Commercial Code of Spain requires an inventory, journal, ledger, 
letter book and invoice book to be kept; while that of Portugal 
prescribes the use of a balance book, journal, ledger and copy- 
letter book. The law of Holland requires business men to keep 
books in which are correctly recorded their commercial transac- 
tions, letters received and copies of letters sent. It also provides 
for the preparation of an annual balance sheet. The law of 
Rumania makes the employment of journal, inventory book and 
ledger compulsory, a small tax per page being charged on the 
two first named. There are no special provisions as to book- 
keeping contained in the Russian law, nor in the United States 
law, but in Russia public companies have to supply the govern- 
ment with copies of their annual accounts, which are published 
in a state newspaper, and in the United States certain classes of 
companies have to submit their accounts to an official audit 
In general terms it may be stated that at the present time the 
employment of card and loose-leaf ledger systems is more general 
in the United States than in Great Britain. 

Apart from the organizations of professional accountants, 
there is none of note devoted to the scientific study of book- 
„ keeping other than purely educational institutions. 

Among the universities those in the United States were 
the first to include accounting as part of their curriculum; 
while in Great Britain the London School of Economics (uni- 
versity of London), the university of Birmingham, and the 
Victoria University of Manchester have, so far, alone treated 
the subject seriously and upon adequate lines. Quite recently 
Japan has been making a movement in the same direction, and 
other countries will doubtless follow suit. In England there have 
for a number of years past been various bodies — such for in- 
stance as the Society of Arts, the London Chamber of Commerce 
and Owens College, Manchester — which hold examinations in 
book-keeping and grant diplomas to successful candidates, 
while most of the polytechnics and technical schools give in- 
struction in book-keeping; these latter, however, for the most 
part regard it as a " craft " merely. 

Authorities. — Those interested in the bibliography of book- 
keeping are referred to the catalogue of the library of the Institute 
of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales, which probably 
contains the most complete collection in existence of ancient and 
modern works on accounting, both British and foreign. The following 
short list comprises those most likely to be found of general interest : 
G. van de Linde, Book-keeping (1898); L. R. Dicksee, Book-keeping 
(5th ed., 1906) and Advanced Accounting (2nd ed., 1905); Encyclo- 
paedia of Accounting, ed. by G. Lisle (1903) ; Accountants' Library, 
ed. by the editor of The Accountant (1901); J. W. Heaps, The 
Antiquity of Book-keeping (1898) ; History of Accounting and Accoun- 
tants, ed. by R. Brown (1905). (L. R. D.) 

BOOK-PLATES. The book-plate, or ex-libris, a printed label 
intended to indicate ownership in individual volumes, is nearly 
as old as the printed book itself. It bears very much the same 
relation to the hand-painted armorial or otherwise symbolical 
personal device found in medieval manuscripts that the printed 
page does to the scribe's work. The earliest known examples 
of book-plates are German. According to Friedrich Warnecke, 
of Berlin (one of the best authorities on the subject), the oldest 



movable ex-libris are certain woodcuts representing a shield of 
arms supported by an angel (fig. i), which were pasted in books 




Fig. 1. — Gift-plate of Hildebrand Brandenburg of Biberach 
to the Monastery of Buxheim (c. 1480). 

presented to the Carthusian monastery of Buxheim by Brother 
Hildebrand Brandenburg of Biberach, about the year 1480 — ■ 
the date being fixed by that of the recorded gift. The woodcut, 
in imitation of similar devices in old MSS., is hand-painted. In 
France the most ancient ex-libris as yet discovered is that of one 
Jean Bertaud de la Tour-Blanche, the date of which is 1529 ; 




J^Q.TZacon equesauratus & mapni 
figilli dlngliae Cufios librum banc bi- 
bliothecae Cantabrigdicauit, 
1574, 

Fig. 2. — 'Book-plate of Sir Nicholas Bacon (slightly reduced). 

and in England that of Sir Nicholas Bacon, a gift-plate for the 
books he presented to the university of Cambridge (fig. 2). 



BOOK-PLATES 



231 



Holland comes next with the plate of a certain Anna van der Aa, 
in 1597; then Italy with one attributed to the year 1622. 
The earliest known American example is the plain printed label 
of one John Williams, 1679. 

A sketch of the history of the book-plate, either as a minor 
work of symbolical and decorative art, or as an accessory to the 
binding of books, must obviously begin in Germany, not only 
because the earliest examples known are German, but also 
because they are found in great numbers long before the fashion 
spread to other countries, and are often of the highest artistic 
interest. Albrecht Diirer is known to have actually engraved at 
least six plates (some of very important size) between 1503 and 
1516 (fig. 3), and to have supplied designs for many others. 
Several notable plates are ascribed to Lucas Cranach and to 
Hans Holbein, and to that bevy of so-called Little Masters, the 




Fig. 3. — Book-plate of Lazarus Spengler, by Albrecht Diirer, 
1515 (reduced). 

Behams, Virgil Solis, Matthias Zundt, Jost Amman, Saldorfer, 
Georg Hiipschmann and others. The influence of these draughts- 
men over the decorative styles of Germany has been felt through 
subsequent centuries down to the present day, notwithstanding 
the invasion of successive Italian and French fashions during the 
17th and 1 8th centuries, and the marked effort at originality of 
composition observable among modern designers. The heavy, 
over-elaborated German style never seems to have affected 
neighbouring countries; but since it was undoubtedly from 
Germany that was spread the fashion of ornamental book-plates 
as marks of possession, the history of German ex-libris remains on 
that account one of high interest to all those who are curious in 
the matter. 

It was not before the 17th century that the movable ex-libris 
became tolerably common in France. Up to that time the more 
luxurious habit of stamping the cover with a personal device 
had been in such general favour with book-owners as to render 
the use of labels superfluous. From the middle of the century, 
however, the ex-libris proper became quite naturalized; examples 
of that period are very numerous, and, as a rule, are very hand- 



some. It may be here pointed out that the expression ex-libris, 
used as a substantive, which is now the recognized term for 
book-plate everywhere on the continent, found its origin in 
France. The words only occur in the personal tokens of other 
nationalities long after they had become a recognized inscription 
on French labels. 

In many ways the consideration of the English book-plate, 
in its numerous styles, from the late Elizabethan to the late 
Victorian period, is peculiarly interesting. In all its varieties it 
reflects with great fidelity the prevailing taste in decorative art 
at different epochs. Of English examples, none thus far seems 
to have been discovered of older date than the gift-plate of 
Sir Nicholas Bacon; for the celebrated, gorgeous, hand-painted 
armorial device attached to a folio that once belonged to Henry 
VIII. , and now reposes in the King's library, British Museum, 
does not come under the head of book-plate in its modern sense. 
The next is that of Sir Thomas Tresham, dated 1585. Until the 
last quarter of the 17th century the number of authentic English 
plates is very limited. Their composition is always remarkably 
simple, and displays nothing of the German elaborateness. They 
are as a rule very plainly armorial, and the decoration is usually 
limited to a symmetrical arrangement of mantling, with an occa- 
sional display of palms or wreaths. Soon after the Restoration, 
however, a book-plate seems to have suddenly become an estab- 
lished accessory to most well-ordered libraries. Book-plates of 
that period offer very distinctive characteristics. In the sim- 
plicity of their heraldic arrangements they recall those of the 
previous age; but their physiognomy is totally different. In the 
first place, they invariably display the tincture lines and dots, 
after the method originally devised in the middle of the century 
by Petra Sancta, the author of Tesserae Genlilitiae, which by this 
time had become adopted throughout Europe. In the second, 
the mantling assumes a much more elaborate appearance — one 
that irresistibly recalls that of the periwig of the period — 
surrounding the face of the shield. This style was undoubtedly 
imported from France, but it assumed a character of its own in 
England. As a matter of fact, thenceforth until the dawn of 
the French Revolution, English modes of decoration in book- 
plates, as in most other chattels, follow at some years' distance 
the ruling French taste. The main characteristics of the style 
which prevailed during the Queen Anne and early Georgian 
periods are: — ornamental frames suggestive of carved oak, a 
frequent use of fish-scales, trellis or diapered patterns, for the 
decoration of plain surfaces; and, in the armorial display, a 
marked reduction in the importance of the mantling. The intro- 
duction of the scallop-shell as an almost constant element of 
ornamentation gives already a foretaste of the Rocaille-Coquille, 
the so-called Chippendale fashions of the next reign. As a matter 
of fact, during the middle third of the century this rococo style 
(of which the Convers plate [fig. 4] gives a tolerably typical 
sample) affects the book-plate as universally as all other decora- 
tive objects. Its chief element is a fanciful arrangement of 
scroll and shell work with curveting acanthus-like sprays — an 
arrangement which in the examples of the best period is generally 
made asymmetrical in order to give freer scope for a variety of 
countercurves. Straight or concentric lines and all appearances 
of flat surface are studiously avoided; the helmet and its 
symmetrical mantling tends to disappear, and is replaced by the 
plain crest on a fillet. The earlier examples of this manner are 
tolerably ponderous and simple. Later, however, the com- 
position becomes exceedingly light and complicated; every 
conceivable and often incongruous element of decoration is 
introduced, from cupids to dragons, from flowerets to Chinese 
pagodas. During the early part of George III.'s reign there is 
a return to greater sobriety of ornamentation, and a style more 
truly national, which may be called the urn style, makes its 
appearance. Book-plates of this period have invariably a 
physiognomy which at once recalls the decorative manner made 
popular by architects and designers such as Chambers, the 
Adams, Josiah Wedgwood, Hepplewhite and Sheraton. The 
shield shows a plain spade-like outline, manifestly based upon 
that of the pseudo-classic urn then so much to the fore. The 



232 



BOOK-PLATES 



ornamental accessories are symmetrical palms and sprays, 
wreaths and ribands. The architectural boss is also an im- 
portant factor. In many plates, indeed, the shield of arms takes 
quite a subsidiary position by the side of the predominantly 
architectural urn. From the beginning of the 19th century, until 




£jc Libria Petri yfntonii 
Corners Laudownsis N° 



Fig. 4. — Book-plate of P. A. Convers, 1762. 

comparatively recent days, no special style of decoration seems 
to have established itself. The immense majority of examples 
display a plain shield of arms with motto on a scroll below, and 
crest on a fillet above. Of late years, however, a rapid impetus 
appears to have been given to the designing of ex-libris; a new 
era, in fact, has begun for the book-plate, one of great interest. 
The main styles of decoration (and these, other data being 



fl 



rfiprancis Cfrvt/n of/andcmor in the Ccrunty\ 
s f Glamorgan. Md of&>rd=Jil>if m the J 
V County of 0)ei^njEjq'i6 S 8^ 

Fig. 5. — Book-plate of Francis Gwyn of Lansanor, 1698. 

absent, must always in the case of old examples remain the 
criteria of date) have already been noticed. It is, however, 
necessary to point out that certain styles of composition were 
also prevalent at certain periods. Many of the older plates (like 
the majority of the most modern ones) were essentially pictorial. 



Of this kind the best-defined English genus may be recalled: 
the library interior — a term which explains itself— and book-piles, 
exemplified by the ex-libris (fig. 6) of W. Hewer, Samuel 
Pepys's secretary. We have also many portrait-plates, of which, 
perhaps, the most notable are those of Samuel Pepys himself 
and of John Gibbs, the architect; allegories, such as were en- 
graved by Hogarth, Bartolozzi, John Pine and George Vertue ; 
landscape-plates, by wood engravers of the Bewick school (see 
Plate), &c. In most of these the armorial element plays but a 
secondary part. 

The value attached to book-plates, otherwise than as an object 
of purely personal interest, is comparatively modern. The study 
of and the taste for collecting these private tokens of book- 
ownership hardly date farther back than the year 1875. The 
first real impetus was given by the appearance of the Guide to 
the Study of Book-Plates, by Lord de Tabley (then the Hon. 
Leicester Warren) in 1880. This work, highly interesting from 
many points of view, established what is now accepted as the 
general classification of styles: early armorial {i.e. previous to 
Restoration, exemplified by the Nicholas Bacon plate) ; Jacobean, 
a somewhat misleading term, but distinctly understood to include- 




Fig. 6. — Book-plate of William Hewer, 1699. 

the heavy decorative manner of the Restoration, Queen Anne 
and early Georgian days (the Lansanor plate, fig. 5, is typically 
Jacobean); Chippendale (the style above described as rococo, 
tolerably well represented by the French plate of Convers); 
wreath and ribbon, belonging to the period described as that of 
the urn, &c. Since then the literature on the subject has grown 
considerably. Societies of collectors have been founded, first 
in England, then in Germany and France, and in the United 
States, most of them issuing a journal or archives: 
The Journal of the Ex-libris Society (London), the Archives 
de la sociSle francaise de collectionneurs d'ex-libris (Paris)', 
both of these monthlies; the Ex-libris Zeitschrift (Berlin), a 
quarterly. 

Much has been written for and against book-plate collecting. 
If, on the one hand, the more enthusiastic ex-librists (for 
such a word has actually been coined) have made the some- 
what ridiculous claim of science for " ex-librisme," the bitter 
animadversion, on the other, of a certain class of intolerant 
bibliophiles upon the vandalism of removing book-plates 
from old books has at times been rather extravagant. Book- 
plates are undoubtedly very often of high interest (and of a value 
often far greater than the odd volume in which they are found 
affixed), either as specimens of bygone decorative fashion or as 
personal relics of well-known personages. There can be no 



BOOK-PLATES 



Plate. 




BOOK-PLATE OF ROBERT PINKNEY. 
By Thomas Bewick. 




FREIHERRLv.LIPPERHEIDE'sche 
BfcJCHERSAMMLUNG 

Nr. 



BOOK-PLATE OF CHARLES DEXTER ALLEN. 
By E. D. French. 




BOOK-PLATE OF FREIHERR V. LIPPERHEIDE. 
By Kakl Rickelt. 



BOOK-PLATE OF SIR ARTHUR VICARS. 
By C. W. Sherborn. 



BOOK-SCORPION— BOOKSELLING 



233 



question, for instance, that engravings or designs by artists 
such as Holbein and Diirer and the Little Masters of Germany, 
by Charles Eisen, Hubert Frangois Bourguignon, dit Gravelot, 
D. N. Chodowiecki or Simon Gribelin; by W. Marshall, W. 
Faithorne, David Loggan, Sir Robert Strange, Francesco 
Piranesi; by Hogarth, Cipriani, Bartolozzi, John Keyse Sherwin, 
William Henshaw, Hewitt or Bewick and his imitators; or, 
to come to modern times, that the occasional examples traced 
to the handicraft of Thomas Stothard, Thackeray, Millais, 
Maclise, Bell Scott, T. G. Jackson, Walter Crane, Caldecott, 
Stacy Marks, Edwin Abbey, Kate Greenaway, Gordon Browne, 
Herbert Railton, Aubrey Beardsley, Alfred Parsons, D. Y. 
Cameron, Paul Avril — are worth collecting. 

Until the advent of the new taste the devising of book-plates 
was almost invariably left to the routine skill of the heraldic 
stationer. Of late years the composition of personal book- 
tokens has become recognized as a minor branch of a higher art, 
and there has come into fashion an entirely new class of designs 
which, for all their wonderful variety, bear as unmistakable a 
character as that of the most definite styles of bygone days. 
Broadly speaking, it may be said that the purely heraldic element 
tends to become subsidiary and the allegorical or symbolic to 
assert itself more strongly. Among modern English artists who 
have more specially paid attention to the devising of book-plates, 
and have produced admirable designs, may be mentioned C. W. 
Sherborn, G. W. Eve, Robert Anning Bell, J. D. Batten, Erat 
Harrison, J. Forbes Nixon, Charles Ricketts, John Vinycomb, 
John Leighton and Warrington Hogg. The development in 
various directions of process work, by facilitating and cheap- 
ening the reproduction of beautiful and elaborate designs, has 
no doubt helped much to popularize the book-plate — a thing 
which in older days was almost invariably restricted to ancestral 
libraries or to collections otherwise important. Thus the great 
majority of modern plates are reproduced by process. There 
are, however, a few artists left who devote to book-plates their 
skill with the graver. Some of the work they produce challenges 
comparison with the finest productions of bygone engravers. 
Of these the best-known are C. W. Sherborn (see Plate) and G. W. 
Eve in England, and in America J. W. Spenceley of Boston, 
Mass., K. W. F. Hopson of New Haven, Conn., and E. D. French 
of New York City (see Plate). 

Authorities.— The curious in the matter of book-plate composi- 
tion will find it treated in the various volumes of the Ex-libris 
Series (London). See also A. Poulet-Malassis, Les Ex-libris francais 
(1875); Hon. J. Leicester Warren (Lord de Tabley), A Guide to the 
Study of Book-plates (1880) ; Sir A. W. Franks, Notes on Book-plates, 
1574-1800 (private, 1887) ; Friedrich Warnecke, Die deutschen 
Biicherzeichen (1890); Henri Bouchot, Les Ex-libris et les marques 
de possession du livre (1891); Egerton Castle, English Book-plates 
(1892); Walter Hamilton, French Book-plates (1892), Dated Book- 
plates (1895) ; H. W. Fincham, Artists and Engravers of British and 
American Book-plates (1897) ; German Book-plates, by Count K. E. zu 
Leiningen-Westerburg, translated by G. R. Denis (1901). (E. Ca.) 

BOOK-SCORPION, or False Scorpion, minute arachnids 
superficially resembling tailless scorpions and belonging to the 
order Pseudoscorpiones of the class Arachnida. Occurring in 
all temperate and tropical countries, book-scorpions live for the 
most part under stones, beneath the bark of trees or in vegetable 
detritus. A few species, however, like the common British forms 
Chelifer cancroides and Chiridium museorum, frequent human 
dwellings and are found in books, old chests, furniture, &c. ; 
others like Ganypus liltoralis and allied species may be found 
under stones or pieces of coral between tide-marks; while others, 
which are for the most part blind, live permanently in dark caves. 
Their food consists of minute insects or mites. It is possibly 
for the purpose of feeding on parasitic mites that book-scorpions 
lodge themselves beneath the wing-cases of large tropical beetles ; 
and the same explanation, in default of a better, may be extended 
to their well-known and oft-recorded habit of seizing hold of the 
legs of horse-flies or other two-winged insects. For safety 
during hibernation and moulting, book-scorpions spin a small 
spherical cocoon. They are oviparous; and the eggs after being 
laid are carried about by the mother, attached to the lower 
surface of her body, the young remaining with their parent until 



they have acquired their definite form and are able to shift for 
themselves. (R. I. P.) 

BOOKSELLING. The trade in books is of a very ancient 
date. The early poets and orators recited their effusions in 
public to induce their hearers to possess written copies of their 
poems or orations. Frequently they were taken down viva voce, 
and transcripts sold to such as were wealthy enough to purchase. 
In the book of Jeremiah the prophet is represented as dictating to 
Baruch the scribe, who, when questioned, described the mode 
in which his book was written. These scribes were, in fact, 
the earliest booksellers, and supplied copies as they were de- 
manded. Aristotle, we are told, possessed a somewhat extensive 
library; and Plato is recorded to have paid the large sum of 
one hundred minae for three small treatises of Philolaus the 
Pythagorean. When the Alexandrian library was founded about 
300 B.C., various expedients were resorted to for the purpose 
of procuring books, and this appears to have stimulated the 
energies of the Athenian booksellers, who were termed /3i/3Xtwv 
KaxijXot. In Rome, towards the end of the republic, it became 
the fashion to have a library as part of the household furniture; 
and the booksellers, librarii (Cic. D. Leg. iii. 20) or bibliopolae 
(Martial iv. 71, xiii. 3), carried on a flourishing trade. Their 
shops (taberna librarii, Cicero, Phil. ii. 9) were chiefly in the 
Argiletum, and in the Vicus Sandalarius. On the door, or on 
the side posts, was a list of the books on sale; and Martial 
(i. 118), who mentions this also, says that a copy of his First 
Book of Epigrams might be purchased for five denarii. In the 
time of Augustus the great booksellers were the Sosii. According 
to Justinian (ii. 1. 33), a law was passed securing to the scribes 
the property in the materials used; and in this may, perhaps, 
be traced the first germ of the modern law of copyright. 

The spread of Christianity naturally created a great demand 
for copies of the Gospels and other sacred books, and later on ' 
for missals and other devotional volumes for church and private 
use. Benedict Biscop, the founder of the abbey at Wearmouth 
in England, brought home with him from France (671) a whole 
cargo of books, part of which he had " bought," but from whom 
is not mentioned. Passing by the intermediate ages we find that 
previous to the Reformation, the text writers or stationers 
(stacyoneres) , who sold copies of the books then in use — the 
ABC, the Paternoster, Creed, Ave Maria and other MS. copies 
of prayers, in the neighbourhood of St Paul's, London, — were, 
in 1403, formed into a gild. Some of these " stacyoneres " had 
stalls or stations built against the very walls of the cathedral 
itself, in the same manner as they are still to be found in some 
of the older continental cities. In Henry Anstey's Munimenta 
Academica, published under the direction of the master of the 
rolls, we catch a glimpse of the " sworn " university bookseller 
or stationer, John More of Oxford, who apparently first supplied 
pupils with their books, and then acted the part of a pawnbroker. 
Anstey says (p. 77), " The fact is that they (the students) mostly 
could not afford to buy books, and had they been able, would 
not have found the advantage so considerable as might be sup- 
posed, the instruction given being almost wholly oral. The 
chief source of supplying books was by purchase from the 
university sworn stationers, who had to a great extent a mono- 
poly. Of such books there were plainly very large numbers 
constantly changing hands." Besides the sworn stationers 
there were many booksellers in Oxford who were not sworn ; for 
one of the statutes, passed in the year 1373, expressly recites that, 
in consequence of their presence, " books of great value are sold 
and carried away from Oxford, the owners of them are cheated, 
and the sworn stationers are deprived of their lawful business." 
It was, therefore, enacted that no bookseller except two sworn 
stationers or their deputies, should sell any book being either 
his own property or that of another, exceeding half a mark in 
value, under a pain of imprisonment, or, if the offence was 
repeated, of abjuring his trade within the university. 

" The trade in bookselling seems," says Hallam, " to have been 
established at Paris and Bologna in the 12th century; the 
lawyers and universities called it into life. It is very improbable 
that it existed in what we properly call the dark ages. Peter of 



234 



BOOKSELLING 



Blois mentions a book which he had bought of a public dealer 
(a quodam publico mangone librorum); but we do not find many 
distinct accounts of them till the next age. These dealers were 
denominated stationarii, perhaps from the open stalls at which 
they carried on their business, though statio is a general word 
for a shop in low Latin. They appear, by the old statutes of 
the university of Paris, and by those of Bologna, to have sold 
books upon commission, and are sometimes, though not uniformly, 
distinguished from the librarii, a word which, having originally 
been confined to the copyists of books, was afterwards applied 
to those who traded in them. They sold parchment and other 
materials of writing, which have retained the name of stationery, 
and they naturally exercised the kindred occupations of bind- 
ing and decorating. They probably employed transcribers; we 
find at least that there was a profession of copyists in the 
universities and in large cities." 

The modern system of bookselling dates from soon after the 
introduction of printing. The earliest printers were also editors 
and booksellers; but being unable to sell every copy of the works 
they printed, they had agents at most of the seats of learning. 
Antony Koburger, who introduced the art of printing into 
Nuremberg in 1470, although a printer, was more of a bookseller; 
for, besides his own sixteen shops, we are informed by his bio- 
graphers that he had agents for the sale of his books in every 
city of Christendom. Wynkyn de Worde, who succeeded to 
Caxton's press in Westminster, had a shop in Fleet Street. 

The religious dissensions of the continent, and the Reforma- 
tion in England under Henry VIII. and Edward VI., created a 
great demand for books; but in England neither Tudor nor 
Stuart could tolerate a free press, and various efforts were made 
to curb it. The first patent for the office of king's printer was 
granted to Thomas Berthelet by Henry VIII. in 1529, but only 
"such books as were first licensed were to be printed. At that 
time even the purchase or possession of an unlicensed book was 
a punishable offence. In 1556 the Company of Stationers was 
incorporated, and very extensive powers were granted in order 
that obnoxious books might be repressed. In the following 
reigns the Star Chamber exercised a pretty effectual censorship; 
but, in spite of all precaution, such was the demand for books 
of a polemical nature, that many were printed abroad and 
surreptitiously introduced into England. Queen Elizabeth inter- 
fered but little with books except when they emanated from 
Roman Catholics, or touched upon her royal prerogatives; and 
towards the end of her reign, and during that of her pedantic 
successor, James, bookselling flourished. Archbishop Laud, who 
was no friend to booksellers, introduced many arbitrary restric- 
tions; but they were all, or nearly all, removed during the time of 
the Commonwealth. So much had bookselling increased during 
the Protectorate that, in 1658, was published A Catalogue of the 
most Vendible Books in England, digested under the heads of Divinity, 
History, Physic, &c, with School Books, Hebrew, Greek and Latin, 
and an Introduction, for the use of Schools, by W. London. A bad 
time immediately followed. The Restoration also restored the 
office of Licenser of the Press, which continued till 1694. 

In the first English Copyright Act ( 1 709) , which specially relates 
to booksellers, it is enacted that, if any person shall think the 
published price of a book unreasonably high, he may thereupon 
make complaint to the archbishop of Canterbury, and to certain 
other persons named, who shall thereupon examine into his 
complaint, and if well founded reduce the price; and any 
bookseller charging more than the price so fixed shall be fined 
£5 for every copy sold. Apparently this enactment remained a 
dead letter. 

For later times it is necessary to make a gradual distinction 
between booksellers, whose trade consists in selling books, either 
by retail or wholesale, and publishers, whose business involves 
the production of the books from the author's manuscripts, and 
who are the intermediaries between author and bookseller, just 
as the booksellers (in the restricted sense) are intermediaries 
between the author and publisher and the public. The article 
on Publishing (q.v.) deals more particularly with this second 
class, who, though originally booksellers, gradually took a higher 



rank in the book-trade, and whose influence upon the history 
of literature has often been very great. The convenience of this 
distinction is not impaired by the fact either that a publisher 
is also a wholesale bookseller, or that a still more recent develop- 
ment in publishing (as in the instance of the direct sale in 1902, 
by the London Times, of the supplementary volumes to the 9th 
edition of the Encyclopaedia Britannica, which were also " pub- 
lished " by The Times) started a reaction to some extent in the 
way of amalgamating the two functions. The scheme of The 
Times Book Club (started in 1905) was, again, a combination 
of a subscription library with the business of bookselling (see 
Newspapers); and it brought the organization of a newspaper, 
with all its means of achieving publicity, into the work of pushing 
the sale of books, in a way which practically introduced a new 
factor into the bookselling business. 

During the 19th century it remains the fact that the distinction 
between publisher and bookseller — literary promoter and shop- 
keeper — became fundamental. The booksellers, as such, were 
engaged either in wholesale bookselling, or in the retail, the old or 
second-hand, and the periodical trades. 

Coming between the publisher and the retail bookseller is the 
important distributing agency of the wholesale bookseller. It is to 
him that the retailer looks for his miscellaneous supplies, as it is 
simply impossible for him to stock one-half of the books published. 
In Paternoster Row, London, which has for over a hundred years 
been the centre of this industry, may be seen the collectors from the 
shops of the retail booksellers, busily engaged in obtaining the books 
ordered by the book-buying public. It is also through these agencies 
that the country bookseller obtains his miscellaneous supplies. At 
the leading house in this department of bookselling almost any book 
can be found, or information obtained concerning it. At one of these 
establishments over 1,000,000 books are constantly kept in stock. 
It is here that the publisher calls first on showing or " subscribing " 
a new book, a critical process, for by the number thus subscribed 
the fate of a book is sometimes determined. 

What may be termed the third partner in publishing and its 
ramification is the retail bookseller; and to protect his interests there 
was established in 1890 a London booksellers' society, which had for 
its object the restriction of discounts to 25 %, and also to arrange 
prices generally and control all details connected with the trade. 
The society a few years afterwards widened its field of queries so
as to include the whole of the United Kingdom, and its designation 
then became " The Associated Booksellers of Great Britain and 
Ireland." 

The trade inold or (as they are sometimes called) second-hand books 
is in a sense, no doubt, a higher class of business, requiring a know- 
ledge of bibliography, while the transactions are with individual 
books rather than with numbers of copies. Occasionally dealers in 
this class of books replenish their stocks by purchasing remainders 
of books, which, having ceased from one cause or another to sell with 
the publisher, they offer to the public as bargains. The periodical 
trade grew up during the 19th century, and was in its infancy when 
the Penny Magazine, Chambers's Journal, and similar publications 
first appeared. The growth of this important part of the business 
was greatly promoted by the abolition of the newspaper stamp and 
of the duty upon paper, the introduction of attractive illustrations, 
and the facilities offered for purchasing books by instalments. 

The history of bookselling in America has a special interest. 
The Spanish settlements drew away from the old country much 
of its enterprise and best talent, and the presses of Mexico 
and other cities teemed with publications mostly of a religious 
character, but many others, especially linguistic and historical, 
were also published. Bookselling in the United States was of a 
somewhat later growth, although printing was introduced into 
Boston as early as 1676, Philadelphia in 1685, and New York 
in 1693. Franklin had served to make the trade illustrious, 
yet few persons were engaged in it at the commencement of 
the 19th century. Books chiefly for scholars and libraries were 
imported from Europe; but after the second war printing- 
presses multiplied rapidly, and with the spread of newspapers 
and education there also arose a demand for books, and publishers 
set to work to secure the advantages offered by the wide field 
of English literature, the whole of which they had the liberty of 
reaping free of all cost beyond that of production. The works of 
Scott, Byron, Moore, Southey, Wordsworth, and indeed of every 
author of note, were reprinted without the smallest payment to 
author or proprietor. Half the names of the authors in the so- 
called "American" catalogue of books printed between 1820 
and 1852 are British. By this means the works of the best 



BOOLE 



235 



authors were brought to the doors of all classes in the cheapest 
variety of forms. In consequence of the Civil War, the high 
price of labour, and the restrictive duties laid on in order to 
protect native industry, coupled with the frequent intercourse 
with England, a great change took place, and American publishers 
and booksellers, while there was still no international copyright, 
made liberal offers for early sheets of new publications. Boston, 
New York and Philadelphia still retained their old supremacy 
as bookselling centres. Meanwhile, the distinct publishing busi- 
ness also grew, till gradually the conditions of business became 
assimilated to those of Europe. 

In the course of the 16th and 17th centuries the Low Countries 
for a time became the chief centre of the bookselling world, and 
many of the finest folios and quartos in our libraries bear the 
names of Jansen, Blauw or Plantin, with the imprint of Amster- 
dam, Utrecht, Leiden or Antwerp, while the Elzevirs besides 
other works produced their charming little pocket classics. The 
southern towns of Douai and St Omer at the same time furnished 
polemical works in English. 

Under Publishing are noticed various further developments of 
this subject. Much interesting information on the history of the 
book trade will be found in Charles Knight's Biography of William 
Caxton, and in the same author's Shadows of the Old Booksellers 
(1865). See also Henry Curwen, History of Booksellers (1873) ; and 
Heinrich Lempertz, Bilder-Hefte zur Geschichte des Biicherhandels 
(Cologne, 1854). 

BOOLE, GEORGE (1815-1864), English logician and mathe- 
matician, was born in Lincoln on the 2nd of November 181 5. 
His father was a tradesman of limited means, but of studious 
character and active mind. Being especially interested in 
mathematical science, the father gave his son his first lessons; 
but the extraordinary mathematical powers of George Boole 
did not manifest themselves in early life. At first his favourite 
subject was classics. Not until the age of seventeen did he attack 
the higher mathematics, and his progress was much retarded by 
the want of efficient help. When about sixteen years of age he 
became assistant-master in a private school at Doncaster, and 
he maintained himself to the end of his life in one grade or other 
of the scholastic profession. Few distinguished men, indeed, 
have had a less eventful life. Almost the only changes which 
can be called events are his successful establishment of a school 
at Lincoln, its removal to Waddington, his appointment in 
1849 as professor of mathematics in the Queen's College at 
Cork, and his marriage in 1855 to Miss Mary Everest, who, as 
Mrs Boole, afterwards wrote several useful educational works on 
her husband's principles. 

To the public Boole was known only as the author of numerous 
abstruse papers on mathematical topics, and of three or four 
distinct publications which have become standard works. His 
earliest published paper was one upon the " Theory of Analytical 
Transformations," printed in the Cambridge Mathematical 
Journal for 1839, and it led to a friendship between Boole and 
D. F. Gregory, the editor of the journal, which lasted until the 
premature death of the latter in 1844. A long list of Boole's 
memoirs and detached papers, both on logical and mathematical 
topics, will be found in the Catalogue of Scientific Memoirs pub- 
lished by the Royal Society, and in the supplementary volume 
on Differential Equations, edited by Isaac Todhunter. To the 
Cambridge Mathematical Journal and its successor, the Cambridge 
and Dublin Mathematical Journal, Boole contributed in all 
twenty-two articles. In the third and fourth series of the Philo- 
sophical Magazine will be found sixteen papers. The Royal 
Society printed six important memoirs in the Philosophical 
Transactions, and a few other memoirs are to be found in the 
Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh and of the Royal 
Irish Academy, in the Bulletin de V Academie de St-Petersbourg 
for 1862 (under the name G. Boldt, vol. iv. pp. 198-215), and 
in Crelle's Journal. To these lists should be added a paper on 
the mathematical basis of logic, published in the Mechanic's 
Magazine for 1848. The works of Boole are thus contained in 
about fifty scattered articles and a few separate publications. 

Only two systematic treatises on mathematical subjects were 
completed by Boole during his lifetime. The well-known 



Treatise on Differential Equations appeared in 1859, and was 
followed, the next year, by a Treatise on the Calculus of Finite 
Differences, designed to serve as a sequel to the former work. 
These treatises are valuable contributions to the important 
branches of mathematics in question, and Boole, in composing 
them, seems to have combined elementary exposition with the 
profound investigation of the philosophy of the subject in a 
manner hardly admitting of improvement. To a certain extent 
these works embody the more important discoveries of their 
author. In the 16th and 17th chapters of the Differential 
Equations we find, for instance, a lucid account of the general 
symbolic method, the bold and skilful employment of which led 
to Boole's chief discoveries, and of a general method in analysis, 
originally described in his famous memoir printed in the Philo- 
sophical Transactions for 1844. Boole was one of the most eminent 
of those who perceived that the symbols of operation could be 
separated from those of quantity and treated as distinct objects 
of calculation. His principal characteristic was perfect con- 
fidence in any result obtained by the treatment of symbols in 
accordance with their primary laws and conditions, and an 
almost unrivalled skill and power in tracing out these results. 

During the last few years of his life Boole was constantly 
engaged in extending his researches with the object of producing 
a second edition of his Differential Equations much more complete 
than the first edition; and part of his last vacation was spent in 
the libraries of the Royal Society and the British Museum. 
But this new edition was never completed. Even the manu- 
scripts left at his death were so incomplete that Todhunter, 
into whose, hands they were put, found it impossible to use them 
in the publication of a second edition of the original treatise, 
and wisely printed them, in 1865, in a supplementary volume. 

With the exception of Augustus de Morgan, Boole was probably 
the first English mathematician since the time of John Wallis 
who had also written upon logic. His novel views of logical 
method were due to the same profound confidence in symbolic 
reasoning to which he had successfully trusted in mathematical 
investigation. Speculations concerning a calculus of reasoning 
had at different times occupied Boole's thoughts, but it was not 
till the spring of 1847 that he put his ideas into the pamphlet 
called Mathematical Analysis of Logic. Boole afterwards regarded 
this as a hasty and imperfect exposition of his logical system, 
and he desired that his much larger work, An Investigation of the 
Laws of Thought, on which are founded the Mathematical Theories 
of Logic and Probabilities (1854), should alone be considered as 
containing a mature statement of his views. Nevertheless, 
there is a charm of originality about his earlier logical work 
which no competent reader can fail to appreciate. He did not 
regard logic as a branch of mathematics, as the title of his earlier 
pamphlet might be taken to imply, but he pointed out such a 
deep analogy between the symbols of algebra and those which 
can be made, in his opinion, to represent logical forms and 
syllogisms, that we can hardly help saying that logic is mathe- 
matics restricted to the two quantities, o and 1. By unity Boole 
denoted the universe of thinkable objects; literal symbols, 
such as x, y, z, v, u, &c, were used with the elective meaning 
attaching to common adjectives and substantives. Thus, if 
* = horned and y = sheep, then the successive acts of election 
represented by x and y, if performed on unity, give the whole of 
the class horned sheep. Boole showed that elective symbols of 
this kind obey the same primary laws of combination as alge- 
braical symbols, whence it followed that they could be added, 
subtracted, multiplied and even divided, almost exactly in 
the same manner as numbers. Thus, 1— x would represent the 
operation of selecting all things in the world except horned things, 
that is, all not horned things, and (1 — x) (1 — y) would give us all 
things neither horned nor sheep. By the use of such symbols 
propositions could be reduced to the form of equations, and 
the syllogistic conclusion from two premises was obtained by 
eliminating the middle term according to ordinary algebraic 
rules. 

Still more original and remarkable, however, was that part 
of his system, fully stated in his Laws of Thought, which formed 



236 



BOOM— BOONE, D. 



a general symbolic method of logical inference. Given any 
propositions involving any number of terms, Boole showed how, 
by the purely symbolic treatment of the premises, to draw any 
conclusion logically contained in those premises. The second 
part of the Laws of Thought contained a corresponding attempt 
to discover a general method in probabilities, which should 
enable us from the given probabilities of any system of events to 
determine the consequent probability of any other event logically 
connected with the given events. 

Though Boole published little except his mathematical and 
logical works, his acquaintance with general literature was wide 
and deep. Dante was his favourite poet, and he preferred the 
Paradiso to the Inferno. The metaphysics of Aristotle, the ethics 
of Spinoza, the philosophical works of Cicero, and many kindred 
works, were also frequent subjects of study. His reflections upon 
scientific, philosophical and religious questions are contained in 
four addresses upon The Genius of Sir Isaac Newton, The Right 
Use of Leisure, The Claims of Science and The Social Aspect of 
Intellectual Culture, which he delivered and printed at different 
times. 

The personal character of Boole inspired all his friends with 
the deepest esteem. He was marked by the modesty of true 
genius, and his life was given to the single-minded pursuit of 
truth. Though he received a medal from the Royal Society for 
his memoir of 1844, and the honorary degree of LL.D. from the 
university of Dublin, he neither sought nor received the ordinary 
rewards to which his discoveries would entitle him. On the 8th 
of December 1864, in the full vigour of his intellectual powers, he 
died of an attack of fever, ending in suffusion on the lungs. 

An excellent sketch of his life and works, by the Rev. R. Harley, 
F R.S., is to be found in the British Quarterly Review for July 1866, 
No. 87. (W. S. J.) 

BOOM, a word of Teutonic origin (cf. the Ger. Baum, tree, 
and the Eng. beam) for a pole, bar or barrier, used especially as a 
nautical term, for a long spar, used to extend a sail at the foot 
(main-boom, jib-boom, &c.) . The " boom " of a cannon (note of 
a bell, cry of the bittern) is distinct from this, being onomatopoeic. 
In the sense of a barrier, a boom is generally formed of timber 
lashed together, or of chains, built across the mouth of a river 
or harbour as a means of defence. Possibly from the metaphor 
of a breaking boom, and the accompanying rush and roar, or from 
the rush of rising waters (mingled with the onomatopoeic use), 
" boom " began in America to be used of a sudden " spurt " or 
access of industrial activity, as in the phrase " a boom in cotton." 
Hence the verb " to boom," meaning to advertise or push into 
public favour. 

BOOMERANG, a missile weapon of the Australian aborigines 
and other peoples. The word is taken from the native name 
used by a single tribe in New South Wales, and was mentioned in 
1827 by Captain King as " the Port Jackson term " (Nav. Surv. 
Coasts Austral, i. 355). It has been erroneously connected with 
the womera or spear-thrower, and equally erroneously regarded 
as onomatopoeic — for it does not " boom " but whistles in the air. 
Two main types may be distinguished: (a) the return boomerang; 
(b) the non-return or war boomerang. Both types are found in 
most parts of Australia; the return form was, according to 
General Pitt-Rivers, used in ancient Egypt; and a weapon 
which has a close resemblance to the boomerang survives to 
the present day in North-East Africa, whence it has spread in 
allied forms made of metal (throwing knives). Among the 
Dravidians of South India is found a boomerang-shaped instru- 
ment which can be made to return. It is, however, still uncertain 
whether the so-called boomerangs of Egypt and India have any 
real resemblance to the Australian return boomerang. The 
Hopis (Moquis) of Arizona use a non-return form. The general 
form of both weapons is the same. They are sickle-shaped, and 
made of wood (in India of ivory or steel), so modelled that the 
thickness is about £th of the breadth, which again is T^th of 
the length, the last varying from 6 in. to 3 or 4 ft. The return 
boomerang, which may have two straight arms at an angle of 
from 70 to 120 , but in Australia is always curved at an angle of 
90 or more, is usually 2 to 3 ft. in length and weighs some 8 oz. ; 




Fig. 1. 



the arms have a skew, being twisted 2° or 3 from the plane 
running through the centre of the weapon, so that B and D (fig. 1) 
are above it, A and E below it; the ends AB and DE are also 
to some extent raised above the plane of the weapon at C; the 
cross section is asymmetrical, the upper side in the figure being 
convex, the lower flat or nearly so ; g 

this must be thrown with the right 
hand. The non-return boomerang 

has a skew in the opposite direction a // ^^^P 

but is otherwise similar. b ^^ e 

The peculiarity of the boomer- 
ang's flight depends mainly on its 
skew. The return boomerang is held vertically, the concave 
side forward, and thrown in a plane parallel to the surface of 
the ground, as much rotation as possible being imparted to it. 
It travels straight for 30 yds. or more, with nearly vertical rota- 
tion; then it inclines to the left, lying over on the flat side and 
rising in the air; after describing a circle of 50 or more yards in 
diameter it returns to the thrower. Some observers state that it 
returns after striking the object; it is certainly possible to strike 
the ground without affecting the return. Throws of 100 yds. or 
more, before the leftward curve begins, can be accomplished by 
Australian natives, the weapon rising as much as 150 ft. in the 
air and circling five times before returning. The non-return type 





Fig. 2.- 



-Flight in Horizontal 
Plane. 



Fig. 3. 



-Flight in Vertical 
Plane. 



may also be made to return in a nearly straight line by throwing 
it at an angle of 45 , but normally it is thrown like the return 
type, and will then travel an immense distance. No accurate 
measurements of Australian throws are available, but an English 
throw of 180 yds. has been recorded, compared with the same 
thrower's 70 yds. with the cricket ball. 

The war boomerang in an expert's hand is a deadly weapon, 
and the lighter hunting boomerang is also effective. The 
return boomerang is chiefly used as a plaything or for killing 
birds, and is often as dangerous to the thrower as to the object 
at which it is aimed. 

See Pitt-Rivers (Lane Fox) in Anthropological and Archaeological 
Fragments, "Primitive Warfare"; also in Journ. Roval United 
Service Inst. xii. No. 51; British Ass. Report (1872); Catalogue of 
Bethnal Green Collection, p. 28 ; Buchner in Globus, lxxxviii. 39, 63 ; 
G. T. Walker in Phil. Trans, cxc. 23; Wide World Mag. ii. 626; 
Nature, xiv. 248, lxiv. 338; Brough Smyth, Aborigines of Victoria, 
i. 310-329; Roth, Ethnological Studies. (N. W. T.) 

BOONE, DANIEL (1 734-1820), American pioneer and back- 
woodsman, of English descent, was born near the present city 
of Reading, Pennsylvania, on the 2nd of November (N.S.) 1734. 
About 1751 his father, Squire Boone, with his family settled in 
the Yadkin Valley in what is now Davie county, North Carolina, 
then on the frontier. Daniel worked on his father's farm, and 
spent much of his time hunting and trapping. In 1 7 5 5 he served 
as a wagoner and blacksmith in Braddock's disastrous expedi- 
tion against the Indians. In 1765 he visited Florida, and in 1767 
he first visited the Kentucky region. With several companions, 
including John Finley, who had been there as early as 1752, he 
spent two years, 1769-1771, roaming about what is now Kentucky, 
meeting with numberless adventures, coming in conflict with 
roving bands of Indians, and collecting bear, beaver and deer 
skins. He served in Lord Dunmore's War (1774), and in 1775 
led to Kentucky the party of settlers who founded Boonesborough, 
long an important settlement. On the 7th of February 1778 he, 



BOONE— BOORDE 



237 



and the party he led, were captured by a band of Shawnees. 
He was adopted into the Shawnee tribe, was taken to Detroit, 
and on the return from that place escaped, reaching Boones- 
borough, after a perilous journey of 160 m., within four days, in 
time to give warning of a formidable attack by his captors. In 
repelling this attack, which lasted from the 8th to the 17th of 
September, he bore a conspicuous part. He also took part in 
the sanguinary " Battle of Blue Licks " in 1782. For a time 
he represented the settlers in the Virginia legislature (Kentucky 
then being a part of Virginia), and he also served as deputy 
surveyor, sheriff and county lieutenant of Fayette county, one 
of the three counties into which Kentucky was then divided. 
Having lost all his land through his carelessness in regard to 
titles, he removed in 1788 to Point Pleasant, Virginia (now 
W. Va.), whence about 1799 he removed to a place in what is 
now Missouri, about 45 m. west of St Louis, in territory then 
owned by Spain. He received a grant of 1000 arpents (about 
845 acres) of land, and was appointed syndic of the district. 
After the United States gained possession of " Louisiana " in 
1803, Boone's title was found to be defective, and he was again 
dispossessed. He died on the 22nd of September 1820, and in 
1845 his remains were removed to Frankfort, Kentucky, where 
a monument has been erected to his memory. Boone was a 
typical American pioneer and backwoodsman, a great hunter 
and trapper, highly skilled in all the arts of woodcraft, familiar 
with the Indians and their methods of warfare, a famous Indian 
fighter, restless, resourceful and fearless. His services, however, 
have been greatly over-estimated, and he was not, as is popularly 
believed, either the first to explore or the first to settle the 
Kentucky region. 

The best biography is that by Reuben G. Thwaites, Daniel Boone 
(New York, 1902). 

BOONE, a city and the county-seat of Boone county, Iowa, 
U.S.A., a short distance from the Des Moines river and near the 
centre of the state. Pop. (1890) 6520; (1900) 8880; (1905, state 
census) 9500 (1334 foreign-born); (1910) 10,347. It is served 
by the Chicago & North- Western (which has construction and 
repair shops here), the Chicago, Milwaukee & St Paul 
railways, and by the Fort Dodge, Des Moines & Southern 
(inter-urban) railway, which connects with Des Moines, Ames, 
&c. Boone is an important coal centre; bricks and tiles are 
manufactured from the clay obtained near by; there is a 
packing plant for the manufacture of beef and pork products; 
and from the rich farming section by which the city is surrounded 
come large quantities of grain, some of which is milled here, 
and live-stock. Boone was laid out in 1865, was incorporated as 
a town in 1866, and was chartered as a city in 1868. 

BOONVILLE, a city and the county-seat of Cooper county, 
Missouri, U.S.A., on the right bank of the Missouri river, about 
210 m. W. by N.of St Louis. Pop. (1890) 4141; (1900) 4377, 
including 1 1 1 1 negroes; (1910) 4252. It is served by the Missouri 
Pacific, and the Missouri, Kansas & Texas railways. The city 
lies along a bluff about 100 ft. above the river. It is the seat of 
the Missouri training school for boys (1889), and of the Kemper 
military school (1844). Among its manufactures are earthen- 
ware, tobacco, vinegar, flour, farm-gates (iron), sash and doors, 
marble and granite monuments, carriages and bricks. Iron, 
zinc and lead are found in the vicinity, and some coal is mined. 
Boonville, named in honour of Daniel Boone, was settled in 
1810, was laid out in 1817, incorporated as a village in 1839, 
and chartered as a city of the third class in 1896. Here on the 
17th of June 1861, Captain (Major-General) Nathaniel Lyon, 
commanding about 2000 Union troops, defeated a slightly 
larger, but undisciplined Confederate force under Brigadier- 
General John S. Marmaduke. David Barton (d. 1837), oneof the 
first two United States senators from Missouri, was buried here. 

BOORDE (or Borde), ANDREW (i49o?-is 4 9), English 
physician and author, was born at Boord's Hill, Holms Dale, 
Sussex. He was educated at Oxford, and was admitted a 
member of the Carthusian order while under age. In 1521 he 
was " dispensed from religion " in order that he might act as 
suffragan bishop of Chichester, though he never actually filled 



the office, and in 1529 he was freed from his monastic vows, not 
being able to endure, as he said, the " rugorosite off your rely- 
gyon." He then went abroad to study medicine, and on his 
return was summoned to attend the duke of Norfolk. He 
subsequently visited the universities of Orleans, Poitiers, 
Toulouse, Montpellier and Wittenberg, saw the practice of 
surgery at Rome, and went on pilgrimage with others of his 
nation to Compostella in Navarre. In 1534 Boorde was again 
in London at the Charterhouse, and in 1536 wrote to Thomas 
Cromwell, complaining that he was in " thraldom " there. 
Cromwell set him at liberty, and after entertaining him at his 
house at Bishops Waltham in Hampshire, seems to have entrusted 
him with a mission to find out the state of public feeling abroad 
with regard to the English king. He writes to Cromwell from 
various places, and from Catalonia he sends him the seeds of 
rhubarb, two hundred years before that plant was generally 
cultivated in England. Two letters in 1535 and 1536 to the prior 
of the Charterhouse anxiously argue for his complete release 
from monastic vows. In 1536 he was studying medicine at 
Glasgow and gathering his observations about the Scots and the 
" devellyshe dysposicion of a Scottysh man, not to love nor 
favour an Englishe man." About 1538 Boorde set out on his 
most extensive journey, visiting nearly all the countries of 
Europe except Russia and Turkey, and making his way to 
Jerusalem. Of these travels he wrote a full itinerary, lost un- 
fortunately by Cromwell, to whom it was sent. He finally 
settled at Montpellier and before 1542 had completed his Fyrst 
Boke of the Introduction of Knowledge, which ranks as the earliest 
continental guide book, his Dietary and his Brevyary. He 
probably returned to England in 1542, and lived at Winchester 
and perhaps at Pevensey. John Ponet, bishop of Winchester, 
in an Apology against Bishop Gardiner, relates as matter of 
common knowledge that in 1547 Doctor Boord, a physician and 
a holy man, who still kept the Carthusian rules of fasting and 
wearing a hair shirt, was convicted in Winchester of keeping in 
his house three loose women. For this offence, apparently, he 
was imprisoned in the Fleet, where he made his will on the 9th of 
April 1549. It was proved on the 25th of the same month. 
Thomas Hearne (Benedicius Abbas, i. p. 52) says that he went 
round like a quack doctor to country fairs, and therefore rashly 
supposed him to have been the original merry-andrew. 

Andrew Boorde was no doubt a learned physician, and he has 
left two amusing and often sensible works on domestic hygiene 
and medicine, but his most entertaining book is The Fyrst Boke 
of the Introduction of Knowledge. The whyche dothe teache a man 
to speake parte of all maner of languages, and to know the usage and 
fashion of all maner of countreys. And for to know the moste parte 
of all maner of coynes of money, the whych is currant in every 
region. Made by Andrew Borde, of Physycke Doctor. Dedycated 
to the right honourable and gracious lady Mary daughter of our 
soverayne Lorde Kyng Henry the eyght (c. 1547). The Englishman 
describes himself and his foibles — his fickleness, his fondness for 
new fashions and his obstinacy — in lively verse. Then follows 
a geographical description of the country, followed by a model 
dialogue in the Cornish language. Each country in turn is dealt 
with on similar lines. His other authentic works are: Here 
foloweth a Compendyous Regimente or Dyetary of health, made in 
Mountpyllor (Thomas Colwell, 1562), of which there are undated 
and doubtless earlier editions; The Brevyary of Health (1347?); 
The Princyples of Astronamy (1547?); "The Peregrination of 
Doctor Board," printed by Thomas Hearne in Benedictus Abbas 
Petroburgensis, vol. ii. (1735) ; A Pronostycacyon or an Almanacke 
for the yere of our lorde MCCCCCXLV. made by Andrew Boorde. 
His Itinerary of Europe and Treatyse upon Berdes are lost. 
Several jest-books are attributed to him without authority — The 
Merie Tales of the Mad Men of Gotam (earliest extant edition, 
1630), Scogin's Jests (1626), A mcry jest of the Mylner of Abyngton, 
with his wyfe, and his daughter, and of two poore scholers of Cam- 
bridge (printed by Wynkyn de Worde), and a Latin poem, Nos 
Vagabunduli. 

See Dr F. J. Furnivall's reprint of the Introduction and some other 
selections for the Early English Text Society (new series, 1870). 



2 3 8 



BOOS— BOOTH, C. 



BOOS, MARTIN (1762-1825), German Roman Catholic theo- 
logian, was born at Huttenried in Bavaria on the 25th of 
December 1762. Orphaned at the age of four, he was reared by 
an uncle at Augsburg, who finally sent him to the university of 
Dillingen. There he laid the foundation of the modest piety by 
which his whole life was distinguished. After serving as priest in 
several Bavarian towns, he made his way in 1799 to Linz in 
Austria, where he was welcomed by Bishop Gall, and set to work 
first at Leonding and then at Waldneukirchen, becoming in 1806 
pastor at Gallneukirchen. His pietistic movement won con- 
siderable way among the Catholic laity, and even attracted some 
fifty or sixty priests. The death of Gall and other powerful 
friends, however, exposed him to bitter enmity and persecution 
from about 18 12, and he had to answer endless accusations in 
the consistorial courts. His enemies followed him when he 
returned to Bavaria, but in 181 7 the Prussian government 
appointed him to a professorship at Diisseldorf, and in 1819 
gave him the pastorate at Sayn near Neuwied. He died on the 
29th of August 1825. 

See Life by J. Gossner (1831). 

BOOT. (1) (From the O. Eng. bol, a word common to Teutonic 
languages, e.g. Goth, bota, " good, advantage," O.H.G. Buoza, 
Mod. Ger. Busse, " penance, fine "; cf. " better," the compara- 
tive of " good "), profit or advantage. The word survives in 
" bootless," i.e. useless or unavailing, and in such expressions, 
chiefly archaistic, as " what boots it?" " Bote," an old form, 
survives in some old compound legal words, such as " house- 
bote," " fire-bote," " hedge-bote," &c, for particular rights of 
" estover," the Norman French word corresponding to the Saxon 
" bote " (see Estovers and Commons). The same form survives 
also in such expressions as " thief-bo te " for the Old English 
customary compensation paid for injuries. 

(2) (A word of uncertain origin, which came into English 
through the 0. Fr. bote, modern botte; Med. Lat. bolta or bota), 
a covering for the foot. Properly a boot covers the whole lower 
part of the leg, sometimes reaching to or above the knee, but in 
common usage it is applied to one which reaches only above the 
ankle, and is thus distinguished from " shoe " (see Costume and 
Shoe). 

The " boot " of a coach has the same derivation. It was 
originally applied to the fixed outside step, the French botte, 
then to the uncovered spaces on or beside the step on which the 
attendants sat facing sideways. Both senses are now obsolete, 
the term now being applied to the covered receptacles under 
the seats of the guard and coachman. 

The Boot, Boots or Bootikin was an instrument of torture 
formerly in use to extort confessions from suspected persons, 
or obtain evidence from unwilling witnesses. It originated in 
Scotland, but the date of its first use is unknown. It was certainly 
frequently employed there in the latter years of the 16th century. 
In a case of forgery in 1579 two witnesses, a clergyman and an 
attorney, were so tortured. In a letter dated 1 583 at the Record 
Office in London, Walsingham instructs the English ambassador 
at Edinburgh to have Father Holt, an English Jesuit, " put to 
the boots." It seems to have fallen into disuse after 1630, but 
was revived in 1666 on the occasion of the Covenanters' rebellion, 
and was employed during the reigns of Charles II. and James II. 
Upon the accession of William III. the Scottish convention 
denounced " the use of torture, without evidence and in ordinary 
crimes, as contrary to law." However, a year or so later, one 
Neville Payne, an Englishman suspected of treasonable motives 
for visiting Scotland, was put to the torture under the authority 
of a warrant signed by the king. This is the last recorded case 
of its use, torture being finally abolished in Scotland in 1709. 
It was not used in England after 1640. The boot was made of 
iron or wood and iron fastened on the leg, between which and 
the boot wedges were driven by blows from a mallet. After each 
blow a question was put to the victim, and the ordeal was con- 
tinued until he gave the information or fainted. The wedges 
were usually placed against the calf of the leg, but Bishop Burnet 
says that they were sometimes put against the shin-bone. A 
similar instrument, called " Spanish boots," was used in Germany. 



There were also iron boots which were heated on the victim's 
foot. A less cruel form was a boot or buskin made wet and 
drawn upon the legs and then dried with fire. 

BOOTES (Gr. j3owttis, a ploughman, from fiovs, an ox), a con- 
stellation of the northern hemisphere, mentioned by Eudoxus 
(4th century B.C.) and Aratus (3rd century B.C.), and perhaps 
alluded to in the book of Job (see Arcturus), and by Homer 
and Hesiod. The ancient Greeks symbolized it as a man walking, 
with his right hand grasping a club, and his left extending up- 
wards and holding the leash of two dogs, which are apparently 
barking at the Great Bear. Ptolemy catalogues twenty-three 
stars, Tycho Brahe twenty-eight, Hevelius fifty-two. In addition 
to Arcturus, the brightest in the group, the most interesting 
stars of this constellation are: e Bootis, a beautiful double 
star composed of a yellow star of magnitude 3, and a blue star 
of magnitude 6f; £ Bootis, a double star composed of a yellow 
star, magnitude 45, and a purple star, magnitude 6§; and W. 
Bootis, an irregularly variable star. This constellation has been 
known by many other names — Areas, Arctophylax, Arcturus 
minor, Bubuleus, Bubulus, Canis latrans, Clamator, Icarus, 
Lycaon, Philometus, Plaustri custos, Plorans, Thegnis, Voci- 
f era tor; the Arabs termed it Aramech or Archamech; Hesychius 
named it Orion; Jules Schiller, St Sylvester; Schickard, 
Nimrod; and Weigelius, the Three Swedish Crowns. 

BOOTH, BARTON (1681-1733), English actor, who came of a 
good Lancashire family, was educated at Westminster school, 
where his success in the Latin play Andria gave him an inclination 
for the stage. He was intended for the church; but in 1698 he 
ran away from Trinity College, Cambridge, and obtained employ- 
ment in a theatrical company in Dublin, where he made his 
first appearance as Oroonoko. After two seasons in Ireland he 
returned to London, where Betterton, who on an earlier applica- 
tion had withheld his active aid, probably out of regard for 
Booth's family, now gave him all the assistance in his power. 
At Lincoln's Inn Fields (1700-1704) he first appeared as Maximus 
in Valentinian, and his success was immediate. He was at the 
Haymarket with Betterton from 1705 to 1708, and for the next 
twenty years at Drury Lane. Booth died on the 10th of May 
1733, and was buried in Westminster Abbey. His greatest parts, 
after the title-part of Addison's Cato, which established his 
reputation as a tragedian, were probably Hotspur and Brutus. 
His Lear was deemed worthy of comparison with Garrick's. 
As the ghost in Hamlet he is said never to have had a superior. 
Among his other Shakespearian roles were Mark Antony, Timon 
of Athens and Othello. He also played to perfection the gay 
Lothario in Rowe's Fair Penitent. Booth was twice married; 
his second wife, Hester Santlow, an actress of some merit, 
survived him. 

See Cibber, Lives and Characters of the most eminent Actors and 
Actresses (1753); Victor, Memoirs of the Life of Barton Booth (1733). 

BOOTH, CHARLES (1840- ), English sociologist, was 
born at Liverpool on the 30th of March 1840. In 1862 he became 
a partner in Alfred Booth & Company, a Liverpool firm engaged 
in the Brazil trade, and subsequently chairman of the Booth 
Steamship Company. He devoted much time, and no inconsider- 
able sums of money, to inquiries into the statistical aspects 
of social questions. The results of these are chiefly embodied 
in a work entitled Life and Labour of the People in London (1891- 
1903), of which the earlier portion appeared under the title of 
Life and Labour in 1889. The book is designed to show " the 
numerical relation which poverty, misery and depravity bear 
to regular earnings and comparative comfort, and to describe 
the general conditions under which each class lives." It contains 
a most striking series of maps, in which the varying degrees of 
poverty are represented street by street, by shades of colour. 
The data for the work were derived in part from the detailed 
records kept by school-board " visitors," partly from systematic 
inquiries directed by Mr Booth himself, supplemented by 
information derived from relieving officers and the Charity 
Organization Society. Mr Booth also paid much attention 
to a kindred subject — the lot of the aged poor. In 1894 he 
published a volume of statistics on the subject, and, in 1891 



BOOTH, E.— BOOTH, W. 



239 



and 1899, works on Old-age pensions, his scheme for the latter 
depending on a general provision of pensions of five shillings 
a week to all aged persons, irrespective of the cost to the state. 
He married, in 1871, the daughter of Charles Zachary Macaulay. 
In 1904 he was made a privy councillor. 

BOOTH, EDWIN [THOMAS] (1833-1893), American actor, 
was the second son of the actor Junius Brutus Booth, and was 
born in Belair, Maryland, on the 13th of November 1833. Hi3 
father (1796-1852) was born in London on the 1st of May 1796, 
and, after trying printing, law, painting and the sea, made his 
first appearance on the stage in 1813, and appeared in London at 
Covent Garden in 1815. He became almost at once a great 
favourite, and a rival of Kean, whom he was thought to resemble. 
To Kean's Othello nevertheless he played Iago on several 
occasions. Richard III., Hamlet, King Lear, Shylock and Sir 
Giles Overreach were his best parts, and in America, whither 
he removed in 1821, they brought him great popularity. His 
eccentricities sometimes bordered on insanity, and his excited and 
furious fencing as Richard III. and as Hamlet frequently com- 
pelled the Richmond and Laertes to fight for their lives in deadly 
earnest. 

Edwin Booth's first regular appearance was at the Boston 
Museum on the 10th of September 1849, as Tressel to his father's 
Richard, in Colley Cibber's version of Richard III. He was 
lithe and graceful in figure, buoyant in spirits; his dark hair 
fell in waving curls across his brow, and his eyes were soft, 
luminous and most expressive. His father watched him with 
great interest, but with evident disappointment, and the members 
of the theatrical profession, who held the acting of the elder 
Booth in great reverence, seemed to agree that the genius of the 
father had not descended td the son. Edwin Booth's first ap- 
pearance in New York was in the character of Wilford in The 
Iron Chest, which he played at the National theatre in Chatham 
Street, on the 27th of September 1850. A year later, on the 
illness of the father, the son took his place in the character of 
Richard III. It was not until after his parent's death that 
the son conquered for himself an unassailable position on the 
stage. Between 1852 and 1856 he played in California, Australia 
and the Sandwich Islands, and those who had known him in the 
east were surprised when the news came that he had captivated 
his audiences with his brilliant acting. From this time for- 
ward his dramatic triumphs were warmly acknowledged. His 
Hamlet, Richard and Richelieu were pronounced to be superior 
to the performances of Edwin Forrest; his success as Sir Giles 
Overreach in A New Way to Pay Old Debts surpassed his father's. 
In 1862 he became manager of the Winter Garden theatre, New 
York, where he gave a series of Shakespearian productions of 
then unexampled magnificence (1864-1867), including Hamlet, 
Othello and The Merchant of Venice. The splendour of this 
period in his career was dashed for many months when in 1865 
his brother, John Wilkes Booth, assassinated President Lincoln 
(see Lincoln, Abraham). The three Booth brothers, Junius 
Brutus (1821-1&83), Edwin and John Wilkes (1830-1865), had 
played together in Julius Caesar in the autumn of the previous 
year — the performance being memorable both for its own 
excellence, and for the tragic situation into which two of the 
principal performers were subsequently hurled by. the crime of 
the third. Edwin Booth did not reappear on the stage until 
the 3rd of January 1866, when he played Hamlet at the Winter 
Garden theatre, the audience showing by unstinted applause 
their conviction that the glory of the one brother would never 
be imperilled by the infamy of the other. 

In 1868-1869 Edwin Booth built a theatre of his own — Booth's 
theatre, at the corner of 23rd Street and 6th Avenue, New York — 
and organized an excellent stock company, which produced Romeo 
and Juliet, The Winter's Tale, Julius Caesar, Macbeth, Much Ado 
about Nothing, The Merchant of Venice and other plays. In all cases 
Booth used the true text of Shakespeare, thus antedating by many 
years a similar reform in England. Almost invariably his ventures 
were successful, but he was of a generous and confiding nature, and 
his management was not economical. In 1 874 the grand dramatic 
structure he had raised was taken from him, and with it went his 



entire fortune. By arduous toil, however, he again accumulated 
wealth, in the use of which his generous nature was shown. He 
converted his spacious residence in Gramercy Park, New York, 
into a club — The Players' — for the elect of his profession, and 
for such members of other professions as they might choose. 
The house, with all his books and works of art, and many in- 
valuable mementos of the stage, became the property of the 
club. A single apartment he kept for himself. In this he died on 
the 7th of June 1893. Among his parts were Macbeth, Lear, 
Othello, Iago, Shylock, Wolsey, Richard II., Richard III., 
Benedick, Petruccio, Richelieu, Sir Giles Overreach, Brutus 
(Payne's), Bertuccio (in Tom Taylor's The Fool's Revenge), Ruy 
Bias, Don Cesar de Bazan, and many more. His most famous 
part was Hamlet, for which his extraordinary grace and beauty 
and his eloquent sensibility peculiarly fitted him. He probably 
played the part of tener than any other actor before or since. He 
visited London in 1851, and again in 1880 and in 1882, playing at 
the Haymarket theatre with brilliant success. In the last year he 
also visited Germany, where his acting was received with the 
highest enthusiasm. His last appearance was in Brooklyn as 
Hamlet in 1891. Booth was twice married: in i860 to Mary 
Devlin (d. 1863), and in 1869 to Mary F. McVicker (d. 1881). He 
left by his first wife one daughter, Edwina Booth Grossman, 
who published Edwin Booth: Recollections (New York, 1894). 

Edwin Booth's prompt-books were edited by William Winter 
(1878). In a series of volumes, Actors and Actresses of Great Britain 
and America, edited by Lawrence Hutton and Brander Matthews, 
Edwin Booth contributed recollections of his father, which contain 
much valuable autobiographic material. For the same series 
Lawrence Barrett contributed an article on Edwin Booth. See also 
William Winter, Life and Art of Edwin Booth (1893) ; Lawrence 
Hutton, Edwin Booth (1893) ; Henry A. Clapp, Reminiscences of a 
Dramatic Critic (Boston, 1902) ; A. B. Clarke. The Elder and the 
Younger Booth (Boston, 1882). (J. J.*) 

BOOTH, WILLIAM (1829- ), founder and " general " of 
the Salvation Army (q.v.), was born at Nottingham on the 10th 
of April 1829. At the age of fifteen his mind took a strongly 
religious turn, under the influence of the Wesleyan Methodists, 
in which body he became a local preacher. In 1849 he came to 
London, where, according to his own account, his passion for 
open-air preaching caused his severance from the Wesleyans. 
Joining the Methodist New Connexion, he was ordained a minis- 
ter, but, not being employed as he wished in active " travelling 
evangelization," left that body also in 1861. Meanwhile he had 
(1855) married Miss Catherine Mumford, and had a family of 
four children. Both he and his wife occupied themselves with 
preaching, first in Cornwall and then in Cardiff and Walsall. 
At the last-named place was first organized a " Hallelujah band " 
of converted criminals and others, who testified in public of their 
conversion. In 1864 Booth went to London and continued his 
services in tents and in the open air, and founded a body which 
was successively known as the East London Revival Society, 
the East London Christian Mission, the Christian Mission and 
(in 1878) the Salvation Army. The Army operates (1) by outdoor 
meetings and processions; (2) by visiting public-houses, prisons, 
private houses; (3) by holding meetings in theatres, factories 
and other unusual buildings; (4) by using the most popular 
song-tunes and the language of everyday life, &c. ; (5) by making 
every convert a daily witness for Christ, both in public and private. 
The army is a quasi-military organization, and Booth modelled 
its "Orders and Regulations" on those of the British army. 
Its early " campaigns " excited violent opposition, a " Skeleton 
Army " being organized to break up the meetings, and for 
many years Booth's followers were subjected to fine and im- 
prisonment as breakers of the peace. Since 1889, however, 
these disorders have been little heard of. The queries of the
army were extended in 1880 to the United States, in 1881 to 
Australia, and spread to the European continent, to India, 
Ceylon and elsewhere, " General " Booth himself being an in- 
defatigable traveller, organizer and speaker. His wife (b. 1829) 
died in 1 890. By her preaching at Gateshead, where her husband 
was circuit minister, in i860, she began the women's ministry 
which is so prominent a feature of the army's work. A biography 
of her by Mr Booth Tucker appeared in 1892. 



240 



BOOTH— BOPP 



In 1890 " General " Booth attracted further public attention 
by the publication of a work entitled In Darkest England, and 
the Way Out, in which he proposed to remedy pauperism and vice 
by a series of ten expedients: (1) the city colony; (2) the farm 
colony; (3) the over-sea colony; (4) the household salvage 
brigade; (5) the rescue homes for fallen women; (6) deliverance 
for the drunkard; (7) the prison-gate brigade; (8) the poor 
man's bank; (9) the poor man's lawyer; (10) Whitechapel-by- 
the-Sea. Money was liberally subscribed and a large part of the 
scheme was carried out. The opposition and ridicule with which 
Booth's work was for many years received gave way, towards 
the end of the 19th century, to very widespread sympathy as his 
genius and its results were more fully realized. 

The active encouragement of King Edward VII., at whose 
instance in 1902 he was invited officially to be present at the 
coronation ceremony, marked the completeness of the change; 
and when, in 1905, the " general " went on a progress through 
England, he was received in state by the mayors and corpora- 
tions of many towns. In the United States also, and elsewhere, 
his work was cordially encouraged by the authorities. 

See T. F.Coates, The Life Story of General Booth (2nd ed., London, 
1906), and bibliography under Salvation Army. 

BOOTH (connected with a Teutonic root meaning to dwell, 
whence also " bower "), primarily a temporary dwelling of 
boughs or other slight materials. Later the word gained the 
special meaning of a market stall or any non-permanent erection, 
such as a tent at a fair, where goods were on sale. Later still it 
was applied to the temporary structure where votes were regis- 
tered, viz. polling-booth. Temporary booths erected for the 
weekly markets naturally tended to become permanent shops. 
Thus Stow states that the houses in Old Fish Street, London, 
" were at first but movable boards set out on market days to 
show their fish there to be sold; but procuring licence to set up 
sheds, they grew to shops, and by little and little, to tall houses." 
As bothy or bothie, in Scotland, meaning generally a hut or 
cottage, the word was specially applied to a barrack-like room 
on large farms where the unmarried labourers were lodged. 
This, known as the Bothy system, was formerly common in 
Aberdeenshire and other parts of northern Scotland. 

BOOTHIA (Boothia Felix), a peninsula of British North 
America, belonging to Franklin district, and having an area of 
13,100 sq. m., between 69 30' and 71 50' N. and 91° 30' and 
97° W. Its northernmost promontory, Murchison Point, is also 
the northernmost point of the American mainland. It was dis- 
covered by Captain (afterwards Sir James) Ross, during his 
expedition of 1829-1833, and was named after Sir Felix Booth, 
who had been chiefly instrumental in fitting out the expedition. 
Boothia forms the western side of Boothia Gulf. From the main 
mass of the continent the peninsula is almost separated by lakes 
and inlets; and a narrow channel known as Bellot Strait inter- 
venes between it and North Somerset Island, which was dis- 
covered by Sir E. Parry in 1819. The peninsula is not only 
interesting for its connexion with the Franklin expedition and 
the Franklin search, but is of scientific importance from the 
north magnetic pole having been first distinctly localized here 
,by Ross, on the western side, in 70 5' N., 96° 47' W. 

Boothia Gulf separates the north-western portion of Baffin 
Land and Melville Peninsula from Boothia Peninsula. It is 
connected with Barrow Strait and Lancaster Sound by Prince 
Regent Inlet, with Franklin Strait by Bellot Strait, and with 
Fox Channel by Fury and Hecla Strait. The principal bays are 
Committee and Pelly in the southern portion, and Lord Mayor 
in the western. 

BOOTLE, a municipal and county borough in the Bootle 
parliamentary division of Lancashire, England; at the mouth 
of the Mersey, forming a northern suburb of Liverpool. Pop. 
(1901) 58,566; an increase by nearly nine times in forty years. 
The great docks on this, the east bank of the Mersey, extend 
into the borough, but are considered as a whole under Liverpool 
(q.v.). Such features, moreover, as communications, water- 
supply, &c, may be considered as part of the greater systems of 
the same citv. The chief buildings and institutions are a hand- 



some town hall, a museum, free libraries, technical schools, and 
several public pleasure grounds. Bootle was incorporated in 
1868 and was created a county borough in 1888; the corporation 
consists of a mayor, 10 aldermen and 30 councillors. A proposal 
to include it within the city of Liverpool was rejected in parlia- 
ment in July 1903. Area, 1576 acres. 

BOOTY (apparently influenced by '' boot," 0. Eng. bot, ad- 
vantage or profit, through an adaptation from an earlier form 
cognate with Ger. Beute and Fr. butin), plunder or gain. The 
phrase " to play booty," dating from the 16th century, means to 
play into a confederate's hands, or to play intentionally badly at 
first in order to deceive an opponent. 

BOPP, FRANZ (1791-1867), German philologist, was born at 
Mainz on the 14th of September 1791. In consequence of the 
political troubles of that time, his parents removed to Aschaffen- 
burg, in Bavaria, where he received a liberal education at the 
Lyceum. It was here that his attention was drawn to the 
languages and literature of the East by the eloquent lectures of 
Karl J. Windischmann, who, with G. F. Creuzer, J. J. Gorres, 
and the brothers Schlegel, was full of enthusiasm for Indian 
wisdom and philosophy. And further, Fr. Schlegel's book, 
Uber die Sprache und Weisheit der Indier (Heidelberg, 1808), 
which was just then exerting a powerful influence on the minds 
of German philosophers and historians, could not fail to stimulate 
also Bopp's interest in the sacred language of the Hindus. In 
1812 he went to Paris at the expense of the Bavarian government, 
with a view to devote himself vigorously to the study of Sanskrit. 
There he enjoyed the society of such eminent men as A. L. 
Chezy, S. de Sacy, L. M. Langles, and, above all, of Alexander 
Hamilton (1762-1824), who had acquired, when in India, an 
acquaintance with Sanskrit, and had brought out, conjointly 
with Langles, a descriptive catalogue of the Sanskrit manuscripts 
of the Imperial library. At that library Bopp had access not 
only to the rich collection of Sanskrit manuscripts, most of 
which had been brought from India by Father Pons early in the 
1 8th century, but also to the Sanskrit books which had up to 
that time issued from the Calcutta and Serampore presses. The 
first fruit of his four years' study in Paris appeared at Frankfort- 
on-Main in 181 6, under the title Uber das Conjugationssystem der 
Sanskritsprache in Vergleichung mit jenem der griechischen, 
lateinischen, persischen und germanischen Sprache, and it was 
accompanied with a preface from the pen of Windischmann. 
In this first book Bopp entered at once on the path on which 
the philological researches of his whole subsequent life were 
concentrated. It was not that he wished to prove the common 
parentage of Sanskrit with Persian, Greek, Latin and German, 
for that had long been established; but his object was to trace 
the common origin of their grammatical forms, of their inflections 
from composition, — a task which had never been attempted. 
By a historical analysis of those forms, as applied to the verb, he 
furnished the first trustworthy materials for a history of the 
languages compared. 

After a brief sojourn in Germany, Bopp came to London, 
where he made the acquaintance of Sir Charles Wilkins and H. T. 
Colebrooke, and became the friend of Wilhelm von Humboldt, 
then Prussian ambassador at the court of St James's, to whom 
he gave instruction in Sanskrit. He brought out, in the Annals 
of Oriental Literature (London, 1820), an essay entitled, " Analy- 
tical Comparison of the Sanskrit, Greek, Latin and Teutonic 
Languages," in which he extended to all parts of the grammar 
what he had done in his first book for the verb alone. He had 
previously published a critical edition, with a Latin translation 
and notes, of the story of Nala and Damayanti (London, 18 19), 
the most beautiful episode of the Mahabharata. Other episodes of 
the Mahabharata — Indralokagamanam, and three others (Berlin, 
1824) ; Diluvium, and three others (Berlin, 1829) ; and a new edi- 
tion of Nala (Berlin, 1832) — followed in due course, all of which, 
with A. W. Schlegel's edition of the Bhagavadglta (1823), proved 
excellent aids in initiating the early student into the reading of 
Sanskrit texts. On the publication, in Calcutta, of the whole Ma- 
habharata, Bopp discontinued editing Sanskrit texts, and confined 
himself thenceforth exclusively to grammatical investigations. 



BOPPARD— BORACITE 



241 



After a short residence at G6ttingen, Bopp was, on the recom- 
mendation of Humboldt, appointed to the chair of Sanskrit and 
comparative grammar at Berlin in 1821, and was elected member 
of the Royal Prussian Academy in the following year. He 
brought out, in 1827, his Ausfilhrliches Lehrgebdude der Sanskrita- 
Sprache, on which he had been engaged since 182 1. A new 
edition, in Latin, was commenced in the following year, and 
completed in 1832; and a shorter grammar appeared in 1834. 
At the same time he compiled a Sanskrit and Latin glossary 
(1830) in which, more especially in the second and third editions 
(1847 and 1867), account was also taken of the cognate languages. 
His chief activity, however, centred on the elaboration of his 
Comparative Grammar, which appeared in six parts at consider- 
able intervals (Berlin, 1833, 1835, 1842, 1847, 1849, 1852), under 
the title Vergleichende Grammatik des Sanskrit, Zend, Griechi- 
schen, Lateinischen, Litthauischen, Altslavischen, Gothischen, und 
Deutschen. How carefully this work was matured may be 
gathered from the series of monographs printed in the Trans- 
actions of the Berlin Academy (1824 to 1831), by which it was 
preceded. They bear the general title, Vergleichende Zerglie- 
derung des Sanskrits und der mit ihm verwandten Sprachen. Two 
other essays (on the " Numerals," 1835) followed the publication 
of the first part of the Comparative Grammar. The Old-Slavonian 
began to take its stand among the languages compared from the 
second part onwards. The work was translated into English by 
E. B. Eastwick in 1845. A second German edition, thoroughly 
revised (1856-1861), comprised also the Old-Armenian. From 
this edition an excellent French translation was made by Pro- 
fessor Michel Breal in 1866. The task which Bopp endeavoured 
to carry out in his Comparative Grammar was threefold, — to give 
a description of the original grammatical structure of the 
languages as deduced from their intercomparison, to trace their 
phonetic laws, and to investigate the origin of their grammatical 
forms. The first and second points were subservient to the third. 
As Bopp's researches were based on the best available sources, 
and incorporated every new item of information that came to 
light, so they continued to widen and deepen in their progress. 
Witness his monographs on the vowel system in the Teutonic 
languages (1836), on the Celtic languages (1839), on the Old- 
Prussian (1853) and Albanian languages (1854), on the accent in 
Sanskrit and Greek (1854), on the relationship of the Malayo- 
Polynesian with the Indo-European languages (1840), and on the 
Caucasian languages (1846). In the two last mentioned the 
impetus of his genius led him on a wrong track. Bopp has been 
charged with neglecting the study of the native Sanskrit 
grammars, but in those early days of Sanskrit studies the requisite 
materials were not accessible in the great libraries of Europe; 
and if they had been, they would have absorbed his exclusive 
attention for years, while such grammars as those of Wilkins 
and Colebrooke, from which his grammatical knowledge was 
derived, were all based on native grammars. The further charge 
that Bopp, in his Comparative Grammar, gave undue prominence 
to Sanskrit may be disproved by his own words; for, as early as 
the year 1820, he gave it as his opinion that frequently the 
cognate languages serve to elucidate grammatical forms lost in 
Sanskrit {Annals of Or. Lit. i. 3), — an opinion which he further 
developed in all his subsequent writings. 

Bopp's researches, carried with wonderful penetration into 
the most minute and almost microscopical details of linguistic 
phenomena, have led to the opening up of a wide and distant 
view into the original seats, the closer or more distant affinity, 
and the tenets, practices and domestic usages of the ancient 
Indo-European nations, and the science of comparative grammar 
may truly be said to date from his earliest publication. In 
grateful recognition of that fact, on the fiftieth anniversary (May 
16, 1866) of the date of Windischmann's preface to that work, 
a fund called Die Bopp-Stiftung, for the promotion of the study 
of Sanskrit and comparative grammar, was established at Berlin, 
to which liberal contributions were made by his numerous pupils 
and admirers in all parts of the globe. Bopp lived to see the 
results of his labours everywhere accepted, and his name justly 
celebrated. But he died, on the 23rd of October 1867, a poor 



man, — though his genuine kindliness and unselfishness, his 
devotion to his family and friends, and his rare modesty, endeared 
him to all who knew him. 

See M. Breal's translation of Bopp's Vergl. Gramm. (1866) introduc- 
tion; Th. Benfey, Gesch. der Sprach'wissenschaft (1869); A. Kuhn in 
Unsere Zeit, Neue Folge, iv. 1 (1868) ; Lefmann, Franz Bopp (Berlin, 
1891-1897). 

BOPPARD, a town of Germany, in the Prussian Rhine pro- 
vince, on the left bank of the Rhine, 12 m. S. of Coblenz on the 
mainline to Cologne. Pop. (1900) 5806. It is an old town still 
partly surrounded by medieval walls, and its most noteworthy 
buildings are the Roman Catholic parish church (12th and 13th 
centuries); the Carmelite church (1318), the former castle, now 
used for administrative offices; the Evangelical church (1851, 
enlarged in 1887); and the former Benedictine monastery of 
the Marienberg, founded n 23 and since 1839 a hydropathic 
establishment, crowning a hill 100 ft. above the Rhine. Boppard 
is a favourite tourist centre, and being less pent in by hills than 
many other places in this part of the picturesque gorge of the 
Rhine, has in modern times become a residential town. It has 
some comparatively insignificant industries, such as tanning and 
tobacco manufacture; its direct trade is in wine and fruit. 

Boppard (Baudobriga) was founded by the Romans; under 
the Merovingian dynasty it became a royal residence. During 
the middle ages it was a considerable centre of commerce and 
shipping, and under the Hohenstaufen emperors was raised to 
the rank of a free imperial city. In 13 12, however, the emperor 
Henry VII. pledged the town to his brother Baldwin, archbishop- 
elector of Trier, and it remained in the possession of the electors 
until it was absorbed by France during the Revolutionary epoch. 
It was assigned by the congress of Vienna in 1815 to Prussia. 

BORA, an Italian name for a violent cold northerly and north- 
easterly wind, common in the Adriatic, especially on the Istrian 
and Dalmatian coasts. There is always a northern tendency in 
the winds on the north Mediterranean shores in winter owing to 
the cold air of the mountains sliding down to the sea where the 
pressure is less. When, therefore, a cyclone is formed over the 
Mediterranean, the currents in its north-western area draw 
the air from the cold northern regions, and during the passage 
of the cyclone the bora prevails. The bora also occurs at 
Novorossiysk on the Black Sea. It is precisely similar in 
character to the mistral which prevails in Provence and along 
the French Mediterranean littoral. 

BORACITE, a mineral of special interest on account of its 
optical anomalies. Small crystals bounded on all sides by 
sharply defined faces are found in considerable numbers embedded 
in gypsum and anhydrite in the salt deposits at Liineburg in 
Hanover, where it was first observed in 1787. In external form 
these crystals are cubic with inclined hemihedrism, the symmetry 
being the same as in blende and tetrahedrite. Their habit varies 
according to whether the tetrahedron (fig. 1), the cube (fig. 2). 
or the rhombic dodecahedron (fig. 3) predominates. Penetration 




Fig. 1. Fig. 2. 

Crystals of Boracite. 



Fig. 3. 



twins with a tetrahedron face as twin-plane are sometimes 
observed. The crystals vary from translucent to transparent, 
are possessed of a vitreous lustre, and are colourless or white, 
though often tinged with grey, yellow or green. The hardness is 
as high as 7 on Mohs' scale ; specific gravity 3 • o. As first observed 
by R. J. Hauy in 1791, the crystals are markedly pyroelectric; 
a cube when heated becomes positively electrified on four of its 
corners and negatively on the four opposite corners. In a 



242 



BORAGE— BORAGINACEAE 



crystal such as represented in fig. 3, the smaller and dull tetra- 
hedral faces 5 are situated at the analogous poles (which become 
positively electrified when the crystal is heated), and the larger 
and bright tetrahedral faces s' at the antilogous poles. 

The characters so far enumerated are strictly in accordance 
with cubic symmetry, but when a crystal is examined in polarized 
light, it will be seen to be doubly refracting, as was first observed 
by Sir David Brewster in 1821. Thin sections show twin- 
lamellae, and a division into definite areas which are optically 
biaxial. By cutting sections in suitable directions, it may be 
proved that a rhombic dodecahedral crystal is really built up of 
twelve orthorhombic pyramids, the apices of which meet in the 
centre and the bases coincide with the dodecahedral faces of the 
compound (pseudo-cubic) crystal. Crystals of other forms show 
other types of internal structure. When the crystals are heated 
these optical characters change, and at a temperature of 265° 
the crystals suddenly become optically isotropic ; on cooling, 
however, the complexity of internal structure reappears. Various 
explanations have been offered to account for these " optical 
anomalies " of boracite. Some observers have attributed them 
to alteration, others to internal strains in the crystals, which 
originally grew as truly cubic at a temperature above 265°. It 
would, however, appear that there are really two crystalline 
modifications of the boracite substance, a cubic modification 
stable above 265 and an orthorhombic (or monoclinic) one stable 
at a lower temperature. This is strictly analogous to the case of 
silver iodide, of which cubic and rhombohedral modifications 
exist at different temperatures; but whereas rhombohedral as 
well as pseudo-cubic crystals of silver iodide (iodyrite) are 
known in nature, only pseudo-cubic crystals of boracite have as 
yet been met with. 

Chemically, boracite is a magnesium borate and chloride with 
the formula Mg7Cl 2 Bi 6 03o. A small amount of iron is sometimes 
present, and an iron-boracite with half the magnesium replaced 
by ferrous iron has been called huyssenite. The mineral is in- 
soluble in water, but soluble in hydrochloric acid. On exposure 
it is liable to slow alteration, owing to the absorption of water 
by the magnesium chloride: an altered form is known as 
parasite. 

In addition to embedded crystals, a massive variety, known as 
stassfurtite, occurs as nodules in the salt deposits at Stassfurt in 
Prussia: that from the carnaliite layer is compact, resembling 
fine-grained marble, and white or greenish in colour, whilst that 
from the kainite layer is soft and earthy, and yellowish or reddish 
in colour. (L. J. S.) 

BORAGE (pronounced like " courage "; possibly from Lat. 
bona, rough hair), a herb (Borago officinalis) with bright blue 
flowers and hairy leaves and stem, considered to have some 
virtue as a cordial and a febrifuge; used as an ingredient in 
salads or in making claret-cup, &c. 

BORAGINACEAE, an order of plants belonging to the sym- 
petalous section of dicotyledons, and a member of the series 
Tubiflorae. It is represented in Britain by bugloss (Echium) 
(fig. 1), comfrey (Symphytum) , Myosotis, hounds-tongue (Cyno- 
glossum) (fig. 2), and other genera, while borage (Borago offici- 
nalis) (fig. 3) occurs as a garden escape in waste ground. The 
plants are rough-haired annual or perennial herbs, more rarely 
shrubby or arborescent, as in Cordia and Ehretia, which are 
tropical or sub-tropical. The leaves, which are generally 
alternate, are usually entire and narrow: the radical leaves in 
some genera, as Pulmonaria (lungwort) and Cynoglossum, differ 
in form from the stem-leaves, being generally broader and some- 
times heart-shaped. A characteristic feature is the one-sided 
(dorsiventral) inflorescence, well illustrated in forget-me-not and 
other species of Myosotis; the cyme is at first closely coiled, 
becoming uncoiled as the flowers open. At the same time there 
is often a change in colour in the flowers, which are red in bud, 
becoming blue as they expand, as in Myosotis, Echium, Sym- 
phytum and others. The flowers are generally regular; the 
form of the corolla varies widely. Thus in borage it is rotate, 
tubular in comfrey, funnel-shaped in hounds-tongue, and salver- 
shaped in alkanet (Anchusa); the throat is often closed by 



scale-like outgrowths from the corolla, forming the so-called 
corona. A departure from the usual regular corolla occurs in 
Echium and a few allied genera, where it is oblique; in Lycopsis 
it is also bent. 

The five stamens alternate in position with the lobes of the 
corolla. The ovary, of two carpels, is seated on a ring-like disk 




2. Corolla split open. 

3. Calyx. 

4. Pistil. 

5. One stamen. 

which secretes honey, 
median constriction in 



Fig. 1. — Viper's Bugloss (Echium vulgare), about i nat. size. 
I. Single flower, about nat. size. 6. Calyx surrounding nutlets. 
r * -" -''■ 7. Same part of calyx cut 

away. 

8. Two nutlets. 

9. Same enlarged. 

Each carpel becomes divided by a 
four portions, each containing one 
ovule; the style springs from the centre of the group of four 
divisions. 

The flowers show well-marked adaptation to insect-visits. 
Their colour and tendency to arrangement on one surface, with 
the presence of honey, serve to 
attract insects. The scales around 
the throat of the corolla protect 
the pollen and honey from wet or 
undesirable visitors, and by their 
difference in colour from the cor- 
olla-lobes, as in the yellow eye of 
forget-me-not, may serve to indicate 
the position of the honey. In most 
genera the fruit consists of one- 
seeded nutlets, generally four, but 
one or more may be undeveloped. 
The shape of the nutlet and the 
character of its coat are very varied. 
Thus in Lithospermum the nutlets 
are hard like a stone, in Myosotis 
usually polished, in Cynoglossum 
covered with bristles, &c. 

The order is widely spread in of Forget-me-not; (2) ripe 
temperate and tropical regions, and fruits, 
contains 85 genera with about 1200 species. Its chief centre 
is the Mediterranean region, whence it extends over central 




Fig. 2. — (1) Inflorescence 



BORAS— BGRDAGE 



243 



Europe and Asia, becoming less frequent northwards. A smaller 
centre occurs on the Pacific side of North America. The order 
is less developed in the south temperate zone. 
The order is of little economic value. Several genera, such as 




Fig. 3. — (1) Flower of Borage; (2) same in vertical section en- 
larged; (3) horizontal plan of flower; (4) flower of Comfrey after 
removal of corolla, showing unripe fruit. 

borage and Pulmonaria, were formerly used in medicine, and 
the roots yield purple or brown dyes, as in Alkanna tinctoria 
(alkanet). Heliotrope or cherry-pie (Heliotropium peruvianum) 
is a well-known garden plant. 

BORAS, a town of Sweden, in the district {Ian) of Elfsborg, 
45 m. E. of Gothenburg by rail, on the river Viske. Pop. (1880) 
4723; (1900) 15,837. It ranks among the first twelve towns 
in Sweden both in population and in the value of its manufac- 
turing industries. These are principally textile, as there are 
numerous cotton spinning and weaving mills, together with a 
technical weaving school. The town was founded in 1632 by 
King Gustavus Adolphus. 

BORAX (sodium pyroborate or sodium biborate), Na 2 B 4 07, 
a substance which appears in commerce under two forms, 
namely "common" or prismatic borax, Na 2 B 4 O7T0H 2 O, and 
" jewellers' " or octahedral borax, Na 2 B 4 Gv5H 2 0. It is to be 
noted that the term " borax " was used by the alchemists in a 
very vague manner, and is therefore not to be taken as meaning 
the substance now specifically known by the name. Prismatic 
borax is found widely distributed as a natural product (see below, 
Mineralogy) in Tibet, and in Canada, Peru and Transylvania, 
while the bed of Borax Lake, near Clear Lake in California, 
is occupied by a large mass of crystallized borax, which is fit 
for use by the assayer without undergoing any preliminary 
purification. The supply of borax is, however, mainly derived 
from the boric acid of Tuscany, which is fused in a reverberatory 
furnace with half its weight of sodium carbonate, and the mass 
after cooling is extracted with warm water. An alternative 
method is to dissolve sodium carbonate in lead-lined steam- 
heated pans, and add the boric acid gradually; the solution 
then being concentrated until the borax crystallizes. Borax 
is also prepared from the naturally occurring calcium borate, 
which is mixed in a finely divided condition with the requisite 
quantity of soda ash; the mixture is fused, extracted with water 
and concentrated until the solution commences to crystallize. 

From a supersaturated aqueous solution of borax, the penta- 
hydrate, Na2B 4 07'5H 2 0, is deposited when evaporation takes place 
at somewhat high temperatures. The same hydrate can be prepared 
by dissolving borax in water until the solution has a specific gravity 
of 1-246 and then allowing the solution to cool. The pentahydrate 
is deposited between 79 C. and 56 C. ; below this temperature the 
decahydrateor^ordinary borax, Na 2 B4O7-10H2O, is deposited. Crystals 
of ordinary borax swell up to a very great extent on heating, losing 
their water of crystallization and melting to a clear white glass. 
I The crystals of octahedral borax fuse more easily than those of the 
prismatic form and are less liable to split when heated, so that they 
are preferable for soldering or fluxing. Fused borax dissolves many 
metallic oxides, forming complex borates which in many cases show 
I characteristic colours. Its use in soldering depends on the fact that 
solder only adheres to the surface of an untarnished metal, and conse- 
quently a little borax is placed on the surface of the metal and heated 
by the soldering iron in order to remove any superficial film of oxide. 
It is also used for glazing pottery, in glass-making and the glazing 
of linen. 

Boric acid (q.v.) being only a weak acid, its salts readily undergo 
hydrolytic dissociation in aqueous solution, and this property can 
be readily shown with a concentrated aqueous solution of borax, 
for by adding litmus and then just sufficient acetic acid to turn the 
litmus red, the addition of a large volume of water to the solution 
changes the colour back to blue again. The boric acid being scarcely 



ionized gives only a very small quantity of hydrogen ions, whilst 
the base (sodium hydroxide) produced by the hydrolysis occasioned 
by the dilution of the solution, being a " strong base," is highly 
ionized and gives a comparatively large amount of hydroxyl ions. 
In the solution, therefore, there is now an excess of hydroxyl ions; 
consequently it has an alkaline reaction and the litmus turns blue. 

Mineralogy. — The Tibetan mineral deposits have been known 
since very early times, and formerly the crude material was 
exported to Europe, under the name of lineal, for the preparation 
of pure borax and other boron salts. The most westerly of the 
Tibetan deposits are in the lake-plain of Pugha on the Rulangchu, 
a tributary of the Indus, at an elevation of 15,000 ft.: here the 
impure borax (sokaga) occurs over an area of about 2 sq. m., 
and is covered by a saline efflorescence; successive crops 
are obtained by the action of rain and snow and subsequent 
evaporation. Deposits of purer material (chu (sale or water 
borax) occur at the lakes of Rudok, situated to the east of the 
Pugha district; also still farther to the east at the great lakes 
Tengri Nor, north of Lhasa, and several other places. More 
recently, the extensive deposits of borates (chiefly, however, 
of calcium; see Colemanite) in the Mohave desert on the 
borders of California and Nevada, and in the Atacama desert 
in South America, have been the chief commercial sources of 
boron compounds. The boron contained in solution in the 
salt lakes has very probably been supplied by hot springs and 
solfataras of volcanic origin, such as those which at the present 
day charge the waters of the lagoons in Tuscany with boric acid. 
The deposits formed by evaporation from these lakes and marshes 
or salines, are mixtures of borates, various alkaline salts (sodium 
carbonate, sulphate, chloride), gypsum, &c. In the mud of the 
lakes and in the surrounding marshy soil fine isolated crystals 
of borax are frequently found. For example, crystals up to 7 in. 
in length and weighing a pound each have been found in large 
numbers at Borax Lake in Lake county, and at Borax Lake in 
San Bernardino county, both in California. 

Borax crystallizes with ten molecules of water, the composition 
of the crystals being Na2B 4 O7-|-10H2O. The crystals belong to the 
monoclinic system, and it is a curious fact that in habit and angles 
they closely resemble pyroxene (a silicate of calcium, magnesium 
and iron). There is a perfect cleavage parallel to the orthopinacoid 
and less perfect cleavages parallel to the faces of the prism. The 
mineral is transparent to opaque and white, sometimes greyish, 
bluish or greenish in colour. Hardness 2-2 J; sp. gr. 1-69-1-72. 

The optical characters are interesting, because of the striking 
crossed dispersion of the optic axes, of which phenomenon borax 
affords the best example. The optic figure seen in convergent 
polarized light through a section cut parallel to the plane of sym- 
metry of a borax crystal is symmetrical only with respect to the 
central point. The plane of the optic axes for red light is inclined 
at 2° to that for blue light, and the angle between the optic axes 
themselves is 3 greater for red than for blue light. 

BORDA, JEAN CHARLES (1733-1799), French mathematician 
and nautical astronomer, was born at Dax on the 4th of May 1 733 . 
He studied at La Fleche, and at an early age obtained a com- 
mission in the cavalry. In 1756 he presented a Memoire sur le 
mouvement des projectiles to the Academy of Sciences, who elected 
him a member. He was present at the battle of Hastembeck, 
and soon afterwards joined the naval service. He visited the 
Azores and the Canary Islands, of which he constructed an 
admirable map. In 1782 his frigate was taken by a British 
squadron; he himself was carried to England, but was almost 
immediately released on parole and returned to France. He 
died at Paris on the 20th of February 1799. Borda contributed 
a long series of valuable memoirs to the Academy of Sciences. 
His researches in hydrodynamics were highly useful for marine 
engineering, while the reflecting and repeating circles, as im- 
proved by him, were of great service in nautical astronomy. 
He was associated with J. B. J. Delambre and P. F. A. Mechain 
in the attempt to determine an arc of the meridian, and the 
greater number of the instruments employed in the task were 
invented by him. 

See J. B. Biot, " Notice sur Borda " in the Mem. de VAcad. des 
Sciences, iv. 

BORDAGE. (1) A nautical term (from Fr. lord, side) for the 
planking on a ship's side. (2) A feudal term (from Lat. borda, 
a cottage) for the tenure by which a certain class of villein held 



244 



BORDEAUX 



their cottages; also the services due from these villeins or 
" bordars." A " bordar " (Med. Lat. bardarius) was a villein 
who obtained a cottage from his lord in return for menial services 
(see Villenage). 

BORDEAUX, a city of south-western France, capital of the 
department of Gironde, 359 m. S.S.W. of Paris by a main line 
of the Orleans railway and 159 m. N.W. of Toulouse on the main 
line of the Southern railway. Pop. (1906) 237,707. Bordeaux, 
one of the finest and most extensive cities in France, is situated 
on the left or west bank of the Garonne about 60 m. from the 
sea, in a plain which comprises the wine-growing district of Medoc. 
The Garonne at this point describes a semicircle, separating the 
city proper on the left bank from the important suburb of La 
Bastide on the right bank. The river is crossed by the Pont 
de Bordeaux, a fine stone structure of the early 19th century, 
measuring 1534 ft. in length, and by a railway bridge connecting 
the station of the Orleans railway company in La Bastide 
with that of the Southern company on the left bank. Looking 
west from the Pont de Bordeaux, the view embraces a crescent 
of wide and busy quays with a background of lofty warehouses, 
factories and mansions, behind which rise towers and steeples. 
Almost at the centre of the line of quays is the Place des Quin- 
conces, round which lie the narrow, winding streets in which the 
life of the city is concentrated. Outside this quarter, which con- 
tains most of the important buildings, the streets are narrow and 
quiet and bordered by the low white houses which at Bordeaux 
take the place of the high tenements characteristic of other large 
French towns. The whole city is surrounded by a semicircle 
of boulevards, beyond which lie the suburbs of Le Bouscat, 
Cauderan, Merignac, Talence and Begles. The principal prome- 
nades are situated close together near the centre of the city. 
They comprise the beautiful public garden, the allees de Tourny 
and the Place des Quinconces. The latter is planted with plane 
trees, among which stand two huge statues of Montaigne and 
Montesquieu, and terminates upon the quays with two rostral 
columns which serve as lighthouses. On its west side there is 
a monument to the Girondin deputies proscribed under the 
convention in 1793. At its south-west corner the Place des 
Quinconces opens into the Place de la Comedie, which contains 
the Grand Theatre (18th century), the masterpiece of the archi- 
tect Victor Louis. The Place de la Comedie, the centre of business 
in Bordeaux, is traversed by a street which, under the names of 
Cours du Chapeau-Rouge, rue de l'lntendance and rue Judaique, 
runs from the Place de la Bourse and the quai de la Douane on the 
east to the outer boulevards on the west. Another important 
thoroughfare, the rue Sainte Catherine, runs at right angles to 
the rue de l'lntendance and enters the Place de la Comedie 
on the south. The Pont de Bordeaux is continued by the 
Cours Victor Hugo, a curved street crossing the rue Sainte 
Catherine and leading to the cathedral of St Andre. This church, 
dating from the nth to the 14th centuries, is a building in the 
Gothic style with certain Romanesque features, chief among 
which are the arches in the nave. It consists of a large nave 
without aisles, a transept at the extremities of which are the 
main entrances, and a choir, flanked by double aisles and chapels 
and containing many works of art. Both the north and south 
facades are richly decorated with sculpture and statuary. Of 
the four towers flanking the principal portals, only those to the 
north are surmounted by spires. Near the choir stands an 
isolated tower. It contains the great bell of the cathedral and 
is known as the Clocher Pey-Berland, after the archbishop of 
Bordeaux who erected it in the 15th century. Of the numerous 
other churches of Bordeaux the most notable are St Seurin (nth 
to the 15th centuries), with a finely sculptured southern portal; 
Ste Croix (12th and 13th centuries), remarkable for its Roman- 
esque fagade; and St Michel, a fine Gothic building of the 15th 
and 16th centuries. The bell tower of St Michel, which has the 
highest spire (354 ft.) in the south of France, dates from the 
end of the 15th century, and, like that of the cathedral, stands 
apart from its church. The palace of the Faculties of Science 
and of Letters (1881-1886) contains the tomb of Michel de 
Montaigne. The prefecture, the h6tel de ville, the bourse and the 



custom-house belong to the 15th century. The law-courts and 
the hospital of St Andr6 (the foundation of which dates from 
1390) belong to the first half of the 19th century. Of greater 
antiquarian interest is the Palais Gallien, situated near the 
public garden, consisting of remains of lofty arcades, vaulting 
and fragments of wall, which once formed part of a Roman 
amphitheatre. Bordeaux lost its fortifications in the 18th cen- 
tury, but four of the old gateways or triumphal arches belonging 
to that period still remain. Still older are the Porte de Cailhau, 
once the entrance to the Palais de l'Ombriere, which before its 
destruction was the residence of the duke of Aquitaine, and the 
Porte de l'Hotel de Ville, the former of the 1 5th, the latter of the 
13th and 16th centuries. 

Bordeaux is the seat of an archbishop, the headquarters of 
the XVIII. army corps, the centre of an academie (educational 
division) and the seat of a court of appeal. A court of assizes 
is held there, and there are tribunals of first instance and of 
commerce, a council of trade-arbitrators, a chamber of commerce 
and a branch of the Bank of France. Its educational institutions 
include faculties of law, of science, of letters and of medicine 
and pharmacy, a faculty of Catholic theology, lycees, training 
colleges, a higher school of commerce, a chair of agriculture, a 
school of fine art and a naval school of medicine. There are 
several museums, including one with a large collection of pictures 
and sculptures, a library with over 200,000 volumes and numerous 
learned societies. 

The trade of Bordeaux, the fourth port in France, is chiefly 
carried on by sea. Its port, 5^ m. long and on the average 550 
yds. wide, is formed by the basin of the Garonne and is divided 
into two portions by the Pont de Bordeaux. That to the south 
is used only by small craft; that to the north is accessible to 
vessels drawing from 21 to 26 ft. according to the state of the 
tide. From 1000 to 1200 vessels can be accommodated in the 
harbour, which is lined on both sides by quays and sloping 
wharves served by railway lines. At the northen extremity 
of the harbour, on the left bank, there is a floating basin of 25 
acres in extent, capable of receiving the largest vessels; it has 
over 1900 yds. of quays and is furnished with a repairing dock 
and with elaborate machinery for the loading and unloading of 
goods. In 1907 the construction of new docks behind this basin 
was begun. The city maintains commercial relations with nearly 
all countries, but chiefly with Great Britain, Spain, Argentina, 
Portugal and the United States. The most important line of 
steamers using the port is the South American service of the 
Messageries Maritimes. The total value of the exports and 
imports of Bordeaux averages between 25 and 26 millions sterling 
yearly. Of this amount exports make up 13! millions, of which 
the sales of wine bring in about one quarter. The city is the 
centre of the trade in " Bordeaux " wines, and the wine-cellars 
of the quays are one of its principal sights. Other principal 
exports are brandy, hides and skins, sugar, rice, woollen and 
cotton goods, salt-fish, chemicals, oil-cake, pitwood, fruit, 
potatoes and other vegetables. The chief imports are wool, 
fish, timber, rice, wine, rubber, coal, oil-grains, hardware, 
agricultural and other machinery and chemicals. A large fleet 
is annually despatched to the cod-fisheries of Newfoundland and 
Iceland. The most important industry is ship-building and re- 
fitting. Ironclads and torpedo-boats as well as merchant vessels 
are constructed. Railway carriages are also built. The industries 
subsidiary -to the wine-trade, such as wine-mixing, cooperage and 
the making of bottles, corks, capsules, straw envelopes and 
wooden cases, occupy many hands. There are also flour-mills, 
sugar-refineries, breweries, distilleries, oil-works, cod-drying 
works, manufactories of canned and preserved fruits, vegetables 
and meat, and of chocolate. Chemicals, leather, iron-ware, 
machinery and pottery are manufactured, and a tobacco factory 
employs 1500 hands. 

Bordeaux (Burdigala) was originally the chief town of the 
Bituriges Vivisci. Under the Roman empire it became a 
flourishing commercial city, and in the 4th century it was made 
the capital of Aquitania Secunda. Ausonius, a writer of the 4th 
century, who was a native of the place, describes it as four-square 



BORDEN— BORDERS 



245 



and surrounded with walls and lofty towers, and celebrates its 
importance as one of the greatest educational centres of Gaul. 
In the evils that resulted from the disintegration of the empire 
Bordeaux had its full share, and did not recover its prosperity 
till the beginning of the 10th century. Along with Guienne it 
belonged to the English kings for nearly three hundred years 
(1154-1453), and was for a time the seat of the brilliant court of 
Edward the Black Prince, whose son Richard was born in the 
city. An extensive commerce was gradually developed between 
the- Bordeaux merchants and their fellow-subjects in England, — 
London, Hull, Exeter, Dartmouth, Bristol and Chester being the 
principal ports with which they traded. The English administra- 
tion was favourable to the liberties as well as to the trade of the 
city. In 1235 it received the right of electing its mayors, who 
were assisted in the administration by a " jurade " or municipal 
council. The influence of Bordeaux was still further increased 
when several important towns of the region, among them St 
Emilion and Libourne, united in a federation under its leadership. 
The defeat of the English at the battle of Castillon in 1453 was 
followed, after a siege of three months, by the submission of 
Bordeaux to Charles VII. The privileges of the city were at once 
curtailed, and were only partially restored under Louis XL, who 
established there the parlement of Guienne. In 1548 the in- 
habitants resisted the imposition of the salt -tax by force of arms, 
a rebellion for which they were punished by the constable Anne 
de Montmorency with merciless severity. 

The reformed religion found numerous adherents at Bordeaux, 
and after the massacre of St Bartholomew nearly three hundred 
of its inhabitants lost their lives. The 17th century was a period 
of disturbance. The city was for a time the chief support of the 
Fronde, and on two occasions, in 1653 and 1675, troops were sent 
to repress insurrections against royal measures. In the middle 
of the 1 8th century, a period of commercial and architectural 
activity for Bordeaux, the marquis de Tourny, intendant of 
Guienne, did much to improve the city by widening the streets 
and laying out public squares. It was the headquarters of the 
Girondists at the Revolution, and during the Reign of Terror 
suffered almost as severely as Lyons and Marseilles. Its com- 
merce was greatly reduced under Napoleon I. In 1814 it declared 
for the house of Bourbon; and Louis XVIII. afterwards gave 
the title of due de Bordeaux to his grand-nephew, better known 
as the comte de Chambord. In 1870 the French government was 
transferred to Bordeaux from Tours on the approach of the 
Germans to the latter city. 

See Camille Jullian, Hist, de Bordeaux, depuis les origines jusqu'en 
1895 (Bordeaux, 1895) ; T. Malvezin, Hist, du commerce de Bordeaux 
(Bordeaux, 1892); Bordeaux, apercu historique, sol, population, in- 
dustrie, commerce, administration (Bordeaux, 1892). 

BORDEN, SIR FREDERICK WILLIAM (1847- ), Canadian 
statesman, was born at Cornwallis, Nova Scotia, on the 14th of 
May 1847. He was educated at King's College, Windsor, and 
at Harvard University, and for some years practised medicine 
at Canning, Nova Scotia. In 1874 he was elected to the Canadian 
parliament as Liberal member for King's county. In 1896 he 
became minister of militia and defence in the Liberal ministry. 

BORDEN, ROBERT LAIRD (1854- ), Canadian statesman, 
was born at Grand Pre, Nova Scotia, on the 26th of June 1854. 
In 1878 he was called to the bar, and became a leading lawyer in 
his native province. In 1896 he was elected to the Canadian 
parliament for the city of Halifax, but later lost his seat there 
and was elected for Carlton. In February 1901 , on the resignation 
of Sir Charles Tupper, he became leader of the Conservative 
opposition. At the general election of 1908 he was returned 
again for Halifax. 

BORDENTOWN, a city of Burlington county, New Jersey, 
U.S.A., on the E. bank of the Delaware river, 6 m. S. of Trenton 
and 28 m. N.E. of Philadelphia. Pop. (1890) 4232; (1900) 
4110; (1905) 4073; (1910) 4250. It is served by the Pennsyl- 
vania railway, the Camden & Trenton railway (an electric line, 
forming part of the line between Philadelphia and New York) 
and by freight and passenger steamboat lines on the Delaware. 
Bordentown is attractively sitSiaterd 6n a bfoad -"level plain; 65 ft. 



above the river, with wide, beautifully shaded streets. The city 
is the seat of the Bordentown Military Institute (with the Wood- 
ward memorial library), of the state manual training and 
industrial school for coloured youth, of the St Joseph's convent 
and mother-house of the Sisters of Mercy, and of St Joseph's 
academy for girls. There are ship-yards, iron foundries and 
forges, machine shops, shirt factories, a pottery for the manu- 
facture of sanitary earthenware, a woollen mill and canning 
factories. The first settlers on the site of the city were several 
Quaker families v/ho came in the 18th century. Bordentown 
was laid out by Joseph Borden, in whose honour it was named; 
was incorporated as a borough in 1825; was re-incorporated in 
1849, and was chartered as a city in 1867. It was the home for 
some years of Francis Hopkinson and of his son Joseph Hopkin- 
son (whose residences are still standing), and from 1817 to 1832 
and in 1837-1839 was the home of Joseph Bonaparte, ex-king 
of Spain, who lived on a handsome estate known as " Bonaparte's 
Park," which he laid out with considerable magnificence. Here 
he entertained many distinguished visitors, including Lafayette. 
The legislature of New Jersey passed a special law, enabling him, 
as an alien, to own real property, and it is said to have been in 
reference to this that the state received its nickname " Spain." 
Prince Napoleon Lucien Charles Murat, the second son of 
Joachim Murat, also lived here for many years; and the estate 
known as " Ironsides " was long the home of Rear-Admiral 
Charles Stewart. The Camden & Amboy railway, begun in 1831 
and completed from Bordentown to South Amboy (34 m.) in 
1832, was one of the first railways in the United States; in 
September 183 1 the famous engine "Johnny Bull," built in 
England and imported for this railway, had its first trial at 
Bordentown, and a monument now marks the site where the first 
rails were laid. 

See E. M. Woodward, Bonaparte's Park and the Murats (Trenton, 
1879). 

BORDERS, THE, a name applied to the territory on both sides 
of the boundary line between England and Scotland. The term 
has also a literary and historical as well as a geographical sense, 
and is most frequently employed of the Scottish side. The line 
begins on the coast of Berwickshire at a spot 3 m. N. by W. of 
Berwick, and, after running a short distance W. and S., reaches 
the Tweed near the village of Paxton, whence it keeps to the 
river to a point just beyond Carham. There it strikes off S.S.E. 
to the Cheviot Hills, the watershed of which for 35 m. constitutes 
the boundary, which is thereafter formed by a series of streams — 
Bells Burn, the Kershope, Liddel and Esk. After following the 
last named for 1 m. it cuts across country due west to the Sark, 
which it follows to the river's mouth at the head of the Solway 
Firth. The length of the boundary thus described is 108 m., 
but in a direct line from the Solway to the North Sea the distance 
is only 70 m. At the extreme east end a small district of 8 sq. m., 
consisting of the tract north of the Tweed which is not included 
in Scotland, forms the " bounds " or " liberties " of Berwick, or 
the country of the borough and town of Berwick-on-Tweed. At 
the extreme west between the Sark and Esk as far up the latter 
as its junction with the Liddel, there was a strip of country, a 
" No man's land," for generations the haunt of outlaws and 
brigands. This was called the Debatable Land, because the 
possession of it was a constant source of contention between 
England and Scotland until its boundaries were finally adjusted 
in 1552. The English Border counties are Northumberland and 
Cumberland, the Scottish Berwick, Roxburgh and Dumfries; 
though historically, and still by usage, the Scottish shires of 
Selkirk and Peebles have always been classed as Border shires. 
On the English side the region is watered by the Till, Bowmont, 
Coquet, Rede and North Tyne; on the Scottish by the Tweed, 
Whiteadder, Leet, Kale, Jed, Kershope, Liddel, Esk and Sark. 
Physically there is a marked difference between the country on 
each side. On the southern it mostly consists of lofty, bleak 
moorland, affording subsistence for sheep and cattle, and rugged 
glens and ravines, while on the northern there are many stretches 
of fertile soil, especially in the valleys and dales, and the landscape 
is often romarrffe and beautiful. Railway communication is 



246 



BORDIGHERA— BORDONE 



supplied by the east coast route to Berwick, the Waverley route 
through Liddesdale, the London & North-Western by Carlisle, 
the North British branch from Berwick to St Boswells, and 
the North Eastern lines from Berwick to Kelso, Alnwick to 
Coldstream, and Newcastle to Carlisle. 

At frequent intervals during a period of 1 500 years the region 
was the scene of strife and lawlessness. The Roman road of 
Watling Street crossed the Cheviots at Brownhartlaw (1664 ft.), 
close to the camp of Ad Fines, by means of which the warlike 
Brigantes on the south and the Gadeni and Otadeni on the north 
were held in check, while another Roman road, the Wheel 
Causeway, passed into Scotland near the headwaters of the 
North Tyne and Liddel. (For early history see Lothian; 
Northumbria; Strathclyde.) In the 12th century were 
founded the abbeys of Hexham and Alnwick, the priory church 
of Lindisfarne and the cathedral of Carlisle on the English side, 
and on the Scottish the abbeys of Jedburgh, Kelso, Melrose and 
Dryburgh. The deaths of Alexander III. (1286) and Margaret 
the Maid of Norway (1290), whose right to the throne had been 
acknowledged, plunged the country into the wars of the suc- 
cession and independence, and until the union of the crowns 
in 1603 the borders were frequently disturbed. Berwick and 
Carlisle were repeatedly assailed, and battles took place at 
Halidon Hill (1333), Otterburn (1388), Nisbet (1402), Homiidon 
(1402), Piperden (1435), Hedgeley Moor (1464), Flodden (1513), 
Solway Moss (1542), and Ancrum Moor (1544), in addition to 
many fights arising out of family feuds and raids fomented by 
the Armstrongs, Eiiots, Grahams, Johnstones, Maxwells and 
other families, of which the most serious were the encounters at 
Arkenholme (Langholm) in 1455, the Raid of Reidswire (1575), 
and the bloody combat at Dryfe Sands (1593). The English 
expeditions of 1544 and 1545 were exceptionally disastrous, since 
they involved the destruction of the four Scottish border abbeys, 
the sack of many towns, and the obliteration of Roxburgh. 
The only other important conflict belongs to the Covenanters' 
time, when the marquess of Montrose was defeated at Philip- 
haugh in 1645. Partly for the defence of the kingdoms and 
partly to overawe the freebooters and mosstroopers who were 
a perpetual menace to the peace until they were suppressed in 
the 17th century, castles were erected at various points on both 
sides of the border. 

Even during the period when relations between England and 
Scotland were strained, the sovereigns of both countries recog- 
nized it to be their duty to protect property and regulate the 
lawlessness of the borders. The frontier was divided into the 
East, Middle and West Marches, each under the control of an 
English and a Scots warden. The posts were generally filled by 
eminent and capable men who had to keep the peace, enforce 
punishment for breach of the law, and take care that neither 
country encroached on the boundary of the other. The wardens 
usually conferred once a year on matters of common interest, 
and as a rale their meetings were conducted in a friendly spirit, 
though in 1575 a display of temper led to the affair of the Raid 
of Reidswire. The appointment was not only one of the most 
important in this quarter of the kingdom, but lucrative as well, 
part of the fines and forfeits falling to the warden, who was also 
entitled to ration and forage for his retinue. On the occasion of 
his first public progress to London, James I. of England attended 
service in Berwick church (March 27, 1603) " to return thanks 
for his peaceful entry into his new dominions." Anxious to 
blot out all memory of the bitter past, he forbade the use of 
the word " Borders," hoping that the designation " Middle 
Shires " might take its place. Frontier fortresses were also to 
be dismantled and their garrisons reduced to nominal strength. 
In course of time this policy had the desired effect, though the 
expression " Borders " proved too convenient geographically 
to be dropped, the king's proposed amendment being in point 
of fact merely sentimental and, in the relative positions then and 
now of England and Scotland, meaningless. Some English 
strongholds, such as Alnwick, Chillingham, Ford and Naworth, 
have been modernized; others, like Norham, Wark.and Wark- 
worth, are picturesque ruins; but most of the Scottish fortresses 



have been demolished and their sites built over, or are now 
represented by grass-grown mounds. Another familiar feature 
in the landscape is the chain of peel towers crossing the country 
from coast to coast. Many were homes of marauding chiefs, and 
nearly all were used as beacon-stations to give alarm of foray or 
invasion. Early in the 18th century the Scottish gipsies found a 
congenial home on the Roxburghshire side of the Cheviots; and 
at a later period the Scottish border became notorious for a 
hundred years as offering hospitality to runaway couples who 
were clandestinely married at Gretna Green, Coldstream or 
Lamberton. The toll-house of Lamberton displayed the follow- 
ing intimation — " Ginger-beer sold here and marriages per- 
formed on the most reasonable terms." 

Border ballads occupy a distinctive place in English literature. 
Many of them were rescued from oblivion by Sir Walter Scott, 
who ransacked the district for materials for his Minstrelsy oj 
the Scottish Border, which appeared in 1802 and 1803. Border 
traditions and folklore, and the picturesque, pathetic and stirring 
incidents of which the country was so often the scene, appealed 
strongly to James Hogg (" the Ettrick Shepherd "), John 
Wilson (" Christopher North "), and John Mackay Wilson (1804- 
1835), whose Tales 0} the Borders, published in 1835, lone enjoyed 
popular favour. 

Besides the works just mentioned see Sir Herbert Maxwell, History 
of Dumfries and Galloway (1896); George Ridpath, Border History 
of England and Scotland (1776) ; Professor John Veilch, History and 
Poetry of the Scottish Border (1877); Sir George Douglas, History 
of the Border Counties (Scots), (1899); W. S. Crockett, The Scott 
Country (1902). 

BORDIGHERA, a town of Liguria, Italy, in the province of 
Porto Maurizio, 91 m. S.W. of Genoa by rail, and 3 m. E.N.E. 
of Ventimiglia. Pop. (1901) 4673. It is a favourite winter 
resort, especially for visitors from England, and is situated in 
beautiful coast scenery. It has fine gardens, and its flowers and 
palms are especially famous: the former are largely exported, 
while the latter serve for the supply of palm branches for St 
Peter's at Rome and other churches on Palm Sunday. The new 
museum contains a unique collection of the flora of the Riviera. 
From 1682 until the Napoleonic period, Bordighera was the capital 
of a small republic of the villages of the neighbouring valleys. 

BORDONE, PARIS (1495-1570), Venetian painter, was born 
at Treviso, and entered the bottega of Titian in 1509. Vasari, 
to whom we are indebted for nearly all the facts of Bordone's 
life — later research has not added much to our knowledge — 
holds that he did not spend many years with Titian and set 
himself to imitate the manner of Giorgione to the utmost of his 
power. As a matter of fact, the Giorgionesque traits in Bordone's 
earlier works are derived entirely from Titian, whom he imitated 
so closely that to this day some of his paintings pass under 
Titian's name. Crowe and Cavalcaselle and Dr Bode ascribe 
to Bordone the " Baptism of Christ " in the Capitoline gallery, 
but Morelli sees in it an early work of Titian. Paris Bordone 
subsequently executed many important mural paintings in 
Venice, Treviso and Vicenza, all of which have perished. In 
1538 he was invited to France by Francis I., at whose court he 
painted many portraits, though no trace of them is to be found 
in French collections, the two portraits at the Louvre being later 
acquisitions. On his return journey he undertook works of 
great importance for the Fugger palace at Augsburg, which 
again have been lost sight of. Bordone's pictures are of very 
unequal merit. They have a certain nobility of style, and that 
golden harmony of colour which he derived from Titian, together 
with the realistic conception of the human figure and the dignified 
character of his portraiture. On the other hand, his nudes are a 
little coarse in form, and the action of his figures is frequently 
unnatural and affected. A true child of the Renaissance, he 
also painted a number of religious pictures, numerous mytho- 
logical scenes, allegories, nymphs, cupids and subjects from 
Ovid's fables, but he excelled as a portraitist. His principal 
surviving work is the " Fisherman and Doge " at the Venice 
Academy. The National Gallery, London, has a " Daphnis and 
Chloe" and a portrait of a lady, whilst a "Holy Family" from 
his brush is at Bridgwater House. Other important works of 



130RE— BORGHESE 



247 



his are the " Madonna " in the Tadini collection at Lovere, 
the paintings in the Duomo of Treviso, two mythological pictures 
at the Villa Borghese and the Doria palace in Rome, the " Chess 
Players " in Berlin, a very little-known portrait of superb 
quality in the possession of the landgrave of Hesse at Kronberg, 
and a " Baptism of Christ " in Philadelphia. Besides these, 
there are examples of his art in Bergamo, Milan, Genoa, Padua, 
Siena, Venice, Florence, Munich, Dresden and Vienna. 

Beyond some references in general works on Italian painting, 
very little has been written on Paris Bordone since the days of 
Vasari. In 1900 the committee of the fourth centenary of Paris 
Bordone, Treviso, published L. Barlo and G. Biscaro's Delia Vita 
e delle Opere di Paris Bordone ; and the Nuova A ntologia (November 
16, 1900). contains a sixteen-page paper on Paris Bordone by P. G. 
Molmenti. (P. G. K.) 

BORE, a high tidal wave rushing up a narrow estuary or 
tidal river. The bore of the Severn is produced by a tide that 
rises 18 ft. in an hour and a half. This body of water becomes 
compressed in the narrowing funnel-shaped estuary, and heaped 
up into an advancing wave extending from bank to bank. The 
phenomenon is also particularly well illustrated in the Bay of 
Fundy. The origin of this word is doubtful, but it is usually 
referred to a Scandinavian word bdra, a wave, billow. The other 
name by which the phenomenon is known, " eagre," is also of 
unknown origin. There is, of course, no connexion with " bore," 
to make a hole by piercing or drilling, which is a common Teutonic 
word, cf. Ger. bohren, the Indo-European root being seen in Lat. 
forare, to pierce, Gr. 4>a.pos, plough. For the making of deep 
holes for shafts, wells, &c, see Boring. The substantival use of 
this word is generally confined to the circular cavity of objects 
of tubular shape, particularly of a gun, hence the internal 
diameter of a gun, its " calibre " (see Gun). A " bore " is also 
a tiresome, wearying person, particularly one who persistently 
harps on one subject, in or out of season, whatever interest his 
audience may take in it. This has generally been taken to be 
merely a metaphorical use of " bore," to pierce. The earliest 
sense, however, in which it is found in English (1766, in certain 
letters printed in Jesse's Life of George Selwyn) is that of ennui, 
and a French origin is suggested. The New English Dictionary 
conjectures a possible source in Fr. bourrer, to stuff, satiate. 

BOREAS, in Greek mythology, a personification of the north 
wind. He was described as the son of Astraeus and Eos, 
brother of Hesperus, Notus and Zephyrus. His dwelling-place 
was on Mount Haemus in Thrace, or at Salmydessus, near the 
country of the Hyperboreans. He was said to have carried off 
the beautiful Oreithyia, a daughter of Erechtheus, king of Athens, 
when he found her leading the dance at a festival, or gathering 
flowers on the banks of the Ilissus or some other spot in the 
neighbourhood of Athens. He had before wooed her in vain, 
and now carried her off to Mount Haemus, where they lived as 
king and queen of the winds, and had two sons, Zetes and Calais, 
and two daughters, Cleopatra and Chione (Apollodorus iii. 15; 
Ovid,. Metam. vi. 677). For the loss of Oreithyia the Athenians 
in after times counted on Boreas's friendliness, and were assured 
of it when he sent storms which wrecked the Persian fleet at 
Athos and at Sepias (Herodotus vii. 189). For this they erected 
to him a sanctuary or altar near the Ilissus, and held a festival 
(Boreasmos) in his honour. Thurii also, which was a colony 
of Athens, offered sacrifice to him as Euergetes every year, 
because he had destroyed the hostile fleet of Dionysius the elder 
(Aelian, Var. Hist. xii. 61). In works of art Boreas was repre- 
sented as bearded, powerful, draped against cold, and winged. 
On the Tower of the Winds at Athens he is figured holding a 
shell, such as is blown by Tritons. Boreas carrying off Oreithyia 
is the subject of a beautiful bronze relief in- the British Museum, 
found in the island of Calymna. The same subject occurs 
frequently on'painted Greek vases. 

BOREL, PETRUS, whose full name was Pierre Joseph 
Borel d'Hauterive (1809-18 59), French writer, was born at 
Lyons on the 26th of June 1809. His father had been ruined 
by taking part in the resistance offered by the Lyonnese 
royalists against the Convention, and Petrus Borel was educated 
in Paris to be an architect. He soon abandoned his profession 



to become one of the most violent partisans of the Romantic 
movement. His extravagant sentiments were illustrated in 
various volumes: Rhapsodies (1832), poems; Champavert, 
contes immoraux (1833); Madame Putiphar (1839), &c. His 
works did not. rescue him from poverty, but through the kindness 
of Theophile Gautier and Mme de Girardin he obtained a small 
place in the civil service. He died at Mostaganem in Algeria on 
the 14th of July 1859. 

See Jules Claretie, Petrus Borel, le Lycanthrope (1865) ; and Ch. 
Asselineau, Bibliographie romantique (1872). 

BORELLI, GIOVANNI ALFONSO (1608-1679), Italian 
physiologist and physicist, was born at Naples on the 28th of 
January 1608. He was appointed professor of mathematics 
at Messina in 1649 and at Pisa in 1656. In 1667 he returned to 
Messina, but in 1674 was obliged to retire to Rome, where he lived 
under the protection of Christina, queen of Sweden, and died on 
the 31st of December 1679. His best-known work is De motu 
animalium (Rome, 1680-168 1), in which he sought to explain the 
movements of the animal body on mechanical principles ; he 
thus ranks as the founder of the iatrophysical school. In a letter, 
Del movimento della cometa apparsa il mese di decetnbre 1664, 
published in 1665 under the pseudonym Pier Maria Mutoli, 
he was the first to suggest the idea of a parabolic path; and 
another of his astronomical works was Theorica mediceorum 
planetarum ex causis physicis deducta (Florence, 1666) , in which he 
considered the influence of attraction on the satellites of Jupiter. 
He also wrote: Della Causa delle Febbri maligni (Pisa, 1658); 
De Renum usu Judicium (Strassburg, 1664); Euclides Restitulus 
(Pisa, 1658); Apollonii Pergaei Conicorum libri v., vi. et vii. 
(Florence, 1661); De vi percussionis (Bologna, 1667); Meteoro- 
logia Aetnea (Reggio, 1669); and De motionibus naturalibus 
a gravitate pendentibus (Bologna, 1670). 

BORGA (Finnish Porvoo), a seaport in the province of Nyland, 
grand duchy of Finland, situated at the entrance of the river 
Borga into the Gulf of Finland, about 33 m. by rail N.W. of 
Helsingfors. Pop. (1810) 1693; (1870) 3478; (1904) 5255. 
It is the seat of a Lutheran bishopric which extends over the 
provinces of Viborg and St Michel with portions of Tavastehus 
and Nyland; it possesses a beautiful cathedral, and a high school 
(where the well-known Finnish poet Runeberg lectured for many 
years), and is the seat of a court of appeal. The weaving of 
sail-cloth and the manufacture of tobacco are the principal 
industries, and the chief articles of trade are wood, butter and 
furs. Borga was once a city of great dignity and importance, 
but the rapid growth of Helsingfors has somewhat eclipsed it. 
In 1809, when the estates of Finland were summoned to a special 
diet to decide the future of the country, Borga. was the place of 
meeting, and it was in the cathedral that the emperor Alexander 
I. pledged himself as grand duke ' of Finland to maintain the 
constitution and liberties of the grand duchy. 

BORGHESE, a noble Italian family of Sienese origin, first 
mentioned in 1238, a member of which, Marcantonio Borghese, 
settled in Rome and was the father of Camillo Borghese (1550- 
1620), elected pope under the title of Paul V. (1605). Paul 
created his nephew prince of Vivero on the 17th of November 
1609, and Philip III. of Spain conferred the title of prince of 
Sulmona on him in 1610. The family took its place among the 
higher Roman nobility by the marriage of the prince's son Paolo 
with Olimpia, heiress of the Aldobrandini family, in 1614. In 
1803 Camillo Filippo Ludovico, Prince Borghese (b. 1775), 
married Pauline, sister of the emperor Napoleon, and widow of 
General Leclerc. In 1806 he was made duke of Guastalla, and 
for some years acted as governor of the Piedmontese and Genoese 
provinces. After the fall of Napoleon he fixed his residence at 
Florence, where he died in 1832. The Borghese palace at Rome 
is one of the most magnificent buildings in the city, and contained 
a splendid gallery of pictures, most of which have been transferred 
to the Villa Borghese outside the Porto del Popolo, now Villa 
Umberto I., the property of the Italian government. 

See A. von Reumont, Geschichte der Stadt Rom, iii. 605, 609. 
617, &c. ; Almanack de Gotha (Gotha, 1902); J. H. Douglas, The 
Principal Noble Families of Rome (Rome, 1905). 



248 



BORGHESI— BORGIA, C. 



BORGHESI, BARTOLOMMEO (1781-1860), Italian anti- 
quarian, was born at Savignano, near Rimini, on the nth of 
Julyi78i. He studied at Bologna and Rome. Having weakened 
his eyesight by the study of documents of the middle ages, he 
turned his attention to epigraphy and numismatics. At Rome 
he arranged and catalogued several collections of coins, amongst 
them those of the Vatican, a task which he undertook for Pius 
VII. In consequence of the disturbances of 1821, Borghesi 
retired to San Marino, where he died on the 16th of April i860. 
Although mainly an enthusiastic student, he was for some time 
podesta of the little republic. His monumental work, Nuovi 
Frammenti dei Fasti Consolari Capitolini (1818-1820), attracted 
the attention of the learned world as furnishing positive bases 
for the chronology of Roman history, while his contributions to 
Italian archaeological journals established his reputation as a 
numismatist and antiquarian. Before his death, Borghesi con- 
ceived the design of publishing a collection of all the Latin 
inscriptions of the Roman world. The work was taken up by 
the Academy of Berlin under the auspices of Mommsen, and the 
result was the Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum. Napoleon III. 
ordered the publication of a complete edition of the works of 
Borghesi. This edition, in ten volumes, of which the first 
appeared in 1862, was not completed until 1897. 

BORGIA, CESARE, duke of Valentinois and Romagna (1476- 
I 5°7)> was the son of Pope Alexander VI. by Vanozza dei 
Cattanei. He was born at Rome while his father was cardinal, 
and on the latter's elevation to the papacy (1492) he was created 
archbishop of Valencia, and a year later cardinal. Cesare was 
Alexander's favourite son, and it was for him that the pope's 
notorious nepotism was most extensively practised. In the early 
years of his father's pontificate he led a profligate life at the 
Vatican. When Charles VIII. left Rome for the conquest of 
Naples (January 25, 1495), Cesare accompanied him as a hostage 
for the pope's good behaviour, but he escaped at Velletri and 
returned to Rome. He soon began to give proofs of the violence 
for which he afterwards became notorious; when in 1497 his 
brother Giovanni, duke of Gandia, was murdered, the deed was 
attributed, in all probability with reason, to Cesare. It was 
suggested that the motive of the murder was the brothers' 
rivalry in the affection of Donna Sancha, wife of Giuffre, the 
pope's youngest son, while there were yet darker hints at in- 
cestuous relations of Cesare and the ■ duke with their sister 
Lucrezia. But it is more probable that Cesare, who contem- 
plated exchanging his ecclesiastical dignities for a secular career, 
regarded his brother's splendid position with envy, and was 
determined to enjoy the whole of his father's favours. 

In July 1497 Cesare went to Naples as papal legate and 
crowned Frederick of Aragon king. Now that the duke of 
Gandia was dead, the pope needed Cesare to carry out his political 
schemes, and tried to arrange a wealthy marriage for him. 
Cesare wished to marry Carlotta, the daughter of the king of 
Naples, but both she and her father resolutely refused an alliance 
with " a priest, the bastard of a priest." In August 1498, Cesare 
in the consistory asked for the permission of the cardinals and 
the pope to renounce the priesthood, and the latter granted it 
" for the good of his soul." On the 1st of October he set forth 
for France with a magnificent retinue as papal legate to Louis 
XII., to bring him the pope's bull annulling his marriage with 
Jeanne of France (Louis wished to marry Anne of Brittany). 
In exchange he received the duchy of Valentinois, as well as 
military assistance for his own enterprises. He found Carlotta 
of Naples in France, and having again tried to win her over in 
vain, he had to content himself with Charlotte d'Albret, sister 
of the king of Navarre (May 1499) . Alexander now contemplated 
sending Cesare to Romagna to subdue the turbulent local despots, 
and with the help of the French king carve a principality for 
himself out of those territories owing nominal allegiance to the 
pope. Cesare made Cesena his headquarters, and with an army 
consisting of 300 French lances, 4000 Gascons and Swiss, besides 
Italian troops, he attacked Imola, which surrendered at once, 
and then besieged Forli, held by Caterina Sforza (q.v.), the 
widow of Girolamo Riario. She held out gallantly, but was at 



last forced to surrender on the 22nd of January 1500; Cesare 
treated her with consideration, and she ended her days in a 
convent. The Sforzas having expelled the French from Milan, 
Cesare returned to Rome in February, his schemes checked for 
the moment; his father rewarded him for his successes by 
making him gonfaloniere of the church and conferring many 
honours on him; he remained in Rome and took part in bull 
fights and other carnival festivities. In July occurred the 
murder of the duke of Bisceglie, Lucrezia Borgia's third husband. 
He was attacked by assassins on the steps of St Peter's and 
badly wounded; attendants carried him to a cardinal's house, 
and, fearing poison, he was nursed only by his wife and Sancha, 
his sister-in-law. Again Cesare was suspected as the instigator 
of the deed, and in fact he almost admitted it himself. Bisceglie 
was related to the Neapolitan dynasty, with whose enemies the 
pope was allied, and he had had a quarrel with Cesare. When it 
appeared that he was recovering from his wounds, Cesare had 
him murdered, but not apparently without provocation, for, 
according to the Venetian ambassador Cappello, the duke had 
tried to murder Cesare first. 

In October 1 500 Cesare again set out for the Romagna, on the 
strength of Venetian friendship, with an army of 10,000 men. 
Pandolfo Malatesta of Rimini and Giovanni Sforza of Pesaro 
fled, and those cities opened their gates to Cesare. Faenza held 
out, for the people were devoted to their lord, Astorre Manfredi, 
a handsome and virtuous youth of eighteen. Manfredi surren- 
dered in April 1501, on the promise that his life should be spared; 
but Cesare broke his word, and sent him a prisoner to Rome, 
where he was afterwards foully outraged and put to death. 
After taking Castel Bolognese he returned to Rome in June, to 
take part in the Franco-Spanish intrigues for the partition of 
Naples. He was now lord of an extensive territory, and the 
pope created him duke of Romagna. His cruelty, his utter want 
of scruple, and his good fortune made him a terror to all Italy. 
His avidity was insatiable and he could brook no opposition; 
but, unlike his father, he was morose, silent and unsympathetic. 
His next conquests were Camerino and Urbino, but his power 
was now greatly shaken by the conspiracy of La Magione (a 
castle near Perugia where the plotters met). Several of the 
princes deposed by him, the Orsinis, and some of his own captains, 
such as Vitellozzo Vitelli (q.v.), Oliverotto da Fermo, and G. P. 
Baglioni, who had been given estates but feared to lose them, 
joined forces to conspire against the Borgias. Risings broke out 
at Urbino and in Romagna, and the papal troops were defeated; 
Cesare could find no allies, and it seemed as though all Italy was 
about to turn against the hated family, when the French king 
promised help, and this was enough to frighten the confederates 
into coming to terms. Most of them had shown very little 
political or military skill, and several were ready to betray each 
other. But Cesare, while trusting no one, proved a match for 
them all. During his queries in northern Romagna, Vitelli,
Oliverotto, Paolo Orsini, and the duke of Gravina, to show their 
repentance, seized Senigallia, which still held for the duke of 
Urbino, in his name. Cesare arrived at that town, decoyed the 
unsuspecting condoltieri into his house, had them all arrested, and 
twoof them, Vitelli and Oliverotto, strangled (December 31, 1502). 

He was back in Rome early in 1503, and took part in reducing 
the last rebel Orsinis. He was gathering troops for a new ex- 
pedition in central Italy in the summer, when both he and his 
father were simultaneously seized with fever. The pope died on 
the 18th of August, while Cesare was still incapacitated, and this 
unfortunate coincidence proved his ruin; it was the one contin- 
gency for which he had not provided. On all sides his enemies 
rose up against him; in Romagna the deposed princes prepared 
to regain their own, and the Orsinis raised their heads once more 
in Rome. Cesare's position was greatly shaken, and when he 
tried to browbeat the cardinals by means of Don Michelotto 
and his bravos, they refused to be intimidated; he had to leave 
Rome in September, trusting that the Spanish cardinals would 
elect a candidate friendly to his house. At the conclave Francesco 
Todeschini-Piccolomini, was elected as Piu? III., and he showed 
every disposition to be peaceful and respectable, btft he was old 



BORGIA, F.— BORGIA, L. 



249 



and in bad health. Cesare's dominion at once began to fall to 
pieces; Guidobaldo, duke of Urbino, returned to his duchy 
with Venetian help; and the lords of Piombino, Rimini and 
Pesaro soon regained their own; Cesena, defended by a governor 
faithful to Cesare, alone held out. Pius III. died on the 18th of 
October 1503, and a new conclave was held. Cesare, who could 
still count on the Spanish cardinals, wished to prevent the 
election of Giuliano della Rovere, the enemy of his house, but the 
latter's chances were so greatly improved that it was necessary 
to come to terms with him. On the 1st of November he was 
elected, and assumed the name of Julius II. He showed no ill- 
will towards Cesare, but declared that the latter's territories 
must be restored to the church, for " we desire the honour of 
recovering what our predecessors have wrongfully alienated." 
Venice hoped to intervene in Romagna and establish her pro- 
tectorate over the principalities, but this Julius was determined 
to prevent, and after trying in vain to use Cesare as a means 
of keeping out the Venetians, he had him arrested. Borgia's 
power was now at an end, and he was obliged to surrender all his 
castles in Romagna save Cesena, Forli and Bettinoro, whose 
governors refused to accept an order of surrender from a master 
who was a prisoner. Finally, it was agreed that if Cesare were 
set at liberty he would surrender the castles; this having been 
accomplished, he departed for Naples, where the Spaniards were 
in possession. The Spanish governor, Gonzalo de Cordova, had 
given him a safe-conduct, and he was meditating fresh plans, 
when Gonzalo arrested him by the order of Ferdinand of Spain as 
a disturber of the peace of Italy (May 1504). In August he was 
sent to Spain, where he remained a prisoner for two years; in 
November 1 506 he made his escape, and fled to the court of his 
brother-in-law, the king of Navarre, under whom he took service. 
While besieging the castle of Viana, held by the rebellious count 
of Lerin, he was killed (March 12, 1507). 

Cesare Borgia was a type of the adventurers with which the 
Italy of the Renaissance swarmed, but he was cleverer and more 
unscrupulous than his rivals. His methods of conquest were 
ferocious and treacherous; but once the conquest was made he 
governed his subjects with firmness and justice, so that his rule 
was preferred to the anarchy of factions and local despots. But 
he was certainly not a man of genius, as has long been imagined, 
and his success was chiefly due to the support of the papacy; 
once his father was dead his career was at an end, and he could no 
longer play a prominent part in Italian affairs. His fall proved 
on how unsound a basis his system had been built up. 

The chief authorities for the life of Cesare Borgia are the same 
as those of Alexander VI., especially M. Creighton's History of the 
Papacy, vol. v. (London, 1897) ; F. Gregorovius's Geschichte der Stadt 
Rom, vol. vii. (Stuttgart, 1881) ; and P. Villari's Machiavelli (London 
1892); also C. Yriarte, Cesar Borgia (Paris, 1889), an admirable 
piece of writing; Schubert-Soldern, Die Borgia und ihre Zeit (Dresden, 
1902), which contains the latest discoveries on the subject; and E. 
Alvisi, Cesare Borgia, Duca di Romagna (Imola, 1878). (L. V.*) 

BORGIA, FRANCIS (1510-1572), Roman Catholic saint, 
duke of Gandia, and general of the order of Jesuits, was born at 
Gandia (Valencia) on the 10th of October 1510, and from boy- 
hood was remarkable for his piety. Educated from his twelfth 
year at Saragossa under the charge of his uncle the archbishop, 
he had begun to show a strong inclination towards the monastic 
life, when his father sent him in 1528 to the court of Charles V. 
Here he distinguished himself, and on his marriage with Eleanor 
de Castro, a Portuguese lady of high rank, he was created 
marquis of Lombay, and was appointed master of the horse to 
the empress. He accompanied Charles on his African expedition 
in 1535, and also into Provence in 1536; and on the death of 
the empress in 1539 he was deputed to convoy the body to the 
burial-place in Granada. This sad duty confirmed his determina- 
tion to leave the court, and also, should he survive his consort, 
to embrace the monastic life. On his return to Toledo, however, 
new honours were thrust upon him, much against his will; he 
was made viceroy of Catalonia and commander of the order of St 
James. At Barcelona, the seat of his government, he lived a 
life of great austerity, but discharged his official duties with 
energy and efficiency until 1543, when, having succeeded his 



father in the dukedom, he at length obtained permission to resign 
his viceroyalty and to retire to a more congenial mode of life at 
Gandia. Having already held some correspondence with Ignatius 
Loyola, he now powerfully encouraged the recently founded 
order of Jesus. One of his first cares at Gandia was to build 
a Jesuit college; and on the death of Eleanor in 1546, he resolved 
to become himself a member of the society. The difficulties 
arising from political and family circumstances were removed by 
a papal dispensation, which allowed him, in the interests of his 
young children, to retain his dignities and worldly possessions 
for four years after taking the vows. In 1550 he visited Rome, 
where he was received with every mark of distinction, and where 
he furnished the means for building the Collegium Romanum. 
Returning to Spain in the following year, he formally resigned his 
rank and estate in favour of his eldest son, assumed the Jesuit 
habit, was ordained priest, and entered upon a life of penance and 
prayer. At his own earnest request, seconded by Loyola, a 
proposal that he should be created a cardinal by Julius III. 
was departed from; and at the command of his superior he 
employed himself in the work of itinerant preaching. In 1554 
he was appointed commissary-general of the order in Spain, 
Portugal and the Indies, in which capacity he showed great 
activity, and was successful in founding many new and thriving 
colleges. In 1556, shortly after Charles V. retired, Borgia had 
an interview with him, but would not yield to his inducements 
to transfer his allegiance to the older order of Hieronymites. 
Some time afterwards Borgia was employed by Charles to conduct 
negotiations with reference to a project which was to secure for 
Don Carlos of Spain the Portuguese succession in the event of 
the death of his cousin Don Sebastian. On the death of Lainez 
in 1 565, Francis Borgia was chosen to succeed him as third general 
of the Jesuits. In this capacity he showed great zeal and ad- 
ministrative skill; and so great was the progress of the society 
under his government that he has sometimes been called " its 
second founder." The peculiarities which are most characteristic 
of the order were, however, derived from Loyola and Lainez, 
rather than from Borgia, whose ideal was a simple monasticism 
rather than a life of manifold and influential contact with the 
world. He died at Rome on the 30th of September 1572. He 
was beatified by Urban VIII. in 1624, and canonized by Clement 
X. in 1671, his festival being afterwards (1683) fixed by Innocent 
XL for the 10th of October. 

Several works by St Francis Borgia have been published, the 
principal of these being a series of Exercises similar to the Exercitia 
Spiritualia of Loyola, and a treatise Rhetorica Concionandi. The 
Opera Omnia were published at Brussels in 1675. His life was written 
by his confessor Pedro de Ribadeneira. See also A. Butler's Lives 
of the Saints, and the Breviarium Romanum (second nocturn for 
October 10). 

BORGIA, LUCREZIA (1480-1519), duchess of Ferrara, 
daughter of Cardinal Rodrigo Borgia, afterwards Pope Alexander 
VI. (q.v.), by his mistress Vanozza dei Cattanei, was born at 
Rome in 1480. Her early years were spent at her mother's house 
near her father's splendid palace; but later she was given over 
to the care of Adriana de Mila, a relation of Cardinal Borgia 
and mother-in-law of Giulia Farnese, another of his mistresses. 
Lucrezia was educated according to the usual curriculum of 
Renaissance ladies of rank, and was taught languages, music, 
embroidery, painting, &c; she was famed for her beauty and 
charm, but the corrupt court of Rome in which she was brought 
up was not conducive to a good moral education. Her father 
at first contemplated a Spanish marriage for her, and at the age 
of eleven she was betrothed to Don Cherubin de Centelles, a 
Spanish nobleman. But the engagement was broken off almost 
immediately, and Lucrezia was married by proxy to another 
Spaniard, Don Gasparo de Procida, son of the count of Aversa. 
On the death of Innocent VIII. (1492), Cardinal Borgia was 
elected pope as Alexander VI., and, contemplating a yet more 
ambitious marriage for his daughter, he annulled the union with 
Procida; in February 1493 Lucrezia was betrothed to Giovanni 
Sforza, lord of Pesaro, with whose family Alexander was now 
in close alliance. The wedding was celebrated in June; but when 
the pope's policy changed and he became friendly to the king 



2 5° 



BORGLUM— BORGU 



of Naples, the enemy of the house of Sforza, he planned the 
subjugation of the vassal lords of Romagna, and Giovanni, feeling 
his position insecure, left Rome for Pesaro with his wife. By- 
Christmas 1495 they were back in Rome; the pope had all his 
children around him, and celebrated the carnival with a series 
of magnificent festivities. But he decided that he had done with 
Sforza, and annulled the marriage on the ground of the husband's 
impotence (March 1497). In order to cement his alliance with 
Naples, he married Lucrezia to Alphonso of Aragon, duke of 
Bisceglie, a handsome youth of eighteen, related to the Nea- 
politan king. But he too realized the fickleness of the Borgias' 
favour when Alexander backed up Louis XII. of France in the 
latter's schemes for the conquest of Naples. Bisceglie fled from 
Rome, fearing for his life, and the pope sent Lucrezia to receive 
the homage of the city of Spoleto as governor. On her return to 
Rome in 1499, her husband, who really loved her, was induced 
to join her once more. A year later he was murdered by the 
order of her brother Cesare. After the death of Bisceglie, 
Lucrezia retired to Nepi, and then returned to Rome, where 
she acted for a time a,s regent during Alexander's absence. 
The latter now was anxious for a union between his daughter 
and Alphonso, son and heir to Ercole d' Este, duke of Ferrara. 
The negotiations were somewhat difficult, as neither Alphonso 
nor his father was anxious for a connexion with the house of 
Borgia, and Lucrezia's own reputation was not unblemished. 
However, by bribes and threats the opposition was overcome, 
and in September 1501 the marriage was celebrated by proxy 
with great magnificence in Rome. On Lucrezia's arrival at 
Ferrara she won over her reluctant husband by her youthful 
charm (she was only twenty- two), and from that time forth 
she led a peaceful life, about which there was hardly a breath 
of scandal. On the death of Ercole in 1505, her husband became 
duke, and she gathered many learned men, poets and artists at 
her court, among whom were Ariosto, Cardinal Bembo, Aldus 
Manutius the printer, and the painters Titian and Dosso Dossi. 
She devoted herself to the education of her children and to 
charitable works; the only tragedy connected with this period 
of her life is the murder of Ercole Strozzi, who is said to have 
admired her and fallen a victim to Alphonso's jealousy. She 
died on the 24th of June 1519, leaving three sons and a daughter 
by the duke of Ferrara, besides one son Rodrigo by the duke 
of Bisceglie, and possibly another of doubtful paternity. She 
seems to have been a woman of very mediocre talents, and only 
played a part in history because she was the daughter of 
Alexander VI. and the sister of Cesare Borgia. While she was 
in Rome she was probably no better and no worse than the women 
around her, but there is no serious evidence for the charges of 
incest with her father and brothers which were brought against 
her by the scandal-mongers of the time. 

See the bibliographies for Alexander VI. and Borgia, Cesare; 
and especially F. Gregorovius's Lucrezia Borgia (Stuttgart, 1874), 
the standard work on the subject; also W. Gilbert's Lucrezia Borgia, 
Duchess of Ferrara (London, 1869), which, while containing much 
information, is quite without historic value; and G. Campori's "Una 
Vittima della Storia, Lucrezia Borgia, " in the Nuova A ntologia (August 
31, 1866), which aims at the rehabilitation of Lucrezia. (L. V.*) 

BORGLUM, SOLON HANNIBAL (1868- ), American 
sculptor, was born in Ogden, Utah, on the 22nd of December 1868, 
the son of a Danish wood-carver. He studied under Louis F. 
Rebisso in the Cincinnati art school in 1895-1897, and under 
Fremiet in Paris. He took as his chief subjects incidents of 
western life, cowboys and Indians, with which he was familiar 
from his years on the ranch; notably " Lassoing Wild Horses," 
" Stampeding Wild Horses," " Last Round-up," " On the 
Border of White Man's Land," and " Burial on the Plains." 
His elder brother, Gutzon Borglum (b. 1867), also showed 
himself an artist of some originality. 

BORGOGNONE, AMBROGIO (fl. 1473-1524), Italian painter 
of the Milanese school, whose real name was Ambrogio Stefani 
da Fossano, was approximately contemporary with Leonardo da 
Vinci, but represented, at least during a great part of his career, 
the tendencies of Lombard art anterior to the arrival of that 
master — the tendencies which he had adopted and perfected 



from the hands of his predecessors Foppa and Zenale. We are 
not precisely informed of the dates either of the death or the birth 
of Borgognone, who was born at Fossano in Piedmont, and 
whose appellation was due to his artistic affiliation to the Bur- 
gundian school. His fame is principally associated with that of 
one great building, the Certosa, or church and convent of the 
Carthusians at Pavia, for which he worked much and in many 
different ways. It is certain, indeed, that there is no truth in the 
tradition which represents him as having designed, in 1473, the 
celebrated facade of the Certosa itself. His residence there 
appears to have been of eight years' duration, from i486, when 
he furnished the designs of the figures of the virgin, saints and 
apostles for the choir-stalls, executed in tarsia or inlaid wood 
work by Bartolommeo Pola, till 1494, when he returned to Milan. 
Only one known picture, an altar-piece at the church San 
Eustorgio, can with probability be assigned to a period of his 
career earlier than i486. For two years after his return to 
Milan he worked at the church of San Satiro in that city. From 
1497 he was engaged for some time in decorating with paintings 
the church of the Incoronata in the neighbouring town at Lodi. 
Our notices of him thenceforth are few and far between. In 
1508 he painted for a church in Bergamo; in 151 2 his signature 
appears in a public document of Milan; in 1524 — and this is our 
last authentic record — he painted a series of frescoes illustrating 
the life of St Sisinius in the portico of San Simpliciano at Milan. 
Without having produced any works of signal power or beauty, 
Borgognone is a painter of marked individuality. He holds an 
interesting place in the most interesting period of Italian art. 
The National Gallery, London, has two fair examples of his work 
— the separate fragments of a silk banner painted for the Certosa, 
and containing the heads of two kneeling groups severally of men 
and women; and a large altar-piece of the marriage of St Catherine, 
painted for the chapel of Rebecchino near Pavia. But to judge 
of his real powers and peculiar ideals — his system of faint and 
clear colouring, whether in fresco, tempera or oil; his somewhat 
slender and pallid types, not without something that reminds us 
of northern art in their Teutonic sentimentality as well as their 
Teutonic fidelity of portraiture; the conflict of his instinctive 
love of placidity and calm with a somewhat forced and borrowed 
energy in figures where energy is demanded, his conservatism in 
the matter of storied and minutely diversified backgrounds — to 
judge of these qualities of the master as they are, it is necessary 
to study first the great series of his frescoes and altar-pieces at 
the Certosa, and next those remains of later frescoes and altar- 
pieces at Milan and Lodi, in which we find the influence of 
Leonardo and of the new time mingling with, but not expelling, 
his first predilections. 

BORGO SAN DONNINO, a town and episcopal see of Emilia, 
Italy, in the province of Parma, 14 m. N.W. by rail from the 
town of Parma. Pop. (1901) town, 6251; commune, 12,109. It 
occupies the site of the ancient Fidentia, on the Via Aemilia; no 
doubt, as its name shows, of Roman origin. Here M. Lucullus 
defeated the democrats under Carbo in 82 b.c. It was inde- 
pendent under Vespasian, but seems soon to have become a village 
dependent on Parma. Its presefnt name comes from the martyr- 
dom of S. Domninus under Maximian in-A.D. 304. The cathedral, 
erected in honour of this saint, is one of the finest and best- 
preserved Lombardo-Romanesque churches of the nth- 13th 
centuries in north Italy. The upper part of the facade is incom- 
plete, but the lower, with its three portals and sculptures, is very 
fine; the interior is simple and well-proportioned, and has not 
been spoilt by restorations. For the benitier, a work of the early 
nth century, see Rdssegna d' 'Arte, 1905, 180. Not far from the 
town is the small church of S. Antonio del Viennese, a 13th- 
century structure in brick (ib., 1906, 2 2) . The Palazzo Comunale, 
in the Gothic-Lombard style, is a work of the 14th century. 
Borgo S. Donnino is an important centre for the produce and 
cattle of Emilia. (T. As.) 

BORGU, or Barba, an inland country of West Africa. The 
western part is included in the French colony of Dahomey (q.v.) ; 
the eastern division forms the Borgu province of the British 
protectorate of Nigeria. Borgu is bounded N.E. and E. by the 



BORIC ACID— BORING 



251 



Niger, S. by the Yoruba country, N. W. by Gurma. The country 
consists of an elevated plain traversed by rivers draining north 
or east to the Niger. The water-parting between the Niger basin 
and the coast streams of Dahomey and Lagos runs north-east 
and south-west near the western frontier. In about 10° N., 
below the town of Bussa, rapids block the course of the Niger, 
navigable up to that point from the sea. The soil is mostly 
fertile, and is fairly cultivated, producing in abundance millet, 
yams, plantains and limes. The acacia tree is common, and 
from it gum-arabic of good quality is obtained. From the nut 
of the horse-radish tree ben oil is expressed. Cattle are numerous 
and of excellent breed, and game is abundant. Borgu is in- 
habited by a number of pagan negro tribes, several of whom were 
dependent on the chief of Nikki, a town in the centre of the 
country, the chief being spoken of as sultan of Borgu. The king 
of Bussa was another more or less powerful potentate. In the 
early years of the 19th century Borgu was invaded by the Fula 
(q.v.), but the Bariba (as the people are called collectively) main- 
tained their independence. In 1894 Borgu became the object 
of rivalry between France and England. The Royal Niger 
Company, which had already concluded a treaty of protection 
with the king of Bussa, sent out Captain (afterwards Sir) F. D. 
Lugard to negotiate treaties with the king of Nikki and other 
chiefs, and Lugard succeeded in doing so a few days before the 
arrival of French expeditions from the west. Disregarding the 
British treaties, French officers concluded others with various 
chiefs, invaded Bussa and established themselves at various 
points on the Niger. To defend British interests, the West 
African Frontier Force was raised locally under Lugard's com- 
mand, and a period of great tension ensued, British and French 
troops facing one another at several places. A conflict was, how- 
ever, averted, and by the convention of June 1898 the western 
part of Borgu was declared French and the eastern British, the 
French withdrawing from all places on the lower Niger. 

The British portion of Borgu has an area of about 12,000 sq. m. 
Up to the period of inclusion within the protectorate of Nigeria 
little or nothing was known of the country, though there were 
interesting legends of the antiquity of its history. The population 
was entirely independent, and resisted with success not only the 
Fula from the north but also the armies of Dahomey and Mossi 
from the south and west. Travellers who attempted to penetrate 
this country had never returned. Since 1898 the country has 
been opened, and from being the most lawless and truculent of 
people the Bariba have become singularly amenable and law- 
abiding. Provincial courts are established, but there is little 
crime in the province. The British garrisons have been replaced 
by civil police. The assessment of taxes under British adminis- 
tration was successfully carried out in 1904, and taxes are collected 
without trouble. In south Borgu the people are agricultural but 
not industrious or inclined for trade. In the north there are 
some pastoral settlements of Fula. The Bariba themselves 
remain agricultural. Cart-roads have been constructed between 
the town of Kiama and the Niger. The agricultural resources of 
Borgu are great, and as the population increases with the 
cessation of war and by immigration the country should show 
marked development. Shea trees are abundant. Elephants are 
still to be found in the fifty-mile strip of forest land which 
stretches between the Niger and the interior of the province. 
The forest contains valuable sylvan products, and there are 
great possibilities for the cultivation of rubber. There are also 
extensive areas of fine land suitable for cotton, with the water- 
way of the Niger close at hand. Labour might be brought from 
Yorubaland close by, and a Yoruba colony has been experiment- 
ally started. (See Nigeria and Bussa.) 

BORIC ACID, or Boracic Acid, H3BO3, an acid obtained by 
dissolving boron trioxide in water. It was first prepared by 
Wilhelm Romberg (1652-1715) from borax, by the action of 
mineral acids, and was given the name sal sedativum Hombergi. 
The presence of boric acid or its salts has been noted in sea-water, 
whilst it is also said to exist in plants and especially in almost all 
fruits (A. H. Allen, Analyst, 1904, 301). The free acid is found 
native in certain volcanic districts such as Tuscany, the Lipari 



Islands and Nevada, issuing mixed with steam from fissures in 
the ground; it is also found as a constituent of many minerals 
(borax, boracite, boronatrocalcite and colemanite). 

The chief source of boric acid for commercial purposes is the 
Maremma of Tuscany, an extensive and desolate tract of country 
over which jets of vapour and heated gases (soffioni) and springs 
of boiling water spurt out from chasms and fissures. In some 
places the fissures open directly into the air, but in other parts 
of the district they are covered by small muddy lakes (lagoni). 
The soffioni contain a small quantity of boric acid (usually less 
than o-i%), together with a certain amount of ammoniacal 
vapours. In order to obtain the acid, a series of basins is con- 
structed over the vents, and so arranged as to permit of the 
passage of water through them by gravitation. Water is led into 
the highest basin and by the action of the heated gases is soon 
brought into a state of ebullition; after remaining in this basin 
for about a day, it is run off into the second one and is treated 
there in a similar manner. The operation is carried on through 
the entire series, until the liquor in the last basin contains about 
2 % of boric acid. It is then run into settling tanks, from which 
it next passes into the evaporating pans, which are shallow lead- 
lined pans heated by the gases of the soffioni. These pans are 
worked on a continuous system, the liquor in the first being 
concentrated and run off into a second, and so on, until it is 
sufficiently concentrated to crystallize. The crystals are purified 
by recrystallization from water. Artificial soffioni are sometimes 
prepared by boring through the rock until the fissures are reached, 
and the water so obtained is occasionally sufficiently impregnated 
with boric acid to be evaporated directly. Boric acid is also 
obtained from boronatrocalcite by treatment with sulphuric 
acid, followed by the evaporation of the solution so obtained. 
The residue is then heated in a current of superheated steam, in 
which the boric acid volatilizes and distils over. It may also be 
obtained by the decomposition of boracite with hot hydrochloric 
acid. In small quantities, it may be prepared by the addition 
of concentrated sulphuric acid to a cold saturated solution of 
borax. 

Na 2 B40 7 +H 2 S04+5H 2 = Na 2 S04+4H 3 B0 3 . 

Boric acid crystallizes from water in white nacreous laminae 
belonging to the triclinic system ; it is difficultly soluble in cold 
water, but dissolves readily in hot water. It is one of the " weak " 
acids, its dissociation constant being only 0-03169 (J. Walker, Jour, 
of Chem. Soc, 1900, lxxvii. 5), and consequently its salts are appreci- 
ably hydrolysed in aqueous solution. The free acid turns blue litmus 
to a claret colour. Its action upon turmeric is characteristic; a 
turmeric paper moistened with a solution of boric acid turns brown, 
the colour becoming much darker as the paper dries; while the 
addition of sodium or potassium hydroxide turns it almost black. 
Boric acid is easilyn/soluble in alcohol, and if the vapour of the solution 
be inflamed it burns with a characteristic vivid green colour. The 
acid on being heated to 100° C. loses water and is converted into 
metaboric acid, HB0 3 ; at 140° C, pyroboric acid, H 2 B 4 07, is produced ; 
at still higher temperatures, boron trioxide is formed. The salts of 
the normal or orthoboric acid in all probability do not exist ; meta- 
boric acid, however, forms several well-defined salts which are readily 
converted, even by carbon dioxide, into salts of pyroboric acid. 
That orthoboric acid is a tribasic acid is shown by the formation of 
ethyl orthoborate on esterification, the vapour density of which 
corresponds to the molecular formula B(OC 5 H 5 )3; the molecular 
formula of the acid must consequently be B(OH)j or H3BO3. The 
metallic borates are generally obtained in the hydrated condition, 
and with the exception of those of the alkali metals, are insoluble in 
water. The most important of the borates is sodium pyroborate or 
borax (q.v.). 

Borax and boracic acid are feeble but useful antiseptics. Hence 
they may be used to preserve food-substances, such as milk and 
butter (see Adulteration). In medicine boracic acid is used in 
solution to relieve itching, but its chief use is as a mild antiseptic 
to impregnate lint or cotton-wool. Recent work has shown it is too 
feeble to be relied upon alone, but where really efficient antiseptics, 
such as mercuric chloride and iodide, and carbolic acid, have been 
already employed, boracic acid (which, unlike these, is non-poisonous 
and non-irritant) may legitimately be used to maintain the aseptic 
or non-bacterial condition which they have obtained. Borax taken 
internally is of some value in irritability of the bladder, but as a 
urinary antiseptic it is now surpassed by several recently introduced 
drugs, such as urotropine. 

BORING. The queries of deep boring are resorted to for
ascertaining the nature, thickness and extent of the various 



252 



BORING 



geological formations underlying the surface of the earth. 
Among the purposes for which boring is specifically employed 
are: (i) prospecting or searching for mineral deposits; (2) 
sinking petroleum, natural gas, artesian or salt wells; (3) de- 
termining the depth below the surface of bed-rock or other 
firm substratum, together with the character of the overlying 
materials, preparatory to mining or civil engineering queries;
(4) carrying on geological or other scientific explorations. 

Prospecting by boring is practised most successfully in the 
case of mineral deposits of large area, which are nearly horizontal, 
or at least not highly inclined; e.g. deposits of coal, iron, lead 
and salt. Wide, flat beds of such minerals may be pierced at any 
desired number of points. The depth at which each hole enters 
the deposit and the thickness of the mineral itself are readily 
ascertained, so that a map may be constructed with some degree 
of accuracy. Samples of the mineral are also secured, furnishing 
data as to the value of the deposit. While boring is sometimes 
adopted for prospecting irregular and steeply inclined mineral 
deposits of small area, the results are obviously less trustworthy 
than under the conditions named above, and may be actually 
misleading unless a large number of holes are bored. Incident- 
ally, bore-holes supply information as to the character and depth 
of the valueless depositions of earth or rock overlying the mineral 
deposit. Such data assist in deciding upon the appropriate 
method for, and in estimating the cost of, sinking shafts or 
driving tunnels for the development and exploitation of the 
deposit. In sinking petroleum wells, boring serves not only for 
discovering the oil-bearing strata but also for extracting the oil. 
This industry has become of great importance in many parts of 
the United States, in southern Russia and elsewhere. Rock salt 
deposits are sometimes worked through bore-holes, by introduc- 
ing water and pumping out the solution of brine for further 
treatment. The sinking of artesian wells is another application 
of boring. They are often hundreds, and sometimes thousands, 
of feet in depth. A well in St Louis, Missouri, has a depth of 

3843 ft. 

Boring is useful in mines themselves for a variety of purposes, 
such as exploring the deposit ahead of the workings, searching 
for neighbouring veins, and sounding the ground on approaching 
dangerous inundated workings. In the coal regions of Pennsyl- 
vania, bore-holes are often sunk for carrying steam pipes and 
hoisting ropes underground at points remote from a shaft. 

Several of the methods of boring in soft ground are employed 
in connexion with civil engineering queries; as for ascertain-
ing the depth below the surface to solid rock, preparatory to 
excavating for and designing deep foundations for heavy struc- 
tures, and for estimating the cost of large scale excavations in 
earth and rock. 

Lastly, a number of deep holes have been bored for geological 
exploration or for observing the increase of temperature in depth 
in the earth's crust; for example, at Paruschowitz, Silesia, about 
6700 ft. deep; at Leipzig, Germany, 6265 ft.; near Pittsburg, 
Pennsylvania, 5532 ft.; and at Wheeling, West Virginia, nearly 
5000 ft. The two last mentioned were intended to obtain as 
complete a knowledge as possible of the bituminous coal and oil- 
bearing formations. 

There are five methods of boring, viz.: by (1) earth augers, 
(2) drive pipes, (3) long, jointed rods and drop drill, (4) the rope 
system, in which the rods are replaced by rope, (5) rotary drills. 
The first two methods are adapted to soft or earthy soils only; 
the others are for rock. 

I. Earth augers comprise spiral and pod augers. The ordinary 
spiral auger resembles the wood auger commonly used by carpenters. 
It is attached to the rod or stem by a socket joint, successive sections 
of rod being added as the hole is deepened. The auger is rotated by 
means of horizontal levers, clamped to the rod — by hand for holes of 
small diameter (2 to 6 in.), the larger sizes (8 to 16 in.) by horse 

Cower. Clayey, cohesive soils, containing few stones, are readily 
ored; stony ground with difficulty. The operation of the auger 
is intermittent. After a few revolutions it is raised and emptied, 
the soil clinging between the spirals. Depths to 50 or 60 ft. are 
usually bored by hand; deeper holes by horse power. For sandy, 
non-cohesive soils, the auger may be encircled by a close-fitting 
sheet-iron cylinder to prevent the soil from falling out. 




Pod augers generally vary in diameter from 8 to 20 in. A common 

form (fig. 1) consists of two curved iron plates, one attached to the 
rod rigidly, the other by hinge and key. By being turned through 
a few revolutions the pod is filled, and is then raised and emptied. 
For boring in sandy soils, the open sides are closed by hinged plates. 
Fig. 2 shows another type of pod auger. For holes of large diameter 
earth augers are handled with the 
aid of a light derrick. 

2. Drive pipes are widely used, 
both for testing the depth and 
character of soft material overlying 
solid rock and as a necessary pre- 
liminary to rock boring, when some 
thickness of surface soil must first 
be passed through. In its simplest 
form the drive pipe consists of one 
or more lengths of wrought iron 
pipe, open at both ends and from 
J in. to 6 in. diameter. When of 
small size the pipe is driven by a 
heavy hammer; for deep and large 
holes, a light pile-driver becomes 
necessary. The lower end of the 
pipe is provided with an annular 
steel shoe; the upper end has a 
drivehead for receiving the blows 
of the hammer. Successive lengths 
are screwed on as required. For p , , 
shallow holes the pipe is cleaned Auger. 

out by a " bailer " or " sand-pump " — a cylinder 4 to 6 ft. long, 
with a valve in the lower end. It is lowered at intervals, filled by 
being dashed up and down, and then raised and emptied. If, 
after reaching some depth, the external frictional resistance prevents 
the pipe from sinking farther, another pipe of small diameter may 
be inserted and the driving continued. Drive pipes are often sunk 
by applying weights at the surface and slowly rotating by a lever. 
Two pipes are then used, one inside the other. Water is pumped 
down the inner pipe, thus loosening 
the soil, raising the debris and in- 
creasing the speed of driving. The 
" driven well " for water supply is an 
adaptation of the drive pipe and put 
down in the same way. 

3. Drill and Rods. — This method has 
long been used in Europe and else- 
where for deep boring. In the United 
States it is rarely employed for depths 
greater than 200 or 300 ft. The usual 
form of cutting tool or drill is shown 
in fig. 3. The iron rods are from I to 
2 in. square, in long lengths with 
screw joints (fig. 4). Wooden rods are 
occasionally used. For shallow holes 



Fig. 1. 



Fig. 2. 




Fig. 3. 
Drill Bit. 



Fig. 4. 
Rod Joint. 



(50 to 75 ft.) the work is 
done by hand, one or two cross-bars being clamped to the rod. 
The men alternately raise and drop the drill, meanwhile slowly 
walking around and around to rotate the bit and so keep the hole 
true. The cuttings are cleaned out by a bailer, as for drive pipes. 

In boring by hand, the practical limit of depth is soon reached, 
on account of the increasing weight of the rods. For going deeper 
a " spring-pole " may be used. This is a tapering pole, say 30 ft. 
long and 5 or 6 in. diameter at the small end. It rests 
in an inclined position on a fulcrum set about 10 ft. JL JL 

from the butt, the latter being firmly fixed. The rods TT TT 

are suspended from the end of the pole, which ex- J \ )\ 

tends at a height of several feet over the mouth of the 
hole. With the aid of the spring of the pole the strokes 
are produced by a slight effort on the part of the 
driller. Average speeds of 6 to 10 ft. per 10 hours are 
easily made, to depths of 200 to 250 ft. 

For deep boring the rod system requires a more 
elaborate plant. The rods are suspended from a 
heavy " walking beam " or lever, usually oscillated 
by a steam engine. By means of a screw-Feed device, 
the rods, which are rotated slightly after every 
stroke, are gradually fed down as the hole is deepened, 
length after length being added. A tall derrick 
carries the sheaves and ropes by which the rods and 
tools are manipulated. The drill bit cannot be attached 
rigidly to the rods as in shallow boring, because the 
momentum of the heavy moving parts, transmitted 
directly to the bit as the blow is struck, would cause 
excessive vibration and breakage. It becomes neces- 
sary, therefore, to introduce a sliding-link joint be- 
tween the rods and bit. One form of link is shown Sliding Link, 
in fig. 5. On striking its blow, the bit comes to rest, 
while the rods continue to descend to the end of the stroke, the upper 
member of the link sliding down upon the lower. Then, on the up 
stroke the lower link, with the bit, is raised for delivering another blow. 
For large holes the striking weight is, say, 800 to 1000 lb, length of 
stroke 2j to 5 ft., and speed from 20 to 30 strokes per minute. 



Fig. 5. 



BORING 



253 



By using the sliding link the cross-section and weight of the 
rods may be greatly reduced, the only strain being that of tension. 
To deliver a sharp, effective blow, however, the rods must drop 
with a quick stroke, which brings a heavy strain upon the 
operating machinery. For overcoming this difficulty, various " free- 
falling tools " have been devised. By these the bit is allowed to fall 
by gravity; the rod follows on its measured down 
stroke, and picks up the bit. Free-falling tools are of 
two classes: (1) those by which the bit is released 
automatically; (2) those operated by a sudden twist 
imparted to the rod by the drillman. One of the best 
known of the first class is the Kind free-fall (fig. 6). 
The shank of the bit is gripped and released by the 
jaws J,J, worked through a toggle joint by move- 
ments of the disk D, When the rod begins its down- 
ward stroke, the resistance of the water in the hole 
slightly raises D, thus opening the jaws and releasing 
the bit, which falls by gravity. On reaching the end 
of the stroke the jaws again catch the shank of the 
bit and raise it for delivering another blow. The 
Fabian free-fall may be noted as an example of the 
second class (see Kohler, Lehrbuch der Bergbaukunde, 
p. 57). Tools are sometimes used for cutting an 
annular groove in the bottom of the hole, and raising 
to the surface the core so formed, for observing the 
character of the rock. 

4. Rope and Drop Tools. — This method was long ago 

used in China. Because of its extensive application 

in the oil-fields it is generally designated in the 

United States as the " oil-well system." In its 

various modifications it is often employed also in 

general prospecting of mineral deposits and in sinking 

artesian, natural gas and salt wells. One of its forms 

Fig. 6. is known in England as the Mather & Piatt system. 

Kind Free- The chief point of difference from rod-boring is 

Falling Tool, the substitution of rope for the jointed rods. For 

deep boring it possesses the advantage of saving 

the large amount of time consumed in raising and lowering 

the rods, as required whenever the hole is to be cleaned out, or 

a dull bit replaced, since the tools are rapidly run up or down 

by means of the rope with which they are operated while drilling. 

The speed of rope-boring is therefore but little affected by increase 

of depth, while with rod-boring it falls off rapidly. In its simplest 

form the so-called " string of tools," suspended from the rope, is 

composed of the bit or drill, jars and rope-socket. The jars are a pair 

of sliding links, similar to those used for rod-boring, but serving a 

different purpose, viz. to produce a sharp shock on the upward 

stroke, as the jars come together, for loosening the bit should it tend 

to stick fast in the hole. A heavy bar (auger stem) is generally 

inserted between the jars and bit, for increasing the force of the blow. 

The weight of another bar above the jars (sinker-bar) keeps the rope 

taut. The length of stroke and feed are regulated 

by the " temper-screw " (fig. 7), a feed device 

resembling that used for rod-boring. Clamped 

to it is the drill rope, which is let out at intervals, 

as the hole is deepened. The bits usually range 

from 3 to 8 in. diameter, the speed of boring 

being generally between 20 and 40 ft. per 24 

hours, according to the kind of rock. A great 

variety of special " fishing tools " are made, for 

use in case of breakage of parts in the hole or other 

accident. 

5. Diamond Drill. — The methodsdescribedabove 
are capable of boring holes vertically down- 
ward only. By the diamond drill, holes can be 
bored in any direction, from vertically downward 
to vertically upward. It has the further ad- 
vantage of making an annular hole from which is 
obtained a core, furnishing a practically complete 
cross-section of the strata penetrated ; the thick- 
ness and character of each stratum are shown, 
together with its depth below the surface. Thus, 
the diamond drill is peculiarly well adapted for 
prospecting mineral deposits from which samples 
are desired. The first practical application of 
diamonds for drilling in rock was made in 1863 
by Professor Rudolph Leschot, a civil engineer of 
Paris. 

The apparatus consists essentially of a line of 

hollow rods, coupled by screw joints, an annular 

steel bit or crown, set with diamonds, being 

Fig. 7- attached to the lower end. By means of a small 

Temper Screw, engine on the surface the rods are rapidly rotated 

and fed down automatically as the hole is 

deepened. The speed of rotation is from 300 to 800 revolut'ons 

per minute, depending on the character of the rock and diameter 

of the bit. While boring a stream of water is forced down the 

hollow rods by a pump, passing back to the surface through the 

annular space between the rods and the walls of the drill hole. The 

cuttings are thus carried to the surface, leaving the bottom of the hole 




clean and unobstructed. For recovering the core and inspecting the 
bit and diamonds, the rods are raised at every 3 to 8 ft. of depth. This 
is done by a small drum and rope, operated by the driving engine. 
