Diamond drills of standard designs (fig. 8) bore holes from I ft to 
2f in. diameter, yielding cores of 1 to 1 { f in. diameter, and are capable 
of reaching depths of a few hundred to 4000 ft. or more. They re- 
quire from 8 to 30 boiler horse-power. Large machines will bore 
shallower holes up to 6, 9 or even 12 in. diameter. For operating 






Fig. 10. 
Diamond Drill Bit. 



Fig. 8. — Little Champion Rock Drill. Fig. 9. 

in underground workings of mines, small and compact machines 

are sometimes mounted on columns (fig. 9). They bore 1 1 to I ft in. 

holes to depths of 300 to 400 ft., cores being 5 to 1 in. diameter. 

Hand-power drills are also built. In the South African goldfields 

several diamond drill holes from 4500 to 5200 ft. deep have been 

successfully bored. Rates of advance for core-drilling to moderate 

depths range usually from 2 to 3 ft. per hour, 

including ordinary delay s,though in favourable 

rock much higher speeds are often attained. 

In deep holes the speeds diminish, because of 

time consumed in raising and lowering the rods. 

If no core is desired a " solid bit " is used. 

The drilling then proceeds faster, as it is only 

necessary to raise the rods occasionally, for 

examining the condition of the bit. 

The driving engine has two inclined cylin- 
ders, coupled to a crank-shaft, by which, 
through gearing, the drill-rod is rotated. The 
rods are wrought iron or steel tubes, in 5 to 10 ft. lengths. For produc- 
ing the feed two devices are employed, the differential screw and 
hydraulic cylinder. For the differential feed (fig. 9) the engine has a 
hollow left-hand threaded screw-shaft, to which the rods are coupled. 
This shaft is driven by a spline and bevel gearing and is supported 
by a threaded feed-nut, carried in the lower bearing. Geared to the 
screw-shaft is a light counter-shaft. By prop- 
erly proportioning the number of teeth in the 
system of gear-wheels, the feed-nut is caused 
to revolve a little faster than the screw-shaft, 
so that the drill-rod is fed downward a small 
fraction of an inch for each revolution. To 
vary the rate of feed, as suitable for different 
rocks, three pairs of gears with different ratios 
of teeth are provided. The screw-shaft and 
gearing are carried by a swivel-head, which 
can be rotated in a vertical plane, for boring 
holes at an angle. 

The hydraulic feed is an improvement on 
the above, in that the rate of feed is inde- 
pendent of the rotative speed of the rods and 
can be adjusted with the utmost nicety. There 
are either one or two feed cylinders, supplied 
with water from the pump. The rod, while 
rotating freely, is supported by the feed 
cylinder piston and caused to move slowly 
downward by allowing the water to pass 
from the lower to the upper part of the 
cylinder. A valve regulates the passage of 
the water and hence the rate of feed. .-«.-.-. 

The bit (fig. 10 and fig. 11, B) is of soft Fig. ii. 

steel, set with six to eight or more diamonds, Core Lifter and Barrel, 
according to its diameter. The diamonds, 

usually from ij to 2§ carats in size, are carefully set in the bit, 
projecting but slightly from its surface. Two kinds of diamonds 
are used, " carbons " and " borts." The carbons are opaque, dark 




254 



BORIS FEDOROVICH GODUNOV— BORISOGLYEBSK 



in colour, tougher than the brilliant, and have no cleavage planes. 
They are therefore suitable for drilling in hard rock. Borts are 
rough, imperfect brilliants, and are best used for the softer rocks. 
As the bit wears, the stones must be reset from time to time. The 
wear of carbons in a well-set bit is small, though extremely variable. 
Above the bit are the core-lifter and core-barrel. The core-lifter 
(fig. n, A) is a device for gripping and breaking off the core and 
raising it to the surface. The barrel, 3 to 10 ft. long, fits closely in 
the hole and is often spirally grooved for the passage of the water 
and debris. It serves partly as a guide, tending to keep the hole 
straight, partly for holding and protecting the core. 

Diamond drills do not work satisfactorily in broken, fissured rock, 
as the carbons are liable to be injured, loosened or torn from their 
settings. In these circumstances, and for soft rocks, the diamond 
bit may be replaced by a steel toothed bit. Another apparatus for 
core-drilling is the Davis Calyx drill. For hard rock it has an 
annular bit, accompanied by a quantity of chilled steel shot; for 
soft rock, a toothed bit is used. 

Diamond drill holes are rarely straight, and usually deviate 
considerably from the direction in which they are started. Very 
deep holes have been found to vary as much as 45 ° and even 60 ° 
from their true direction. This is due to the fact that the rods do 
not fit closely in the hole and therefore bend. It is also likely to 
occur in drilling through inclined strata, specially when of different 
degrees of hardness. By using a long and closely fitting core-barrel 
the liability to deviation is reduced, but cannot be wholly prevented. 
Holes which are nearly horizontal always deflect upward, because 
the sag of the rods tilts up tire bit. Diamond drill holes should there- 
fore always be surveyed. This is done by lowering into the hole 
instruments for observing at a number of successive points the direc- 
tion and degree of deviation. 1 If accurately surveyed a crooked 
hole may be quite as useful as a straight one. 

Authorities. — For further information on boring see Trans. 
Amer. Inst. Mining Engs. vol. ii. p. 241, vol. xxvii. p. 123; C. le 
Neve Foster, Text-book of Ore and Stone Mining, chap. iii. ; Glilckauf, 
9th December 1899, 20th and 27th May 1905; Scientific American, 
21st August 1886; Engineering and Mining Jour. vol. lviii. p. 268, 
vol. lxx. p. 699, vol. lxxx. p. 920; Trans. Inst. Mining Engs., 
England, vol. xxiii. p. 685 ; School of Mines Quarterly, N. Y., vol. xvi. 
p. I ; Zeitschr. filr Berg- Hiitten- und Salinenwesen, vol. xxv. p. 29 ; 
Denny, " Diamond Drilling," Mines and Minerals, vol. xx., August 
1899, p. 7, to January 1900, p. 241 ; Mining Jour., 26th January 1901 ; 
Mining and Scientific Press, 28th November 1903, p. 353 ; Ost. 
Zeitschr. filr Berg- und Huttenwesen, 21st May, 4th June 1904; Trans. 
Inst. Mining and Metallurgy, vol. xii. p. 301 ; Engineering Magazine, 
March 1896, p. 1075. (R. P.*) 

BORIS FEDOROVICH GODUNOV, tsar of Muscovy (c. 1551- 
1605), the most famous member of an ancient, now extinct, 
Russian family of Tatar origin, which migrated from the Horde 
to Muscovy in the 14th century. Boris' career of service began 
at the court of Ivan the Terrible. He is mentioned in 1570 as 
taking part in the Serpeisk campaign as one of the archers of 
the guard. In 1571 he strengthened his position at court by his 
marriage with Maria, the daughter of Ivan's abominable favourite 
Malyuta Skuratov. In 1580 the tsar chose Irene, the sister of 
Boris, to be the bride of the tsarevich Theodore, on which 
occasion Boris was promoted to the rank of boyar. On his death- 
bed Ivan appointed Boris one of the guardians of his son and 
successor; for Theodore, despite his seven-and-twenty years, 
was of somewhat weak intellect. The reign of Theodore began 
with a rebellion in favour of the infant tsarevich Demetrius, the 
son of Ivan's fifth wife Marie Nagaya, a rebellion resulting in the 
banishment of Demetrius, with his mother and her relations, to 
their appanage at Uglich. On the occasion of the tsar's corona- 
tion (May 31, 1584), Boris was loaded with honours and riches, 
yet he held but the second place in the regency during the life- 
time of his co-guardian Nikita Romanovich, on whose death, in 
August, he was left without any serious rival. A conspiracy 
against him of all the other great boyars and the metropolitan 
Dionysy, which sought to break Boris' power by divorcing the 
tsar from Godunov's childless sister, only ended in the banish- 
ment or tonsuring of the malcontents. Henceforth Godunov 
was omnipotent. The direction of affairs passed entirely into 
his hands, and he corresponded with foreign princes as their 
equal. His policy was generally pacific, but always most prudent. 
In 1595 he recovered from Sweden the towns lost during the 
former reign. Five years previously he had defeated a Tatar 
raid upon Moscow, for which service he received the title of sluga, 

1 Brough, Mine Surveying, pp. 276-278; Marriott, Trans. Inst. 
Mining and Metallurgy, vol. xiv. p. 255. 



an obsolete dignity even higher than that of boyar. Towards 
Turkey he maintained an independent attitude, supporting an 
anti-Turkish faction in the Crimea, and furnishing the emperor 
with subsidies in his war against the sultan. Godunov en- 
couraged English merchants to trade with Russia by exempting 
them from tolls. He civilized the north-eastern and south- 
eastern borders of Muscovy by building numerous towns and 
fortresses to keep the Tatar and Finnic tribes in order. Samara, 
Saratov, and Tsaritsyn and a whole series of lesser towns derive 
from him. He also re-colonized Siberia, which had been slipping 
from the grasp of Muscovy, and formed scores of new settle- 
ments, including Tobolsk and other large centres. It was during 
his government that the Muscovite church received its patri- 
archate, which placed it on an equality with the other Eastern 
churches and emancipated it from the influence of the metro- 
politan of Kiev. Boris' most important domestic reform was 
the ukaz (1587) forbidding the peasantry to transfer themselves 
from one landowner to another, thus binding them to the soil. 
The object of this ordinance was to secure revenue, but it led to 
the institution of serfdom in its most grinding form. The-sudden 
death of the tsarevich Demetrius at Uglich (May 15, 1591) 
has commonly been attributed to Boris, because it cleared his 
way to the throne ; but this is no clear proof that he was person- 
ally concerned in that tragedy. The same may be said of the 
many, often absurd, accusations subsequently brought against 
him by jealous rivals or ignorant contemporaries who hated 
Godunov's reforms as novelties. 

On the death of the childless tsar Theodore (January 7, 1598), 
self-preservation quite as much as ambition constrained Boris to 
seize the throne. Had he not done so, lifelong seclusion in a 
monastery would have been his lightest fate. His election was 
proposed by the patriarch Job, who acted on the conviction that 
Boris was the one man capable of coping with the extraordinary 
difficulties of an unexampled situation. Boris, however, would 
only accept the throne from a Zemsky Sobor, or national assembly, 
which met on the 17th of February, and unanimously elected 
him on the 21st. On the 1st of September he was solemnly 
crowned tsar. During the first years of his reign he was both 
popular and prosperous, and ruled the people excellently well. 
Enlightened as he was, he fully recognized the intellectual 
inferiority of Russia as compared with the West, and did his 
utmost to bring about a better state of things. He was the first 
tsar to import foreign teachers on a great scale, the first to send 
young Russians abroad to be educated, the first to allow Lutheran 
churches to be built in Russia. He also felt the necessity of a 
Baltic seaboard, and attempted to obtain Livonia by diplomatic 
means. He cultivated friendly relations with the Scandinavians, 
in order to intermarry if possible with foreign royal houses, so as 
to increase the dignity of his own dynasty. That Boris was one of 
the greatest of the Muscovite tsars there can be no doubt. But his 
great qualities were overbalanced by an incurable suspiciousness, 
which made it impossible for him to act cordially with those about 
him. His fear of possible pretenders induced him to go so far as to 
forbid the greatest of the boyars to marry. He also encouraged 
informers and persecuted suspects on their unsupported state- 
ments. The Romanov family in especial suffered severely from 
these delations. Boris died suddenly (April 13, 1605), leaving one 
son, Theodore II., who succeeded him for a few months and then 
was foully murdered by the enemies of the Goduncvs. 

See Platon Vasilievich Pavlov, On the Historical Significance of 
the Reign of Boris Godunov (Rus.) (Moscow, 1850) ; Sergyei Mikhaili- 
vich Solovev, History of Russia (Rus.) (2nd ed., vols, vii.-viii., St 
Petersburg, 1897). (R. N. B.) 

BORISOGLYEBSK, a town of Russia, in the government of 
Tambov, 100 m. S.S.E. of the city of that name, in 51° 22' N. lat. 
and 43 4' E. long. It was founded in 1646 to defend the southern 
frontiers of Muscovy against the Crimean Tatars, and in 1696 was 
surrounded by wooden fortifications. The principal industries 
are the preparation of wool, iron-casting, soap-boiling, tallow- 
melting, and brick-making; and there is an active trade in 
grain, wool, cattle, and leather, and two important annual fairs. 
Pop. (1867) 12,254; (1897) 22,370. 



BORKU— BORNE 



255 



BORKU, or Borgu, a region of Central Africa between 17° and 
19° N. and 18° and 21 E., forming part of the transitional zone 
between the arid wastes of the Sahara and the fertile lands of 
the central Sudan. It is bounded N. by the Tibesti Mountains, 
and is in great measure occupied by lesser elevations belonging 
to the same system. These hills to the south and east merge into 
the plains of Wadai and Darfur. South-west, in the direction of 
Lake Chad, is the Bodele basin. The drainage of the country 
is to the lake, but the numerous khors with which its surface is 
scored are mostly dry or contain water for brief periods only. A 
considerable part of the soil is light sand drifted about by the 
wind. The irrigated and fertile portions consist mainly of a 
number of valleys separated from each other by low and irregular 
limestone rocks. They furnish excellent dates. Barley is also 
cultivated. The northern valleys are inhabited by a settled popu- 
lation of Tibbu stock, known as the Daza, and by colonies 
of negroes; the others are mainly visited by nomadic Berber 
and Arab tribes. The inhabitants own large numbers of goats 
and asses. 

A caravan route from Barca and the Kufra oasis passes through 
Borku to Lake Chad. The country long remained unknown to 
Europeans. Gustav Nachtigal spent some time in it in the 
year 187 1, and gave a valuable account of the region and its 
inhabitants in his book, Sahara und Sudan (Berlin, 1879-1889). 
In 1899 Borku, by agreement with Great Britain, was assigned 
to the French sphere of influence. The country, which had for- 
merly been periodically raided by the Walad Sliman Arabs, was 
then governed by the Senussi (q.v.), who had placed garrisons 
in the chief centres of population. From it raids were made 
on French territory. In 1907 a French column from Kanem 
entered Borku, but after capturing Ain Galakka, the principal 
Senussi station, retired. Borku is also called Borgu, but must 
not be confounded with the Borgu (q.v.) west of the Niger. 

A summary of Nachtigal's writing on Borku will be found in 
section 28 of Gustav Nachtigal's Reisen in der Sahara und im Sudan 
(1 vol.), arranged by Albert Frankel (Leipzig, 1887). See also an 
article (with map) by Commdt. Bordeaux in La Geographic, Oct. 1908. 

BORKUM, an island of Germany, in the North Sea, belonging 
to the Prussian province of Hanover, the westernmost of the 
East Frisian chain, lying between the east and west arms of the 
estuary of the Ems, and opposite to the Dollart. Pop. about 
2500. The island is 5 m. long and 25 m. broad, is a favourite 
summer resort, and is visited annually by about 20,000 persons. 
There is a daily steamboat service with Emden, Leer and Ham- 
burg during the summer months. The island affords pasture for 
cattle, and a breeding-place for sea-birds. 

BORLASE, WILLIAM (1695-1772), English antiquary and 
naturalist, was born at Pendeen in Cornwall, of an ancient 
family, on the 2nd of February 1695. He was educated at 
Exeter College, Oxford, and in 1719 was ordained. In 1722 he 
was presented to the rectory of Ludgvan, and in 1732 he obtained 
in addition the vicarage of St Just, his native parish. In the 
parish of Ludgvan were rich copper works, abounding with 
mineral and metallic fossils, of which he made a collection, and 
thus was led to study somewhat minutely the natural history of 
the county. In 1750 he was admitted a fellow of the Royal 
Society; and in 1754 he published, at Oxford, his Antiquities of 
Cornwall (2nd ed., London, 1769). His next publication was 
Observations on the Ancient and Present State of the Islands of 
Scilly, and their Importance to the Trade of Great Britain (Oxford, 
1756). In 1758 appeared his Natural History of Cornwall. He 
presented to the Ashmolean museum, Oxford, a variety of fossils 
and antiquities, which he had described in his works, and 
received the thanks of the university and the degree of LL.D. 
He died on the 31st of August 1772. Borlase was well acquainted 
with most of the leading literary men of the time, particularly 
with Alexander Pope, with whom he kept up a long correspond- 
ence, and for whose grotto at Twickenham he furnished the 
greater part of the fossils and minerals. 

Borlase's letters to Pope, St Aubyn and others, with answers, fill 
several volumes of MS. There are also MS. notes on Cornwall, and 
a complete unpublished treatise Concerning the Creation and Deluge. 
Some account of these MSS., with extracts from them, was given 



in the Quarterly Review, October 1875. Borlase's memoirs of his 
own life were published in Nichol's Literary Anecdotes, vol. v. 

BORMIO (Ger. Worms), a town of Lombardy, Italy, in the 
province of Sondrio, 415 m. N.E. of the town of Sondrio. Pop. 
(1901) 1814. It is situated in the Valtellina (the valley of the 
Adda), 4020 ft. above sea-level, at the foot of the Stelvio pass, 
and, owing to its position, was of some military importance in 
the middle ages. It contains interesting churches and picturesque 
towers. A cemetery of pre-Roman date was discovered at 
Bormio in 1820. 

The baths of Bormio, 2 m. farther up the valley, are mentioned 
by Pliny and Cassiodorus, the secretary of Theodoric, and are 
much frequented. 

BORN, IGNAZ, Edler von (1742-1791), Austrian mineralo- 
gist and metallurgist, was born of a noble family at Karlsburg, 
in Transylvania, on the 26th of December 1742. Educated 
in a Jesuit college in Vienna, he was for sixteen months a 
member of the order, but left it and studied law at Prague. 
Then he travelled extensively in Germany, Holland and France, 
studying mineralogy, and on his return to Prague in 1770 entered 
the department of mines and the mint. In 1 776 he was appointed 
by Maria Theresa to arrange the imperial museum at Vienna, 
where he was nominated to the council of mines and the mint, 
and continued to reside until his death on the 24th of July 1791. 
He introduced a method of extracting metals by amalgamation 
ijjber das Anquicken der Erze, 1786), and other improvements in 
mining and other technical processes. His publications also 
include Lithophylacium Bornianum (1772-1775) and Bergbau- 
kunde (1789), besides several museum catalogues. Von Born 
attempted satire with no great success. Die Slaatsperiicke, a 
tale published without his knowledge in 1772, and an attack on 
Father Hell, the Jesuit, and king's astronomer at Vienna, are 
two of his satirical works. Part of a satire, entitled Monachologia, 
in which the monks are described in the technical language of 
natural history, is also ascribed to him. Von Born was well 
acquainted with Latin and the principal modern languages of 
Europe, and with many branches of science not immediately 
connected with metallurgy and mineralogy. He took an active 
part in -the political changes in Hungary. After the death of 
the emperor Joseph II., the diet of the states of Hungary re- 
scinded many innovations of that ruler, and conferred the rights 
of denizen on several persons who had been favourable to the 
cause of the Hungarians, and, amongst others, on von Born. 
At the time of his death in 1791, he was employed in writing a 
work entitled Fasti Leopoldini, probably relating to the prudent 
conduct of Leopold II., the successor of Joseph, towards the 
Hungariahs. 

BORNA, a town of Germany in the kingdom of Saxony, on the 
Wyhra at its junction with the Pleisse, 17 m. S. by E. of Leipzig 
by rail. Pop. (1905) 9176. The industries include peat-cutting, 
iron foundries, organ, pianoforte, felt and shoe factories. 

BORNE, KARL LUDWIG (1786-1837), German political 
writer and satirist, was born on the 6th of May 1786 at Frankfort- 
on-Main, where his father, Jakob Baruch, carried on the business 
of a banker. He received his early education at Giessen, but 
as Jews were ineligible at that time for public appointments in 
Frankfort, young Baruch was sent to study medicine at Berlin 
under a physician, Markus Flerz, in whose house he resided. 
Young Baruch became deeply enamoured of his patron's wife, 
the talented and beautiful Henriette Herz (1764-1847), and gave 
vent to his adoration in a series of remarkable letters. Tiring of 
medical science, which he had subsequently pursued at Halle, 
he studied constitutional law and political science at Heidelberg 
and Giessen, and in 18 n took his doctor's degree at the latter 
university. On his return to Frankfort, now constituted as a 
grand duchy under the sovereignty of the prince bishop Karl von 
Dalberg, he received (1811) the appointment of police actuary in 
that city. The old conditions, however, returned in 18 14 and 
he was obliged to resign his office. Embittered by the oppression 
under which the Jews suffered in Germany, he engaged in journal- 
ism, and edited the Frankfort liberal newspapers, Staatsristretto 
and Die Zeitsckmngen. In 1818 he became a convert to Lutheran 



256 



BORNEO 



protestantism, changing his name from Lob Baruch to Ludwig 
Borne. This step was taken less out of religious conviction than, 
as in the case of so many of his descent, in order to improve 
his social standing. From 1818 to 1821 he edited Die Wage, 
a paper distinguished by its lively political articles and its power- 
ful but sarcastic theatrical criticisms. This paper was suppressed 
by the police authorities, and in 182 1 Borne quitted for a while 
the field of publicist writing and led a retired life in Paris, Ham- 
burg and Frankfort. After the July Revolution (1830), he 
hurried to Paris, expecting to find the newly-constituted state of 
society somewhat in accordance with his own ideas of freedom. 
Although to some extent disappointed in his hopes, he was not 
disposed to look any more kindly on the political condition of 
Germany; this lent additional zest to the brilliant satirical 
letters (Briefe aus Paris, 1830-1833, published Paris, 1834), 
which he began to publish in his last literary venture, La Balance, 
a revival under its French name of Die Wage. The Briefe aus 
Paris was Borne's most important publication, and a landmark 
in the history of German journalism. Its appearance led him 
to be regarded as one of the leaders of the new literary party of 
" Young Germany." He died at Paris on the 12th of February 
1837. 

Borne's works are remarkable for brilliancy of style and for a 
thorough French vein of satire. His best criticism is to be found 
in his Denkrede auf Jean Paul (1826), a writer for whom he had 
warm sympathy and admiration, in his Dramaturgische Blatter 
(1820-1834), and the witty satire, Menzel der Franzosenfresser 
(1837). He also wrote a number of short stories and sketches, of 
which the best known are the Monograpkie der deutschen Post- 
schnecke (1829) and Der Esskiinstler (1822). 

The first edition of his Gesammelte Schriften appeared at Hamburg 
(1829-1834.) in 14 volumes, followed by 6 volumes of Nachgelassene 
Schriften (Mannheim, 1844-1850); more complete is the edition 
in 12 volumes (Hamburg, 1862-1863), reprinted in 1868 and subse- 
quently. The latest complete edition is that edited by A. Klaar 
(8 vols., Leipzig, 1900). For further biographical matter see 
K. Gutzkow, Bornes Leben (Hamburg, 1840), and M. Holzmann, 
L. Borne, sein Leben und sein Wirken (Berlin, 1888). Bornes Briefe 
an Henriette Herz (1802-1807), first published in 1861, have been 
re-edited by L. Geiger (Oldenburg, 1905), who has also published 
Borne's Berliner Briefe (1828) (Berlin, 1905). See also .Heine's 
witty attack on Borne (Werke, ed. Elster, vii.), G. Gervinus' essay 
in his Historiche Schriften (Darmstadt, 1838), and the chapters 
in G. Brandes, Hovedstromninger i det iQdeAarhundredesLitteratur 
vol. vi. (Copenhagen, 1890, German trans. 1891 ; English trans. 
1905), and in J. Proelss, Das junge Deutschland (Stuttgart, 1892). 

BORNEO, a great island of the Malay Archipelago, extending 
from 7° N. to 4 20' S., and from 108° 53' to 119 22' E. It is 
830 m. long from N.E. to S.W., by 600 m. in maximum breadth. 
Its area according to the calculations of the Topographical 
Bureau of Batavia (1894) comprises 293,496 sq. m. These figures 
are admittedly approximate, and Meyer, who is generally accurate, 
gives the area of Borneo at 289,860 sq. m. It is roughly, however, 
five times as large as England and Wales. Politically Borneo is 
divided into four portions: (1) British North Borneo, the territory 
exploited and administered by the Chartered British North 
Borneo Company, to which a separate section of this article 
is devoted; (2) Brunei (q.v.), a Malayan sultanate under British 
protection; (3) Sarawak (q.v.), the large territory ruled by 
raja Brooke, and under British protection in so far as its foreign 
relations are concerned; and (4) Dutch Borneo, which comprises 
the remainder and by far the largest and most valuable portion 
of the island. 

Physical Features. — The general character of the country is 
mountainous, though none of the ranges attains to any great 
elevation, and Kinabalu, the highest peak in the island, which is 
situated near its north-western extremity, is only 13,698 ft. above 
sea-level. There is no proper nucleus of mountains whence chains 
ramify in different directions. The central and west central 
parts of the island, however, are occupied by three mountain 
chains and a plateau. These chains are: (1) the folded chain 
of the upper Kapuas, which divides the western division of 
Dutch Borneo from Sarawak, extends west to east, and attains 
near the sources of the Kapuas river a height of 5000 to 6000 ft. ; 
(2) the Schwaner chain, south of the Kapuas, whose summits 



range from 3000 to 7500 ft., the latter being the height of Bukit 
Raja, a plateau which divides the waters of the Kapuas from the 
rivers of southern Borneo; and (3) the M tiller chain, between the 
eastern parts of the Madi plateau (presently to be mentioned) and 
the Kapuas chain, a volcanic region presenting heights, such as 
Bukit Terata (4700 ft.), which were once active but are now long 
extinct volcanos. The Madi plateau lies between the Kapuas and 
the Schwaner chains. Its height is from 3000 to 4000 ft., and it 
is clothed with tropical high fens. These mountain systems are 
homologous in structure with those, not of Celebes or of Halma- 
hera, but of Malacca, Banka and Billiton. From the eastern 
end of the Kapuas mountains there are further to be observed: 
(1) A chain running north-north-east, which forms the boundary 
between Sarawak and Dutch Borneo, the highest peak of which, 
Gunong Tebang, approaches 10,000 ft. This chain "can hardly be 
said to extend continuously to the extreme north of the island, 
but it carries on the line of elevation towards the mountains of 
Sarawak to the west, and those of British North Borneo to the 
north, of which latter Kinabalu is the most remarkable. The 
mountains of North Borneo are more particularly referred to in 
the portion of this article which deals with that territory. (2) 
A chain which runs eastward from the central mountains and 
terminates in the great promontory of the east coast, known 
variously as Cape Kanior or Kaniungan. (3) A well-marked 
chain running in a south-easterly direction among the congeries 
of hills that extend south-eastward from the central mountains, 
and attaining, near the southern part of the east coast, heights 
up to and exceeding 6000 ft. 

Coasts. — Resting on a submarine plateau of no great depth, 
the coasts of Borneo are for the most part rimmed round by low 
alluvial lands, of a marshy, sandy and sometimes swampy 
character. In places the sands are fringed by long lines of 
Casuarina trees; in others, and more especially in the neighbour- 
hood of some of the river mouths, there are deep banks of black 
mud covered with mangroves; in others the coast presents to 
the sea bold headlands, cliffs, mostly of a reddish hue, sparsely 
clad with greenery, or rolling hills covered by a growth of rank 
grass. The depth of the sea around the shore rarely exceeds a 
maximum depth of 1 to 3 fathoms, and the coast as a whole offers 
few accessible ports. The towns and seaports are to be found as a 
rule at or near the mouths of those rivers which are not barricaded 
too efficiently by bars formed of mud or sand. All round the 
long coast-line of Dutch Borneo there are only seven ports of call, 
which are habitually made use of by the ships of the Dutch 
Packet Company. They are Pontianak, Banjermasin, Kota 
Bharu, Pasir, Samarinda, Beru and Bulungan. The islands off 
the coast are not numerous. Excluding some of alluvial forma- 
tion at the mouths of many of the rivers, and others along the 
shore which owe their existence to volcanic upheaval, the 
principal islands are Banguey and Balambangan at the northern 
extremity, Labuan (.q.v.), a British colony off the west coast of 
the territory of North Borneo, and the Karimata Islands off the 
south-west coast. On Great Karimata is situated the village of 
Palembang with a population of about 500 souls employed in 
fishing, mining for iron, and trading in forest produce. 

Rivers. — The rivers play a very important part in the economy 
of Borneo, both as highways and as lines along which run the 
main arteries of population. Hydrographically the island may 
be divided into five principal versants. Of these the shortest 
embraces the north-western slope, north of the Kapuas range, 
and discharges its waters into the China Sea. The most important 
of its rivers are the Sarawak, the Batang-Lupar, the Sarebas, the 
Rejang (navigable for more than 100 m.), the Baram, theLimbang 
or Brunei river, and the Padas. The rivers of British North 
Borneo to the north of the Padas are of no importance and of 
scant practical utility, owing to the fact that the mountain range 
here approaches very closely to the coast with which it runs 
parallel. In the south-western versant the largest river is the 
Kapuas, which, rising near the centre of the island, falls into the 
sea between Mampawa and Sukadana after a long and winding 
course. This river, of volume varying with the tide and the 
amount of rainfall, is normally navigable by small steamers and 



BORNEO 



257 




native prahus, of a draught of 4 to 5 ft., for 300 to 400 m., that is 
to say, from Pontianak up to Sintang, and thence as far as Benut. 
The middle part of this river, wider and more shallow than the 
lower reaches, gives rise to a region of inundation and lakes which 
extend as far as the northern mountain chain. Among its 
considerable tributaries may be mentioned the southern Melawi 
with its affluent the Penuh. It reaches the sea through several 
channels in a wide marshy delta. The Sambas, north of the 
Kapuas, is navigable in its lower course for vessels drawing 25 ft. 
Rivers lying to the south of the Kapuas, but of less importance in 
the way of size, commerce and navigation, are the Simpang, 
Pawanand Kandawangan,in the neighbourhood of whose mouths, 
or upon the adjacent coast, the principal native villages are 
situated in each case. The Barito, which is the principal river of 
the southern versant, takes its rise in the Kuti Lama Lake, and 
IV. 9 r 



falls into the Java Sea in 114 30' E. Its upper reaches are 
greatly impeded by rocks, rapids and waterfalls, but the lower 
part of its course is wide, and traverses a rich, alluvial district, 
much of which is marshy. Cross branches unite it with two 
rivers of considerable size towards the west, the Kapuas Murung 
or Little Dyak, and the Kahayan or Great Dyak. The Katingan 
or Mendawci, the Sampit, Pembuang or Surian and the Kota 
Waringin are rivers that fall into the sea farther to the west. The 
rivers of the southern versant are waters of capacious drainage, 
the basin of the Kahayan having, for instance, an area of 16,000 
sq. m., and the Barito one of 38,000 sq. m. These rivers are 
navigable for two-thirds of their course by steamers of a fair size, 
but in many cases the bars at their mouths present considerable 
difficulties to ships drawing anything over 8 or 9 ft. Most of the 
larger affluents of the Barito are also navigable throughout the 

11 



2 5 8 



BORNEO 



greater part of their courses. The south-eastern like the north- 
western corner of the island is watered by a considerable number 
of short mountain streams. The one great river of the eastern 
versant is the Kutei or Mahakan, which, rising in the central 
mountains, flows east with a sinuous course and falls by numerous 
mouths into the Straits of Macassar. At a great distance from its 
mouth it has still a depth of three fathoms, and in all its physical 
features it is comparable to the Kapuas and Barito. The Kayan 
or Bulungan river is the only other in the eastern versant that 
calls for mention. Most of the rivers of the northern versant are 
comparatively small, as the island narrows into a kind of pro- 
montory. Of these the Kinabatangan in the territory of British 
North Borneo is the most important. Lakes are neither 
numerous nor very large. In most cases they are more fittingly 
described as swamps. In the flood area of the upper Kapuas, of 
which mention has already been made, there occurs Lake Luar, 
and there are several lake expanses of a similar character in the 
basins of the Barito and Kutei rivers. The only really fine 
natural harbour in the island of which any use has been made is 
that of Sandakan, the principal settlement of the North Borneo 
Company on the north coast. 

Geology. — The geology of Borneo is very imperfectly known 
The mountain range which lies between Sarawak and the Dutch 
possessions, and may be looked upon as the backbone of the island, 
consists chiefly of crystalline schists, together with slates, sandstones 
and limestones. All these beds are much disturbed and folded. The 
sedimentary deposits were formerly believed to be Palaeozoic, but 
Jurassic fossils have since been found in them, and it is probable that 
several different formations are represented. Somewhat similar 
rocks appear to form the axis of the range in south-east Borneo, and 
possibly of the Tampatung Mountains. But the Muller range, the 
Madi plateau, and the Schwaner Mountains of west Borneo, consist 
chiefly of almost undisturbed sedimentary and volcanic rocks of 
Tertiary age. The low-lying country between the mountain ranges 
is covered for the most part by Tertiary and Quaternary deposits, 
but Cretaceous beds occur at several localities. Some of the older 
rocks of the mountain regions have been referred to the Devonian, 
but the evidence cannot be considered conclusive. Vertebraria and 
Phyllotheca, plants characteristic of the Indian Gondwana series, 
have been recorded in Sarawak; and marine forms, similar to those 
of the lower part of the Australian Carboniferous system, are stated 
to occur in the limestone of north Borneo. P seudomonotis salinaria, 
a Triassic form, has been noted from the schists of the west of Borneo. 
In the Kapoewas district radiolarian cherts supposed to be of 
Jurassic age are met with. Undoubted Jurassic fossils, belonging 
to several horizons, have been described from west Borneo and 
Sarawak. The Cretaceous beds, which have long been known in 
west Borneo, are comparatively little disturbed. They consist 
for the most part of marls with Orbitolina concava, and are referred 
to the Cenomanian. Cretaceous beds of somewhat later date are 
found in the Marpapura district in south-east Borneo. The Tertiary 
system includes conglomerates, sandstones, limestones and marls, 
which appear to be of Eocene, Oligocene and Miocene age. They 
contain numerous seams of coal. The Tertiary beds generally lie 
nearly horizontal and form the lower hills, but in the Madi plateau 
and the Schwaner range they rise to a height of several thousand 
feet. Volcanic rocks of Tertiary and late Cretaceous age are exten- 
sively developed, especially in the Muller Mountains. The whole 
of this consists of tuffs and lavas, andesites prevailing in the west 
and rhyolites and dacites in the east. 

Minerals. — The mineral wealth of Borneo is great and varied. 
It includes diamonds, the majority of which, however, are of a 
somewhat yellow colour, gold, quicksilver, cinnabar, copper, 
iron, tin, antimony, mineral oils, sulphur, rock-salt, marble and 
coal. The exploitation of the mines suffers in many cases from 
the difficulties and expense of transport, the high duties payable 
in Dutch Borneo to the native princes, the competition among 
the rival companies, and often the limited quantities of the - 
minerals found in the mines. The districts of Sambas and 
Landak in the west, the Kahayan river, the mountain valleys of 
the extreme south-east and parts of Sarawak furnish the largest 
quantities of gold, which is obtained for the most part from 
alluvial washings. The Borneo Company is engaged in working 
gold-mines in the upper part of the Sarawak valley, and the 
prospects of the enterprise, which is conducted on a fairly ex- 
tensive scale, are known to be encouraging. Diamonds are also 
found widely distributed and mainly in the same regions as the 
gold. The Kapuas valley has so far yielded the largest quantity, 
and Pontianak is, for diamonds, the principal port of export. 



Considerable progress has been made in the development of the 
oil-fields in Dutch Borneo, and the Ncdcrlandsch Indische 
Industrie en Handel Maatschappij, the Dutch business of the 
Shell Transport and Trading Company, increased its output 
from 123,592 tons in 1901 to 285,720 tons in 1904, and showed 
further satisfactory increase thereafter. This company owns 
extensive oil-fields at Balik Papan and Sanga-Sanga. The quality 
of the oil varies in a remarkable way according to the depth. 
The upper stratum is struck at a depth of 600 to 700 ft., and yields 
a natural liquid fuel of heavy specific gravity. The next source 
is met with at about 1 200 ft., yielding an oil which is much lighter 
in weight and, as such, more suitable for treatment in the 
refinery. The former oil is almost invariably of an asphalte basis, 
whereas the latter sometimes is found to contain a considerable 
percentage of paraffin wax. The average daily production is very 
high, owing to a large number of the wells flowing under the 
natural pressure of the gas. There is every reason to believe 
that the oil-fields of Dutch Borneo have a great future. Coal 
mines have, in many instances, been opened and abandoned, 
failure being due to the difficulty of production. Coal of good 
quality has been found in Pengaron and elsewhere in the Banjer- 
masin district, but most Borneo coal is considerably below this 
average of excellence. It has also been found in fair quantities 
at various places in the Kutei valley and in Sarawak. The coal- 
mines of Labuan have been worked spasmodically, but success 
has never attended the venture. Sadohg yields something under 
130 tons a day, and the Brooketown mine, the property of the 
raja of Sarawak, yields some 50 tons a day of rather indifferent 
coal. The discovery that Borneo produced antimony was made 
in 1825 by John Crawfurd, the orientalist, who learned in that 
year that a quantity had been brought to Singapore by a native 
trader as ballast. The supply is practically unlimited and widely 
distributed. The principal mine is at Bidi in Sarawak. 

Climate and Health. — As is to be anticipated, having regard to 
its insular position and to the fact that the equator passes through 
the very middle of the island, the climate is at once hot and very 
damp. In the hills and in the interior regions are found which 
may almost be described as temperate, but on the coasts the atmo- 
sphere is dense, humid and oppressive. Throughout the average 
temperature is from 78 to 8o° F., but the thermometer rarely 
falls below 70 , except in the hills, and occasionally on excep- 
tional days mounts as high as 96° in the shade. The rainy 
westerly winds (S.W. and N.W.) prevail at all the meteoro- 
logical stations, not the comparatively dry south-east wind. 
Even at Banjermasin, near the south coast, the north-west 
wind brings annually a rainfall of 60 in., as against 33 in. of rain 
carried by the south-east wind. The difference between the 
seasons is not rigidly marked. The climate is practically un- 
changing all the year round, the atmosphere being uniformly 
moist, and though days of continuous downpour are rare, com- 
paratively few days pass without a shower. Most rain falls 
between November and May, and at this season the torrents are 
tremendous while they last, and squalls of wind are frequent and 
violent, almost invariably preceding a downpour. Over such an 
extensive area there, is, of course, great variety in the climatic 
character of different districts, especially when viewed in relation 
to health. Some places, such as Bidi in Sarawak, for instance, 
are notoriously unhealthy; but from the statistics of the Dutch 
government, and the records of Sarawak and British North 
Borneo, it would appear that the European in Borneo has in 
general not appreciably more to fear than his fellow in Java, 
or in the Federated Malay States of the Malayan Peninsula. 
Among the native races the prevailing diseases, apart from those 
of a malarial origin, are chiefly such as arise from bad and in- 
sufficient food, from intemperance, and from want of cleanliness. 
The habit of allowing their meat to putrefy before regarding it 
as fit for food, and of encouraging children of tender age to drink 
to intoxication, accounts for absence of old folk and the heavy 
mortality which are to be observed among the Muruts of British 
North Borneo and some of the other more debased tribes of 
the interior of the island. Scrofula and various forms of lupus 
are common among the natives throughout the country and 



BORNEO 



259 



especially in the interior; elephantiasis is frequently met with 
on the coast. Smallpox, dysentery and fevers, frequently of 
a bilious character, are endemic and occasionally epidemic. 
Cholera breaks out from time to time and works great havoc, as 
was the case in 1903 when one of the raja of Sarawak's punitive 
expeditions was stricken while ascending the Limbang river by 
boat, and lost many hundreds of its numbers before the coast 
could be regained. Ophthalmia is common and sometimes will 
attack whole tribes. About one sixth of the native population 
of the interior, and a smaller proportion of those living on the 
coast, suffer from a kind of ringworm called kurap, which also 
prevails almost universally among the Sakai and Semang, the 
aboriginal hill tribes of the Malayan Peninsula. The disease is 
believed to be aggravated by chronic anaemia. Consumption is 
not uncommon. 

Fauna. — The fauna of Borneo comprises a large variety of 
species, many of which are numerically of great importance. 
Among the quadrupeds the most remarkable is the orang-utan 
(Malay, 6rang utan, i.e. jungle man), as the huge ape, called mias 
or m&yas by the natives, is* named by Europeans. Numerous 
species of monkey are found in Borneo, including the wahwah, 
a kind of gibbon, a creature far more human in appearance and 
habits than the orang-utan, and several Semnopitheci, such as the 
long-nosed ape and the golden-black or chrysomelas. The large- 
eyed Stenops tardigradus also deserves mention. The larger 
beasts of prey are not met with, and little check is therefore put 
on the natural fecundity of the graminivorous species. A small 
panther and the clouded tiger (so called) — Felis macroscelis — 
are the largest animals of the cat kind that occur in Borneo. 
The Bengal tiger is not found. The Malay or honey-bear is 
very common. The rhinoceros and the elephant both occur in 
the northern part of the island, though both are somewhat rare, 
and in this connexion it should be noted that the distribution 
of quadrupeds as between Borneo, Sumatra and the Malayan 
Peninsula is somewhat peculiar and seemingly somewhat cap- 
ricious. Many quadrupeds, such as the honey-bear and the 
rhinoceros, are common to all, but while the tiger is common 
both in the Malayan Peninsula and in Sumatra, it does not occur 
in Borneo; the elephant, so common in the peninsula, and found 
in Borneo, is unknown in Sumatra; and the orang-utan, so 
plentiful in parts of Borneo and parts of Sumatra, has never 
been discovered in the Malay Peninsula. It has been suggested, 
but with very scant measure of probability, that the existence of 
elephants in Borneo, whose confinement to a single district is 
remarkable and unexplained, is due to importation; and the 
fact is on record that when Magellan's ships visited Brunei in 
1522 tame elephants were in use at the court of the sultan of 
Brunei. Wild oxen of the Sunda race, not to be in any way con- 
founded with the Malayan seladang or gaur, are rare, but the 
whole country swarms with wild swine, and the babirusa, a 
pig with curious horn-like tusks, is not uncommon. Alligators 
are found in most of the rivers, and the gavial is less frequently 
met with. Three or four species of deer are common, including 
the mouse-deer, or plandok, an animal of remarkable grace and 
beauty, about the size of a hare but considerably less heavy. 
Squirrels, flying-squirrels, porcupines, civet-cats, rats, bats, 
flying-foxes and lizards are found in great variety; snakes of 
various kinds, from the boa-constrictor downward, are abundant, 
while the forests swarm with tree-leeches, and the marshes with 
horse-leeches and frogs. A remarkable flying-frog was discovered 
by Professor A. R. Wallace. Birds are somewhat rare in some 
quarters. The most important are eagles, kites, vultures, falcons, 
owls, horn-bills, cranes, pheasants (notably the argus, fire-back 
and peacock-pheasants), partridges, ravens, crows, parrots, 
pigeons, woodpeckers, doves, snipe, quail and swallows. Of most 
of these birds several varieties are met with. The Cypselus 
esculentus, or edible-nest swift, is very common, and the nests, 
which are built mostly in limestone caves, are esteemed the best 
in the archipelago. Mosquitoes and sand-flies are the chief insect 
pests, and in some districts are very troublesome. Several kinds 
of parasitic jungle ticks cause much annoyance to men and to 
beasts. There are also two kinds of ants, the sSmut dpi (" fire 



ant") and the stmut Idda ("pepper ant"), whose bites are 
peculiarly painful. Hornets, bees and wasps of many varieties 
abound. The honey and the wax of the wild bee are collected 
by the natives. Butterflies and moths are remarkable for their 
number, size, variety and beauty. Beetles are no less numer- 
ously represented, as is to be expected in a country so richly 
wooded as Borneo. The swamps and rivers, as well as the sur- 
rounding seas, swarm with fish. The siawan is a species of fish 
found in the rivers and valued for its spawn, which is salted. 
The natives are expert and ingenious fishermen. Turtles, trepang 
and pearl-shell are of some commercial importance. 

The dog, the cat, the pig, the domestic fowl (which is not 
very obviously related to the bantam of the woods), the buffalo, 
a smaller breed than that met with in the Malayan Peninsula, 
and in some districts bullocks of the Brahmin breed and small 
horses, are the principal domestic animals. The character of the 
country and the nomadic habits of many of the natives of the 
interior, who rarely occupy their villages for more than a few 
years in succession, have not proved favourable to pastoral 
modes of life. The buffaloes are used not only in agriculture, 
but also as beasts of burden, as draught-animals and for the 
saddle. Horses, introduced by Europeans and owned only by 
the wealthier classes, are found in Banjermasin and in Sarawak. 
In British North Borneo, and especially in the district of Tem- 
pasuk on the north-west coast, Borneo ponies, bred originally, 
it is supposed, from the stock which is indigenous to the Sulu 
archipelago, are common. 

Flora. — The flora of Borneo is very rich, the greater portion 
of the surface of the island being clothed in luxuriant vegetation. 
The king of the forest is the tapan, which, rising to a great height 
without fork or branch, culminates in a splendid dome of foliage. 
The official seats of some of the chiefs are constructed from the 
wood of this tree. Iron-wood, remarkable for the durability of 
its timber, is abundant; it is used by the natives for the pillars 
of their homes and forms an article of export, chiefly to Hong- 
Kong. It is rivalled in hardness by the kdyu tSmbSsu. In all, 
about sixty kinds of timber of marketable quality are furnished 
in more or less profusion, but the difficulty of extraction, even 
in the regions situated in close proximity to the large waterways, 
renders it improbable that the timber trade of Borneo will attain 
to any very great dimensions until other and easier sources of 
supply have become exhausted. Palm-trees are abundant in 
great variety, including the nlpah, which is much used for thatch- 
ing, the cabbage, fan, sugar, coco and sago palms. The last two 
furnish large supplies of food to the natives, some copra is ex- 
ported, and sago factories, mostly in the hands of Chinese, 
prepare sago for the Dutch and British markets. Gutta-percha 
{gStah percha in the vernacular), camphor, cinnamon, cloves, 
nutmegs, gambir and betel, or areca-nuts, are all produced in 
the island; most of the tropical fruits flourish, including the 
much-admired but, to the uninitiated, most evil-smelling durian, 
a large fruit with an exceedingly strong outer covering composed 
of stout pyramidal spikes, which grows upon the branches of a 
tall tree and occasionally in falling inflicts considerable injuries 
upon passers-by. Yams, several kinds of sweet potatoes, melons, 
pumpkins, cucumbers, pineapples, bananas and mangosteens 
are cultivated, as also are a large number of other fruits. Rice 
is grown in irrigated lands near the rivers and in the swamps, 
and also in rude clearings in the interior; sugar-cane of superior 
quality in Sambas and Montrado; cotton, sometimes exported 
in small quantities, on the banks of the Negara, a tributary of the 
Barito; tobacco, used very largely now in the production of 
cigars, in various parts of northern Borneo; and tobacco for 
native consumption, which is of small commercial importance, 
is cultivated in most parts of the island. Indigo, coffee and 
pepper have been cultivated since 1855 in the western division 
of Dutch Borneo. Among the more beautiful of the flowering 
plants are rhododendrons, orchids and pitcher-plants — the 
latter reaching extraordinary development, especially in the 
northern districts about Kinabalu. Epiphytous plants are very 
common, many that are usually independent assuming here the 
parasitic character; the Vanda lowii, for example, grows on the 



26o 



BORNEO 



lower branches of trees, and its strange pendent flower-stalks 
often hang down so as almost to reach the ground. Ferns are 
abundant, but not so varied as in Java. 

Population. — The population of Borneo is not known with any 
approach to accuracy, but according to the political divisions of 
the island it is estimated as follows: — 



Dutch Borneo 
British North Borneo 
Sarawak 
Brunei 



1,130,000 

200,000 

500,000 

20,000 



No effective census of the population has ever been taken, and 
vast areas in Dutch Borneo and in British North Borneo remain 
unexplored, and free from any practical authority or control. 
In Sarawak, owing to the high administrative genius of the first 
raja and his successor, the natives have been brought far more 
completely under control, but the raja has never found occasion 
to utilize the machinery of his government for the accurate 
enumeration of his subjects. 

Dutch Borneo is divided for administrative purposes into two 
divisions, the western and the south and eastern respectively. 
Of the two, the former is under the more complete and effective 
control. The estimated population in the western division is 
413,000 and in the south and eastern 717,000. Europeans 
number barely 1000; Arabs about 3000, and Chinese, mainly in 
the western division, -over 40,000. In both divisions there is an 
average density of little more than 1 to every 2 sq. m. The 
sparseness of the population throughout the Dutch territory is 
due to a variety of causes — to the physical character of the 
country, which for the most part restricts the area of population 
to the near neighbourhood of the rivers; to the low standard of 
civilization to which the majority of the natives have attained 
and the consequent disregard of sanitation and hygiene; to wars, 
piracy and head-hunting, the last of which has not even yet been 
effectually checked among some of the tribes of the interior; and 
to the aggression and oppressions in earlier times of Malayan, 
Arab and Bugis settlers. Among the natives, more especially 
of the interior, an innate restlessness which leads to a life of 
spasmodic nomadism, poverty, insufficient nourishment, an 
incredible improvidence which induces them to convert into 
intoxicating liquor a large portion of their annual crops, feasts 
of a semi-religious character which are invariably accompanied 
by prolonged drunken orgies, and certain superstitions which 
necessitate the frequent procuration of abortion, have contributed 
to check the growth of population. In Sambas, Montrado and 
some parts of Pontianak, the greater density of the population 
is due to the greater fertility of the soil, the opening of mines, the 
navigation and trade plied on the larger rivers, and the con- 
centration of the population at the junctions of rivers, the mouths 
of rivers and the seats of government. Of the chief place in the 
western division, Pontianak has about 9000 inhabitants; Sambas 
about 8000; Montrado, Mampawa and Landak between 2000 
and 4000 each; and in the south and eastern division there 
are Banjermasin with nearly 50,000 inhabitants; Marabahan, 
Amuntai, Negara, Samarinda and Tengarung with populations of 
from 5000 to 10,000 inhabitants each. In Amuntai and Marta- 
pura early Hindu colonization, of which the traces and the 
influence still are manifest, the fertile soil, trade and industry 
aided by navigable rivers, have co-operated towards the growth 
of population to a degree which presents a marked contrast to 
the conditions in the interior parts of the Upper Barito and of 
the more westerly rivers. Only a very small proportion of the 
Europeans in Dutch Borneo live by agriculture and industry, 
the great majority of them being officials. The Arabs and Chinese 
are engaged in trading, mining, fishing and agriculture. Of the 
natives fully 90 % live by agriculture, which, however, is for the 
most part of a somewhat primitive description. The industries 
of the natives are confined to such crafts as spinning and weaving 
and dyeing, the manufacture of iron weapons and implements, 
boat- and shipbuilding, &c. More particularly in the south- 
eastern division, and especially in the districts of Negara, 
Banjermasin, Amuntai and Martapura, shipbuilding, iron- 
forging, gold- and silversmith's work, and the polishing of 



diamonds, are industries of high development in the larger 
centres of population. 

Races. — The peoples of Borneo belong to a considerable 
variety of races, of different origin and degrees of civilization. 
The most important numerically are the Dyaks, the Dusuns and 
Muruts of the interior, the Malays, among whom must be 
counted such Malayan tribes as the Bajaus, Ilanuns, &c, the 
Bugis, who were originally immigrants from Celebes, and the 
Chinese. The Dutch, and to a minor extent the Arabs, are of 
importance on account of their political influence in Dutch 
Borneo, while the British communities have a similar importance 
in Sarawak and in British North Borneo. Accounts of the 
Malays, Dyaks and Bugis are given under their several headings, 
and some information concerning the Dusuns and Muruts will 
be found in the section below, which deals with British North 
Borneo. The connexion of the Chinese with Borneo calls for 
notice here. They seem to have been the first civilized people 
who had dealings with Borneo, if the colonization of a portion 
of the south-eastern corner of the island by Hindus be excepted. 
The Chinese annals speak of tribute paid to the empire by Pha-la 
on the north-east coast of the island as early as the 7th century, 
and later documents mention a Chinese colonization in the 15th 
century. The traditions of the Malays and Dyaks seem to con- 
firm the statements, and many of the leading families of Brunei 
in north-west Borneo claim to have Chinese blood in their 
veins, while the annals of Sulu record an extensive Chinese 
immigration about 1575. However this may be, it is certain 
that the flourishing condition of Borneo in the 16th and 17th 
centuries was largely due to the energy of Chinese settlers and 
to trade with China. In the 18th century there was a consider- 
able Chinese population settled in Brunei, engaged for the most 
part in planting and exporting pepper, but the consistent 
oppression of the native rajas destroyed their industry and led 
eventually to the practical extirpation of the Chinese. The 
Malay chiefs of other districts encouraged immigration from 
China with a view to developing the mineral resources of their 
territories, and before long Chinese settlers were to be found in 
considerable numbers in Sambas, Montrado, Pontianak and else- 
where. They were at first forbidden to engage in commerce or 
agriculture, to carry firearms, to possess or manufacture gun- 
powder. About 1779 the Dutch acquired immediate authority 
over all strangers, and thus assumed responsibility for the 
control of the Chinese, who presently proved themselves some- 
what troublesome. Their numbers constantly increased and 
were reinforced by new immigrants, and pushing inland in search 
of fresh mineral-bearing areas, they contracted frequent inter- 
marriages with the Dyaks and other non-Mahommedan natives. 
They brought with them from China their aptitude for the 
organization of secret societies which, almost from the first, 
assumed the guise of political associations. These secret societies 
furnished them with a machinery whereby collective action was 
rendered easy, and under astute leaders they offered a formidable 
opposition to the Dutch government. Later, when driven into 
the interior and eventually out of Dutch territory, they cost the 
first raja of Sarawak some severe contests before they were 
at last reduced to obedience. Serious disturbances among the 
Chinese are now in Borneo matters of ancient history, and to-day 
the Chinaman forms perhaps the most valuable element in the 
civilization and development of the island, just as does his fellow 
in the mining states of the Malayan Peninsula. They are in- 
dustrious, frugal and intelligent;' the richer among them are 
excellent men of business and are peculiarly equitable in their 
dealings; the majority of all classes can read and write their own 
script, and the second generation acquires an education of an 
European type with great facility. The bulk of the shop- 
keeping, trading and mining industries, so long as the mining 
is of an alluvial character, is in Chinese hands. The greater 
part of the Chinese on the west coast are originally drawn 
from the boundaries of Kwang-tung and Kwang-si. They are 
called Kehs by the Malays, and are of the same tribes as those 
which furnish the bulk of the workers to the tin mines of the 
Malay Peninsula. They are a rough and hardy people, and are 



BORNEO 



261 



apt at times to be turbulent. The shopkeeping class comes 
mostly from Fuh-kien and the coast districts of Amoy. They 
are known to the Borneans as Ollohs. 

History. — As far as is known, Borneo never formed a political 
unity, and even its geographical unity as an island is a fact 
unappreciated by the vast majority of its native inhabitants. 
The name of Kalamantan has been given by some Europeans 
(on what original authority it is not possible now to ascertain) 
as the native name for the island of Borneo considered as a 
whole; but it is safe to aver that among the natives of the island 
itself Borneo has never borne any general designation. To this 
day, among the natives of the Malayan Archipelago, men speak 
of going to Pontianak, to Sambas or to Brunei, as the case may 
be, but make use of no term which recognizes that these localities 
are part of a single whole. The only archaeological remains are 
a few Hindu temples, and it is probable that the early settlement 
of the south-eastern portion of the island by Hindus dates from 
some time during the first six centuries of our era. There exist, 
however, no data, not even any trustworthy tradition, from 
which to reconstruct the early history of Borneo. Borneo began 
to be known to Europeans after the fall of Malacca in 1511, when 
Alphonso d' Albuquerque despatched Antonio d' Abreu with three 
ships in search of the Molucca or Spice Islands with instructions 
to establish friendly relations with all the native states that he 
might encounter on his way. D 'Abreu, sailing in a south- 
easterly direction from the Straits of Malacca, skirted the southern 
coast of Borneo and laid up his ships at Amboyna, a small island 
near the south-western extremity of Ceram. He returned to 
Malacca in 1314, leaving one of his captains, Francisco Serrano, 
at Ternate , where Magellan's followers found him in 1 5 2 1 . After 
Magellan's death, his comrades sailed from the Moluccas across 
the Celebes into the Sulu Sea, and were the first white men who 
are known to have visited Brunei on the north-west coast of 
Borneo, where they arrived in 1 522. Pigafetta gives an interest- 
ing account of the place and of the reception of the adventurers 
by the sultan. The Molucca Islands being, at that time, the 
principal objective of European traders, and the route followed 
by Magellan's ships being frequently used, Borneo was often 
touched at during the remainder of the 16th century, and trade 
relations with Brunei were successfully established by the 
Portuguese. In 1573 the Spaniards tried somewhat unsuccess- 
fully to obtain a share of this commerce, but it was not until 
1580, when a dethroned sultan appealed to them for asistance 
and by their agency was restored to his own, that they attained 
their object. Thereafter the Spaniards maintained a fitful 
intercourse with Brunei, varied by not infrequent hostilities, 
and in 1645 a punitive expedition on a larger scale than hereto- 
fore was sent to chastise Brunei for persistent acts of piracy. 
No attempt at annexation followed upon this action, commerce 
rather than territory being at this period the prime object of 
both the Spaniards and the Portuguese, whose influence upon 
the natives was accordingly proportionately small. The only 
effort at proselytizing of which we have record came to an 
untimely end in the death of the Theatine monk, Antonio Venti- 
miglia, who had been its originator. Meanwhile the Dutch and 
British East India Companies had been formed, had destroyed 
the monopoly so long enjoyed'by the Portuguese, and to a less 
extent the Spaniards, in the trade of the Malayan Archipelago, 
and had gained a footing in Borneo. The establishment of 
Dutch trading-posts on the west coast of Borneo dates from 
1604, nine years after the first Dutch fleet, under Houtman, 
sailed from the Texel to dispute with the Portuguese the posses- 
sion of the Eastern trade, and in 1608 Samuel Blommaert was 
appointed Dutch resident, or head factor, in Landak and Suke- 
dana. The first appearance of the British in Borneo dates from 
1609, and by 1698 they had an important settlement at Banjer- 
masin, whence they were subsequently expelled by the influence 
of the Dutch, who about 1733 obtained from the sultan a trad- 
ing monopoly. The Dutch, in fact, speedily became the pre- 
dominant European race throughout the Malay Archipelago, 
defeating the British by superior energy and enterprise, and the 
trading-posts all along the western and southern coasts of 



Borneo were presently their exclusive possessions, the sultan of 
Bantam, who was the overlord of these districts, ceding his 
rights to the Dutch. The British meanwhile had turned their 
attention to the north of the island, over which the sultan of 
Sulu exercised the rights of suzerain, and from him, in 1759, 
Alexander Dalrymple obtained possession of the island of 
Balambangan, and the whole of the north-eastern promontory. 
A military post was established, but it was destroyed in 1775 
by the natives under the ddto' , or vassal chiefs, who resented 
the cession of their territory. This mishap rendered a treaty, 
which had been concluded in 1774 with, the sultan of Brunei, 
practically a dead letter, and by the end of the century British 
influence in Borneo was to all intents and purposes at an end. 
The Dutch also mismanaged their affairs in Borneo and suffered 
from a series of misfortunes which led Marshal Daendels in 1809 
to order the abandonment of all their posts. The natives of the 
coasts of Borneo, assisted and stimulated by immigrants from 
the neighbouring islands to the north, devoted themselves more 
and more to organized piracy, and putting to sea in great fleets 
manned by two and three thousand men on cruises that lasted 
for two and even three years, they terrorized the neighbouring 
seas and rendered the trade of civilized nations almost impossible 
for a prolonged period. During the occupation of Java by the 
British an embassy was despatched to Sir Stamford Raffles by 
the sultan of Banjermasin asking for assistance, and in 181 1 
Alexander Hare was despatched thither as commissioner and 
resident. He not only obtained for his government an advan- 
tageous treaty, but secured for himself a grant of a district 
which he proceeded to colonize and cultivate. About the same 
time a British expedition was also sent against Sambas and a 
post established at Pontianak. On the restoration of Java to the 
Dutch in 1816, all these arrangements were cancelled, and the 
Dutch government was left in undisputed possession of the field. 
An energetic policy was soon after adopted, and about half the 
kingdom of Banjermasin was surrendered to the Dutch by its 
sultan in 1823, further concessions being made two years later. 
Meanwhile, George Muller, while exploring the east coast, 
obtained from the sultan of Kutei an acknowledgment of Dutch 
authority, a concession speedily repented by its donor, since the 
enterprising traveller was shortly afterwards killed. The out- 
break of war in Java caused Borneo to be more or less neglected 
by the Dutch for a considerable period, and no effective check 
was imposed upon the natives with a view to stopping piracy, 
which was annually becoming more and more unendurable. On 
the rise of Singapore direct trade had been established with 
Sarawak and Brunei, and it became a matter of moment to 
British merchants that this traffic should be safe. In 1838 Sir 
James Brooke, an Englishman, whose attention had been turned 
to the state of affairs in the Eastern Archipelago, set out for 
Borneo, determined, if possible, to remedy the evil. By 1841 he 
had obtained from the sultan of Brunei the grant of supreme 
authority over Sarawak, in which state, on the sultan's behalf, 
he had waged a successful war, and before many years had 
elapsed he had, with the aid of the British government, suc- 
ceeded in suppressing piracy (see Brooke, Sir James; and 
Sarawak). In 1847 the sultan of Brunei agreed to make no 
cession of territory to any nation .or individual without the 
consent of Great Britain. Since then more and more territory 
has been ceded by the sultans of Brunei to the raja of Sarawak 
and to British North Borneo, and to-day the merest remnant 
of his once extensive state is left within the jurisdiction of the 
sultan. The treaty in 1847 put an end once for all to the 
hopes which the Dutch had cherished of including the whole 
island in their dominions, but it served also to stimulate their 
efforts to consolidate their power within the sphere already 
subjected to their influence. Gunong Tebur, Tanjong, and 
Bulungan had made nominal submission to them in 1834, and 
in 1844 the sultan of Kutei acknowledged their protectorate, a 
treaty of a similar character being concluded about the same 
time with Pasir. The boundaries of British and Dutch Borneo . 
were finally defined by a treaty concluded on the 20th of June 
1 89 1. In spite of this, however, large areas in the interior, 



262 



BORNEO 



both in Dutch Borneo and in the territory owned by the British 
North Borneo Company, are still only nominally under European 
control, and have experienced few direct effects of European 
administration. 

British North Borneo or Sabah 

Sabah is the name applied by the natives to certain portions 
of the territory situated on the north-western coast of the island, 
and originally in no way included the remainder of the country 
now owned by the British North Borneo Company. It has 
become customary, however, for the name to be used by 
Europeans in Borneo to denote the whole of the company's 
territory, and little by little the more educated natives are 
insensibly adopting the practice. 

History. — As has been seen, the British connexion with north- 
ern and north-western Borneo terminated with the 18th century, 
nor was it resumed until 1838, when Raja Brooke set out for 
Brunei and Sarawak. The island of Labuan (q.v.) was occupied 
by the British as a crown colony in 1848, and this may be taken 
as the starting-point of renewed British relations with that 
portion of northern Borneo which is situated to the north of 
Brunei. In 1872 the Labuan Trading Company was established 
in Sandakan, the fine harbour on the northern coast which 
was subsequently the capital of the North Borneo Company's 
territory. In 1878, through the instrumentality of Mr (after- 
wards Sir) Alfred Dent, the sultan of Sulu was induced to transfer 
to a syndicate, formed by Baron Overbeck and Mr Dent, all his 
rights in North Borneo, of which, as has been seen, he had 
been from time immemorial the overlord. The chief promoters 
of this syndicate were Sir Rutherford Alcock, Admiral the Hon. 
Sir Harry Keppel, who at an earlier stage of his career had 
rendered great assistance to the first raja of Sarawak in the 
suppression of piracy, and Mr Richard B. Martin. Early in 188 1 
the British North Borneo Provisional Association, Limited, was 
formed to take over the concession which had been obtained 
from the sultan of Sulu, and in November of that year a petition 
was addressed to Queen Victoria praying for a royal charter. 
This was granted, and subsequently the British North Borneo 
Company, which was formed in May 1882, took over, in spite of 
some diplomatic protests on the part of the Dutch and Spanish 
governments, all the sovereign and territorial rights ceded by 
the original grants, and proceeded under its charter to organize 
the administration of the territory. The company subsequently 
acquired further sovereign and territorial rights from the sultan 
of Brunei and his chiefs in addition to some which had already 
been obtained at the time of the formation of the company. 
The Putatan river was ceded in May 1884, the Padas district, 
including the Padas and Kalias rivers, in November of the same 
year, the Kawang river in February 1885, and the Mantanani 
islands in April 1885. In 1888, by an agreement with the " State 
of North Borneo," the territory of the company was made a 
British protectorate, but its administration remained entirely 
in the hands of the company, the crown reserving only control 
of its foreign relations, and the appointment of its governors 
being required to receive the formal sanction of the secretary of 
state for the colonies. In 1890 the British government placed the 
colony of Labuan under the administration of the company, the 
governor of the state of North Borneo thereafter holding a royal 
commission as governor of Labuan in addition to his commission 
from the company. This arrangement held good until 1905, 
when, in answer to the frequently and strongly expressed desire 
of the colonists, Labuan was removed from the jurisdiction of 
the company and attached to the colony of the Straits Settlements. 
In March 1898 arrangements were made whereby the sultan 
of Brunei ceded to the company all his sovereign and territorial 
rights to the districts situated to the north of the Padas river 
which up to that time had been retained by him. This had the 
effect of rounding off the company's territories, and had the 
additional advantage of doing away with the various no-man's 
lands which had long been used by the discontented among the 
natives as so many Caves of Adullam. The company's acquisi- 
tion of territory was viewed with considerable dissatisfaction 



by many of the natives, and this found expression in frequent acts 
of violence. The most noted and the most successful of the 
native leaders was a Bajau named Mat Saleh (Mahomet Saleh), 
who for many years defied the company, whose policy in his 
regard was marked by considerable weakness and vacillation. 
In 1898 a composition was made with him, the terms of which 
were unfortunately not defined with sufficient clearness, and he 
retired into the Tambunan country, to the east of the range 
which runs parallel with the west coast, where for a period he 
lorded it unchecked over the Dusun tribes of the valley. In 
1899 it was found necessary to expel him, since his acts of aggres- 
sion and defiance were no longer endurable. A short, and this 
time a successful campaign followed, resulting, on the 31st of 
January 1900, in the death of Mat Saleh, and the destruction of 
his defences. Some of his followers who escaped raided the town 
of Kudat on Marudu Bay in April of the same year, but caused 
more panic than damage, and little by little during the next 
years the last smouldering embers of rebellion were extinguished. 
At the present time, though effective administration of the more 
inaccessible districts of the interior cannot be said to have been 
established even yet, the pacification of the native population 
is to all intents and purposes complete. The Tambunan district, 
the last stronghold of Mat Saleh, is now thoroughly settled. 
It is some 500 sq. m. in extent, and carries a population of 
perhaps 12,000. 

Geography. — The state of North Borneo may roughly be said 
to form a pentagon of which three sides, the north-west, north- 
east and east are washed by the sea, while the remaining two 
sides, the south-west and the south, are bordered respectively 
by the Malayan sultanate of Brunei, and by the territories of the 
raja of Sarawak and of the Dutch government. The boundary 
between the company's territory and the Dutch government 
is defined by the treaty concluded in June 1891, of which mention 
has already been made. 

The total area of the company's territory is estimated at about 
31,000 sq. m., with a coast-line of over 900 m. The greater 
portion is exceedingly hilly and in parts mountainous, and the 
interior consists almost entirely of highlands with here and there 
open valleys and plateaus of 50 to 60 sq. m. in extent. On the 
west coast the mountain range, as already noted, runs parallel 
with the seashore at a distance from it of about 15 m. Of this 
range the central feature is the mountain of Kinabalu, which is 
composed of porphyritic granite and igneous rocks and attains 
to a height of 13,698 ft. Mount Madalon, some 15 or 20 m. to 
the north, is 5000 ft. in height, and inland across the valley of 
the Pagalan river, which runs through the Tambunan country 
and falls into the Padas, rises the peak of Trus Madi, estimated 
to be 11,000 ft. above sea-level. The valley of the Pagalan is 
itself for the most part from 1000 to 2000 ft. above the sea, form- 
ing a string of small plateaus marking the sites of former lakes. 
From the base of Trus Madi to the eastern coast the country 
consists of huddled hills broken here and there by regions of a 
more mountainous character. The principal plateaus are in the 
Tambunan and Kaningau valleys, in the basin of the Pagalan, 
and the Ranau plain to the eastward of the base of Kinabalu. 
Similar plateaus of minor importance are to be found dotted 
about the interior. The proximity of the mountain range to the 
seashore causes the rivers of the west coast, with the single 
exception of the Padas, to be rapid, boulder-obstructed, shallow 
streams of little value as means of communication for a distance 
of more than half a dozen miles from their mouths. The Padas 
is navigable for light-draught steam-launches and native boats 
for a distance of nearly 50 m. from its mouth, and smaller craft 
can be punted up as far as Rayoh, some 15 m. farther, but at 
this point its bed is obstructed by impassable falls and rapids, 
which are of such a character that nothing can even be brought 
down them. Even below Rayoh navigation is rendered difficult 
and occasionally dangerous by similar obstructions. The other 
principal rivers of the west coast are the Kalias, Kimanis, Benoneh, 
Papar, Kinarut, Putatan, Inaman, Mengkabong, Tampasuk 
and Pandasan, none of which, however, is of any great importance 
as a means of communication. There is a stout breed of pony 



BORNEO 



263 



raised along the Tampasuk, which is also noted for the Kalupis 
waterfall (1500 ft.), one of the highest in the world, though the 
volume of water is not great. Here also are the principal 
Bajau settlements. Throughout the Malayan Archipelago the 
words Bajau and perompak (pirate) are still used as synonymous 
terms. At the northern extremity of the island Marudu Bay 
receives the waters of the Marudu which rises on the western side 
of Mount Madalon. On the east coast the principal rivers are the 
Sugut, which rises in the hills to the east of Kinabalu and forms 
its delta near Torongohok or Pura-Pura Island; the Labuk, 
which has its sources 70 m. inland and debouches into Labuk Bay; 
and the Kinabatangan, the largest and most important river in 
the territory, which is believed to have its rise eastward of the 
range of which Trus Madi is the principal feature, and is navigable 
by steamer for a considerable distance and by native boats for 
a distance of over 100 m. from its mouth. Some valuable 
tobacco land, which, however, is somewhat liable to flood, and 
some remarkable burial-caves are found in the valley of the 
Kinabatangan. The remaining rivers of the east coast are the 
Segamah, which rises west of Darvel Bay, the Kumpong, and the 
Kalabakang, which debouches into Cowie Harbour. Taking it 
as a whole, the company's territory is much less generously 
watered than are other parts of Borneo, which again compares 
unfavourably in this respect with the Malayan states of the 
peninsula. Many of the rivers, especially those of the west coast, 
are obstructed by bars at their mouths that render them difficult 
of access. Several of the natural harbours of North Borneo, on 
the other hand, are accessible, safe and commodious. Sandakan 
Harbour, on the north-east coast (5° 40' N., 118° 10' E.), runs 
inland for some 17 m. with a very irregular outline broken by 
the mouths of numerous creeks and streams. The mouth, only 
2 m. across, is split into two channels by the little, high, bluff- 
like island of Barhala. The depth in the main entrance varies 
from 10 to 17 fathoms, and vessels drawing 20 ft. can advance 
half-way up the bay. The principal town in the territory, and 
the seat of government (though an attempt has been unsuccess- 
fully made to transfer this to Jesselton on the west coast), is 
Sandakan, situated just inside the mouth of the Sarwaka inlet. 
At Silam, on Darvel Bay, there is good anchorage; and Kudat 
in Marudu Bay, first surveyed by Commander Johnstone of 
H.M.S. " f/geria " in 1881, is a small but useful harbour. 

Climate and Population, — The climate of North Borneo is 
tropical, hot, damp and enervating. The rainfall is steady and 
not usually excessive. The shade temperature at Sandakan 
ordinarily ranges from 72 to 94 F. The population of the 
company's territory is not' known with any approach to accuracy, 
but is estimated, somewhat liberally, to amount to 175,000, 
including 16,000 Chinese. Of this total about three-fourths are 
found in the districts of the west coast. The seashore and the 
country bordering closely on the west coast are inhabited chiefly 
by Dusuns, by Kadayans, by Bajaus and Ilanuns — both Malayan 
tribes — and by Brunei Malays. The east coast is very sparsely 
populated and its inhabitants are mostly Bajaus and settlers 
from the neighbouring Sulu archipelago. The interior is dotted 
with infrequent villages inhabited by Dusuns or by Muruts, 
a village ordinarily consisting of a single long hut divided up 
into cubicles, one for the use of each family, opening out on to a 
common verandah along which the skulls captured by the tribe 
are festooned. It has been customary to speak of these tribes as 
belonging to the Dyak group, but the Muruts would certainly 
seem to be the representatives of the aboriginal inhabitants of 
the island, and there is much reason to think that the Dusuns 
also must be classed as distinct from the Dyaks. The Dusun 
language, it is interesting to note, presents very curious gram- 
matical complications and refinements such as are not to be 
found among the tongues spoken by any of the other peoples 
of the Malayan Archipelago or the mainland of south-eastern 
Asia. Dusuns and Muruts alike are in a very low state of civiliza- 
tion, and both indulge inordinately in the use of intoxicating 
liquors of their own manufacture. 

Settlements and Communication. — The company possesses a 
number of small stations along the coast, of which Sandakan, 



with a population of 9 500, is the most important. The remainder 
which call for separate mention are Lahat Datu on Darvel Bay 
on the east coast; Kudat on Marudu Bay and Jesselton on Gaya 
Bay on the west coast. A railway of indifferent construction 
runs along the west coast from Jesselton to Weston on Brunei 
Bay, with a branch along the banks of the Padas to Tenom above 
the rapids. It was originally intended that this should eventually 
be extended across the territory to Cowie Harbour (Sabuko Bay) 
on the east coast, but the extraordinary engineering difficulties 
which oppose themselves to such an extension, the sparse 
population of the territory, and the failure of the existing line 
to justify the expectations entertained by its designers, combine 
to render the prosecution of any such project highly improbable. 
Sandakan is connected by telegraph with Mempakul on the west 
coast whence a cable runs to Labuan and so gives telegraphic 
communication with Singapore. The overland line from Mem- 
pakul to Sandakan, however, passes through forest-clad and 
very difficult country, and telegraphic communication is therefore 
subject to very frequent interruption. Telegraphic communica- 
tion between Mempakul and Kudat, via Jesselton, has also been 
established and is more regularly and successfully maintained. 
The only roads in the territory are bridle-paths in the immediate 
vicinity of the company's principal stations. The Sabah Steam- 
ship Company, subsidized by the Chartered Company, runs 
steamers along the coast, calling at all the company's stations 
at which native produce is accumulated. A German firm runs 
vessels at approximately bi-monthly intervals from Singapore 
to Labuan and thence to Sandakan, calling in on occasion at 
Jesselton and Kudat en route. There is also fairly frequent 
communication between Sandakan and Hong-Kong, a journey 
of four days' steaming. 

Products and Trade. — The capabilities of the company's 
territory are only dimly known. Coal has been found in the 
neighbourhood of Cowie Harbour and elsewhere, but though its 
quality is believed to be as good as that exported from Dutch 
Borneo, it is not yet known whether it exists in payable 
quantities. Gold has been found in alluvial deposits on the 
banks of some of the rivers of the east coast, but here again the 
quantity available is still in serious doubt. The territory as a 
whole has been very imperfectly examined by geologists, and 
no opinion can at present be hazarded as to the mineral wealth 
or poverty of the company's property. Traces of mineral oil, 
iron ores, copper, zinc and antimony have been found, but the 
wealth of North Borneo still lies mainly in its jungle produce. 
It possesses a great profusion of excellent timber, but the 
difficulty of extraction has so far restricted the lumber industry 
within somewhat modest limits. Gutta, rubber, rattans, 
mangrove-bark, edible nuts, guano, edible birds'-nests, &c, are 
all valuable articles of export. The principal cultivated produce 
is tobacco, sago, cocoanuts, coffee, pepper, gambier and sugar- 
canes. Of these the tobacco and the sago are the most important. 
Between 1886 and 1900 the value of the tobacco crop increased 
from £471 to £200,000. 

As is common throughout Malayan lands, the trade of North 
Borneo is largely in the hands of Chinese shopkeepers who send 
their agents inland to attend the Tamus (Malay, t&mu, to meet) 
or fairs, which are the recognized scenes of barter between the 
natives of the interior and those of the coast. At Sandakan 
there is a Chinese population of over 2000. 

Administration. — For administrative purposes the territory 
is divided into nine provinces: Alcock and Dewhurst in the 
north; Keppel on the west; Martin in the centre; Myburgh, 
Mayne and Elphinstone on the east coast; and Dent and 
Cunliffe in the south. The boundaries of these provinces, how- 
ever, are purely arbitrary and not accurately defined. The form 
of government is modelled roughly upon the system adopted 
in the Malay States of the peninsula during the early days of 
their administration by British residents. The government is 
vested primarily in the court of directors appointed under the 
company's charter, which may be compared to the colonial 
office in its relation to a British colony, though the court of 
directors interests itself far more closely than does the colonial 



264 



BORNHOLM— BORNIER 



department in the smaller details of local administration. The 
supreme authority on the spot is represented by the governor, 
under whom are the residents of Kudat, Darvel Bay and Keppel, 
officers who occupy much the same position as that usually 
known by the title of magistrate and collector. The less im- 
portant districts are administered by district magistrates, who 
also collect the taxes. The principal departments, whose chiefs 
reside at the capital, are the treasury, the land and survey, the 
public works, the constabulary, the medical and the judicial. 
The secretariat is under the charge of a government secretary 
who ranks next in precedence to the governor. Legislation is 
by the proclamation of the governor, but there is a council, 
meeting at irregular intervals, upon which the principal heads 
of departments and one unofficial member have seats. The 
public service is recruited by nomination by the court of directors. 
The governor is the chief judge of the court of appeal, but a 
judge who is subordinate to him takes all ordinary supreme Court 
cases. The laws are the Indian Penal and Civil Procedure Codes 
and Evidence Acts, supplemented by a few local laws pro- 
mulgated by proclamation. There is an Imam's court for the 
trial of cases affecting Mahommedan law of marriage, succession, 
&c. The native chiefs are responsible to the government for 
the preservation of law and order in their districts. They have 
restricted judicial powers. The constabulary numbers some 
600 men and consists of a mixed force of Sikhs, Pathans, Punjabi 
Mahommedans, Dyaks and Malays, officered by a few Europeans. 
There is a Protestant mission which supports a church — the only 
stone building in the territory — and a school at Sandakan, with 
branches at Kudat, Kaningau and Tambunan. The Roman 
Catholic mission maintains an orphanage, a church and school at 
Sandakan, and has missions among the Dusuns at several points 
on the west coast and in the Tambunan country. Its head- 
quarters are at Kuching in Sarawak. The Chinese have their 
joss-houses and the Mahommedans a few small mosques, but 
the vast majority of the native inhabitants are pagans who 
have no buildings set apart for religious purposes. 

Finance and Money. — The principal sources of revenue are 
the licences granted for the importation and retailing of opium, 
wine and spirits, which are in the hands of Chinese; a customs 
duty of 5 % on imports; an export tax of 5 % on jungle produce; 
a poll-tax sanctioned by ancient native custom; and a stamp 
duty. A land revenue is derived from the sale of government 
lands, from quit rents and fees of transfer, &c. Judicial fees 
bring in a small amount, and the issue and sale of postage and 
revenue stamps have proved a fruitful source of income. The 
people of the country are by no means heavily taxed, a large 
number of the natives of the interior escaping all payment of 
dues to the company, the revenue being for the most part con- 
tributed by the more civilized members of the community 
residing in the neighbourhood of the company's stations. There 
are bank agencies in Sandakan, and the company does banking 
business when required. The state, which has adopted the 
penny postage, is in the Postal Union, and money orders on 
North Borneo are issued in the United Kingdom and in most 
British colonies and vice versa. Notes issued by the principal 
banks in Singapore were made current in North Borneo in 1900. 
There is also a government note issue issued by the company for 
use within the territory only. The currency is the Mexican and 
British dollar, the company issuing its own copper coin — viz. 
cents and half cents. It is proposed to adopt the coinage of the 
Straits Settlements, and measures have been taken with a view 
to the accomplishment of this. In the interior the principal 
medium of exchange among the natives is the large earthenware 
jars, imported originally, it is believed, from China, which form 
the chief wealth both of tribes and individuals. (H. Cl.) 

Authorities. — Among early works may be mentioned, S. Blom- 
maert, Discours ende ghelegentheyt van het eylandt Borneo int Jear 
i6oq; Hachelyke reystogt van Jacob Jansz. de Roy na Borneo en 
Atchin injiet jaar i6qi; Beeckman, Visit to Borneo, 1718, in J. 
Pinkerton's General Collections (1808-1814); F. Valentijn in Ond 
en Nieuw Oost Indien (Dordrecht, 1724-1726). See also H. Keppel, 
Expedition to Borneo of H. M.S. " Dido " (London, 1846) ; R. Mundy, 
Narrative of Events in Borneo and Celebes (London, 1848) ; F. S. 



Marryat, Borneo, &c. ( 1 848) ; P. J .Veth, Borneo's Westerafdeeling (Zalt- 
Bommel, 1854 and 1856) ; S. M filler, Reizen en onderzoekingen in den 
Indischen Archipel (Amsterdam, 1857); C. Bock, Head-hunters of 
Borneo (London, 1881), and Reis in Oost en Zuid-Borneo (The Hague, 
1887); J. Hatton, The New Ceylon, a Sketch of British North 
Borneo (London, 1882); F. Hatton, North Borneo (London, 1885); 
T. Posewitz, Borneo . . . Verbreitung der nutzbaren Mineralien 
(Berlin, 1889), Eng. trans., Borneo; its Geology and Mineral Resources 
(London, 1892); J. Whitehead, Exploration of Mount Kini Balu 
(London, 1893); Mrs W. B. Pryor, A Decade in Borneo (London, 
1894); H. Ling Roth, The Natives of Sarawak and North Borneo 
(London, 1896); G. A. F. Molengraaf, Geologische Verkinningstochten 
in Centraal Borneo (Leiden, 1900, Eng. trans. 1902) ; A. W. Niewen- 
huis, In Centraal Borneo (Leiden, 1901), and Quer durch Borneo 
(Leiden, 1904), &c; W. H. Furness, Home Life of Borneo Head- 
hunters (London, 1902) ; O. Beccari, Nelle Foreste di Borneo (Florence, 
1902), Eng. trans., Wanderings in the Great Forests of Borneo (London, 
1904) ; D. Cator, Everyday Life among the Head-hunters (London, 
I9°5)- For geology, besides the works of Posewitz and Molengraaf 
already cited, see R. B. Newton in Geol. Mag., 1897, pp. 407-415, 
and Proc. Malac. Soc, London, vol. v. (1902-1903), pp. 403-409. 
A series of papers on the palaeontology of the island will be found in 
the several volumes of the Samml. Geol. R. Mus., Leiden. 

BORNHOLM, an island in the Baltic Sea, 22 m. S.E. of the 
Swedish coast, belonging to Denmark, lying on 15° E., and 
between 55° and 55° 18' N., and measuring 24 m. from S.E. to 
N.W. and 19 (extreme) from E. to W. Pop. (1901) 40,889. The 
surface is generally hilly; the scenery is fine in the north, where 
the cliffs reach a height of 135 ft., and the granite hill of Hellig- 
domsklipper dominates the island. Besides freestone, exported 
for building, limestone, blue marble, and porcelain-clay are 
worked. A little coal is found and used locally, but it is not 
of good quality. Oats, flax and hemp are cultivated. The 
inhabitants are employed in agriculture, fishing, brewing, 
distillation and the manufacture of earthenware. Weaving 
and clock-making are also carried on to some extent. The 
capital is Ronne (115 m. by sea from Copenhagen), and there are 
five other small towns on the island — Svanike, Nekso, Hasle, 
Allinge, and Sandvig. A railway connects Ronne with Nekso 
(22 m. E. by S.), where a bust commemorates J. N. Madvig, the 
philologist, who was born there in 1804 (d. 1886). Blanch's 
Hotel, 10 m. N. of Ronne, is the most favoured resort on the 
island, which attracts many visitors. On the north-west coast 
are the ruins of the castle of Hammershus, which was built in 
1158, and long served as a state prison; while another old 
castle, erected by Christian V. in 1684, and important as com- 
manding the entrance to the Baltic, is situated on Christianso, 
one of a small group of islands 15 m. E. by N. The island of 
Bornholm has had an eventful history. In early times it was 
long the independent seat of marauding Vikings. In the 12th 
century it became a fief of the archbishop of Lund. In 15 10 it 
was captured by the Hanseatic League, in 1522 it came under 
Danish sway, and in 1526 it was made directly subject to the 
city of Liibeck. In 1645 the Swedes took it by storm, and their 
possession of it was confirmed by the peace of Roskilde in 1658; 
but the sympathies of the people were with Denmark, and a 
popular insurrection succeeded in expelling the Swedish forces, 
the island coming finally into the possession of Denmark in 1660. 

BORNIER, HENRI, Vicomte de (1825-1901) French poet 
and dramatist, was born at Lunel (Herault) on the 25th of 
December 1825. He came to Paris in 1845 wit h the object of 
studying law, but in that year he published a volume of verse, 
Les Premieres Feuittes, and the Comedie Frangaise accepted a 
play of his entitled Le Mariage de Luther. He was given a post 
in the library of the Arsenal, where he served for half a century, 
becoming director in 1889. In 1875 was produced at the Theatre 
Francais his heroic drama in verse, La Fille de Roland. The 
action of the play turns on the love of Gerald, son of the traitor 
Ganelon, for the daughter of Roland. The patriotic subject and 
the nobility of the character of Gerald, who renounces Berthe 
when he learns his real origin, procured for the piece a great 
success. The conflict between honour and love and the grandiose 
sentiment of the play inevitably provoked comparison with 
Corneille. The piece would indeed be a masterpiece if, as its 
critics were not slow to point out, the verse had been quite equal 
to the subject. Among the numerous other works of M. de 



BORNU 



265 



Bornier should be mentioned: Dimitri (1876), libretto of an 
opera by M. V. de Joncieres; and the dramas, Les Noces d'Attila 
(1880) and Mahomet (1888). The production of this last piece 
was forbidden in deference to the representations of the Turkish 
ambassador. Henri de Bornier was critic of the Nouvelle Revue 
from 1879 to 1887. His Poesies computes were published in 1894. 
He died in January 1901. 

BORNU, a country in the Central Sudan, lying W. and S. of 
Lake Chad. It is bounded W. and S. by the Hausa states and 
N. by the Sahara. Formerly an independent Mahommedan 
sultanate it has been divided between Great Britain, Germany 
and France. To France has fallen a portion of northern Bornu 
and also Zinder (q.v.), a tributary state to the north-west, while 
the south-west part is incorporated in the German colony of 
Cameroon. Three-fourths of Bornu proper, some 50,000 sq. m., 
forms part of the British protectorate of Nigeria. 

Bornu is for the most part an alluvial plain, the country sloping 
gradually to Lake Chad, which formerly spread over a much 
larger area than it now occupies. The Komadugu (i.e. river) 
Waube — generally known as the Yo — and its tributaries rise 
in the highlands which, beyond the western border of Bornu, 
form the watershed between the Niger and Chad systems, and 
flow north and east across the plains to Lake, Chad, the Yo in its 
last few miles marking the frontier between the French and 
British possessions. In the south-west a part of Bornu drains 
to the Benue. The rivers are intermittent, and water in southern 
Bornu is obtained only from wells, which are sunk to a great 
depth. The vast plain of Bornu is stoneless, except for rare 
outcrops of ironstone, and consists of the porous fissured black 
earth called " cotton soil " in India, alternating with, or more 
probably overlaid by, sand. Throughout the flat country water 
is apparently found everywhere at a depth of 54 ft., corresponding 
to the level of Chad. Towards Damjiri in the north-west the 
country becomes more broken, hilly and timbered. In the south 
limestone is found near Gujba and also along the Gongola 
tributary of the Benue. A forest of red and green barked 
acacia, yielding the species of gum most valuable in the market, 
extends from the Gongola to Gujba. Immense baobabs (Adan- 
sonia digitata), fine tamarinds and a few trees of the genus Ficus 
are met with in the south. North of Maifoni (latitude 12° N.) 
the baobab ceases, except at Kuka, where extensive plantations 
have been made, and its place is taken by the Kigelia and also 
by a very handsome species of Diospyros. North of Kuka is a 
dense belt of Hyphaene palm with fine tamarinds and figs. 
Cotton and indigo grow wild, and afford the materials for the 
cloths, finely dyed with blue stripes, which form the staple 
fabric of the country. On the shores of Lake Chad the cotton 
grown is of a peculiarly fine quality. Rice and wheat of excellent 
quality are raised, but in small quantities, the staple food being 
a species of millet called gussub, which is made into a kind of 
paste and eaten with butter or honey. Ground-nuts, yams, 
sweet potatoes, several sorts of beans and grains, peppers, 
onions, water-melons and tomatoes are grown. Of fruit trees 
the country possesses the lime and fig. 

Wild animals, in great numbers, find both food and cover 
in the extensive districts of wood and marsh. Lions, giraffes, 
elephants, hyenas, crocodiles, hippopotami, antelopes, gazelles 
and ostriches are found. The horse, the camel and the ox are 
the chief domestic animals ; all are used as beasts of burden. The 
country abounds with bees, and honey forms one of the chief 
Bornuese delicacies. 

The climate, especially from March to the end of June, is 
oppressively hot, rising sometimes to 105° and 107 , and even 
during most of the night not falling much below ioo°. In May 
the wet season begins, with violent storms of thunder and 
lightning. In the end of June the rivers and lakes begin to 
overflow, and for several months the rains, accompanied with 
sultry weather, are almost incessant. The inhabitants at this 
season suffer greatly from fevers. In October the rains abate; 
cool, fresh winds blow from the west and north-west; and for 
several months the climate is healthy and agreeable. 

Inhabitants. — The inhabitants, of whom the great majority 



profess Mahommedanism, are divided into Negroes and those of 
mixed blood, i.e. Negro and Berber, Arab or other crossing. 
The total population of British Bornu is estimated at 500,000. 
The dominant tribe, called Bornuese, Berberi or Kanuri, a 
Negro race with an infusion of Berber blood, have black skins, 
large mouths, thick lips and broad noses, but good teeth and 
high foreheads. The females add to their want of beauty by 
extensive tattooing; they also stain their faces with indigo, 
and dye their front teeth black and their canine teeth red. The 
law allows polygamy, but the richest men have seldom more 
than two or three wives. The marriage ceremonies last for a 
whole week, the first three days being spent in feasting on the 
favourite national dishes, and the others appropriated to certain 
symbolical rites. A favourite amusement is the watching of 
wrestling matches. A game bearing some resemblance to chess, 
played with beans and holes in the sand, is also a favourite 
occupation. 

The pastoral districts of the country are occupied by the 
Shuwas, who are of Arab origin, and speak a well-preserved 
dialect of Arabic. Of the date of their immigration from the 
East there is no record; but they were in the country as early 
as the middle of the 17th century. They are divided into 
numerous distinct clans. Their villages in general consist of 
rudely constructed huts, of an exaggerated conical form. 
Another tribe, called La Salas, inhabits a number of low fertile 
islands in Lake Chad, separated from the mainland by fordable 
channels. 

The Bornuese are noted horsemen, and in times of war the 
horses, as well as the riders, used to be cased in light iron mail. 
The Shuwas, however, are clad only in a light shirt, and the 
Kanembu spearmen go almost naked, and fight with shield and 
spear. It is indispensable to a chief of rank that he should 
possess a huge belly, and when high feeding cannot produce this, 
padding gives the appearance of it. Notwithstanding the heat 
of the climate, the body is enveloped in successive robes, the 
number indicating the rank of the wearer. The head likewise 
is enclosed in numerous turbans. The prevailing language in 
Bornu is the Kanuri. It has no affinity, according to Heinrich 
Barth, with the great Berber family. A grammar was published 
in 1854 by S. W. Koelle, as well as a volume of tales and fables, 
with a translation and vocabulary. 

The towns in Bornu, which have populations varying from 
10,000 to 50,000 or more, are surrounded with walls 35 or 40 ft. 
in height and 20 ft. in thickness, having at each of the four 
corners a triple gate, composed of strong planks of wood, with 
bars of iron. The abodes of the principal inhabitants form an 
enclosed square, in which are separate houses for each of the 
wives; the chief's palace consists of turrets connected together 
by terraces. These are well built of a reddish clay, highly polished, 
so as to resemble stucco ; the interior roof, though composed only 
of branches, is tastefully constructed. Maidugari, which in 1908 
became the seat of the native government, is a thriving com- 
mercial town some 70 m. south-west of Lake Chad. The former 
capital, Kuka (q.v.), and Ngornu (the town of " blessing "), are 
near the shores of Lake Chad. On the Yo are still to be seen 
extensive remains of Old Bornu or Birni and Gambarou or. 
Gha.mbaru, which were destroyed by the Fula about 1809. 
Dikwa, the capital chosen by Rabah (see below), lies in the 
German part of Bornu. 

History. — The history of Bornu goes back to the 9th century 
A.D., but its early portions are very fragmentary and dubious. 
The first dynasty known is that of the Sefuwa or descendants 
of Sef, which came to the throne in the person of Dugu or Duku, 
and had its capital at Njimiye (Jima) in Kanem on the north-east 
shores of Lake Chad. The Sefuwa are of Berber origin, the 
descent from Sef, the Himyaritic ruler, being mythical. From 
this Berber strain comes the name Berberi or Ba-Berberche, 
applied by the Hausa to the inhabitants of Bornu. Mahom- 
medanism was adopted towards the end of the nth century, 
and has since continued the religion of the country. From 
1 1 94 to 1220 reigned Selma II., under whom the power of the 
kingdom was greatly extended; and Dunama II.. his successor 



266 



BORODIN 



was also a powerful and warlike prince. In the following reigns 
the prosperity of the country began to diminish, and about 1386 
the dynasty was expelled from Njimiye, and forced to seek 
refuge in the western part of its territory by the invasion of the 
Bulala. Mai Ali (I.) Ghajideni, who founded the city of Birni, 
rendered his country once more redoubtable and strong. His 
successor, Idris II., completely vanquished the Bulala and subju- 
gated Kanem ; and under Mahommed V., the next monarch, Bornu 
reached its highest pitch of greatness. At this period Zinder 
became a tributary state. A series of for the most part peaceful 
reigns succeeded till about the middle of the 18th century, when 
Ali (IV.) Omarmi entered upon a violent struggle with the 
Tuareg or Imoshagh. Under his son Ahmed (about 1808) the 
kingdom began to be harassed by the Fula, who had already 
conquered the Hausa country. Expelled from his capital by the 
invaders, Ahmed was only restored by the assistance of the fakir 
Mahommed al-Amin al-Kanemi, who, pretending to a celestial 
mission, hoisted the green flag of the Prophet, and undertook 
the deliverance of his country. The Fula appear to have been 
taken by sufprise, and were in ten months driven completely out 
of Bornu. The conqueror invested the nearest heir of the ancient 
kings with all the appearance of sovereignty — reserving for 
himself, however, under the title of sheik, all its reality. The 
court of the sultan (shehu) was established at New Bornu, 
or Birni, which was made the capital, the old city having 
been destroyed during the Fula invasion; while the sheik, in 
military state, took up his residence at the new city of Kuka. 
Fairly established, he ruled the country with a rod of iron, and 
at the same time inspired his subjects with a superstitious notion 
of his sanctity. His zeal was peculiarly directed against moral or 
religious offences. The most frivolous faults of women, as talking 
too loud, and walking in the street unveiled, rendered the offender 
liable to public indictment, while graver errors were visited with 
the most ignominious punishments, and often with death itself. 
Kanemi died in 1835, and was succeeded by his son, Sheik Omar, 
who altogether abolished the nominal kingship of- the Sefuwa. 

During Omar's reign, which lasted about fifty years, Bornu 
was visited by many Europeans, who reached it via Tripoli and 
the Sahara. The first to enter the country were Walter Oudney, 
Hugh Clapperton and Dixon Denham (1823). They were 
followed in 1851-1855 by Heinrich Barth. Later travellers in- 
cluded Gerhard Rohlfs (1866) and Gustav Nachtigal. All these 
travellers were well received by the Kanuri, whose power from the 
middle of the 1 9th century began to decay. This was foreseen by 
Barth; and Nachtigal, who in 1870 conveyed presents sent by 
King William of Prussia, in acknowledgment of the sheik's kind- 
ness to many German explorers, writes thus in December 1872: 

" The rapid declension of Bornu is an undeniable and lamentable 
fact. It is taking place with increasing rapidity, and the boundless 
weakness of Sheik Omar — otherwise so worthy and brave a man — 
must bear almost all the blame. His sons and ministers plunder 
the provinces in an almost unheard-of manner; trade and inter- 
course are almost at a standstill; good faith and confidence exist 
no more. The indolence of the court avoids military expeditions, 
and anarchy and a lack of security on the routes are the consequences. 
. . . Thus the sheik and the land grow poorer and poorer, and 
public morality sinks lower and lower." 

After the visit of Nachtigal the country was visited by no 
European traveller until 1892, when Colonel P. L. Monteil 
resided for a time at Kuka during his great journey from the 
Senegal to Tripoli. The French traveller noticed many signs of 
decadence, the energy of the people being sapped by luxury, 
while a virtual anarchy prevailed owing to rivalries and intrigues 
among members of the royal family. The chief of Zinder had 
ceased to pay tribute, and the sultan was not strong enough to 
exact it by force. At the same time a danger was threatening 
from the south-east, where the negro adventurer Rabah, once 
a slave of Zobeir Pasha, was menacing the kingdom of Bagirmi. 
After making himself master of the fortified town of Manifa, 
Rabah proceeded against Bornu, defeating the army of the sultan 
Ahsem in two pitched battles. In December 1893 Ahsem fled 
from Kuka, which was entered by Rabah and soon afterwards 
destroyed, the capital being transferred to Dikwa in the south- 



east of the kingdom. These events ruined for many years the 
trade between Tripoli and Kuka by the long-established route 
via Bilma. Rabah had raised a large, well-drilled army, and 
proved a formidable opponent to the French in their advance on 
Lake Chad from the south. However in 1900 he was killed at 
Kussuri near the lower Shari, by the combined forces of three 
French expeditions which had been converging from the Congo, 
the Sahara and the Niger. 

By an Anglo-French agreement of 1898 the tributary state of 
Zinder in the north had been included in the French sphere, 
and after the defeat of Rabah French military expeditions 
occupied both the German and British portions of Bornu, but 
in 1902 on the appearance of British and German expeditions' 
the French withdrew to their own country east of the Shari. 
The British placed on the throne of Bornu Shehu Garbai, a 
descendant of the ancient sultans, and Kuka was again chosen as 
the capital of the state. From that date British Bornu has been 
under administrative control. It has been divided into East and 
West Bornu, the line of division being fixed approximately at 
longitude 12°, and placed under the administration of a resident. 
Maifoni and Kuka were selected for British stations in the east, 
and Damjiri and Gujba in the west. Garrisons are quartered at 
these points. The province has been mapped, and a network of 
tracks available for wheeled transport has been made through it. 
Water communication with the Benue and Niger has been 
opened through the Gongola river. The shehu, who took the 
oath of t allegiance to the British crown on the occasion of his 
formal installation in November 1904, is maintained in all local 
dignity as a native chief, and co-operates loyally with the British 
administration. Peace has prevailed in Bornu since the British 
occupation, and it is estimated that the population has increased 
by immigration to about 50% more than it was in 1902. The 
people are industrious. Extensive areas are being brought under 
cultivation, and taxes are collected without difficulty. Owing 
to its increasing commercial importance, the native capital was 
in 1908 transferred to Maidugari (see also Nigeria: History; 
and Rabah). 

Authorities. — Heinrich Barth's Travels in North and Central 
Africa (1857, new ed., London, 1890) contains an exact picture 
of the state in the period (c. 1850) preceding its decay. The earlier 
Travels of Denham and Clapperton (London, 1828) may also be 
consulted, as well as Rohlfs, Land und Volk in Afrika (Bremen, 1 870) ; 
Nachtigal, Sahara und Sudan, vol. i. (Berlin, 1879); and Monteil, 
de St.-Louis & Tripoli par le lac Tchad (Paris, 1895). For later infor- 
mation consult Lady Lugard's A Tropical Dependency (London, 1905) , 
and the Annual Reports, from 1900 onward, on Northern Nigeria, 
issued by the Colonial Office, London. (F. L. L.) 

BORODIN, ALEXANDER PORFYRIEVICH (1834-1887), 
Russian musical composer, natural son of a Russian prince, was 
born in St Petersburg on the 12th of November 1834. He was 
brought up to the medical profession, and in 1862 was appointed 
assistant professor of chemistry at the St Petersburg academy of 
medicine. He wrote several works on chemistry, and took a 
leading part in advocating women's education, helping to found 
the school of medicine for women, and lecturing there from 1872 
till his death. But he is best known as a musician. His interest 
in music was indeed stimulated from 1862 onwards by his friend- 
ship with Balakirev, and from 1863 by his marriage with a lady 
who was an accomplished pianist; but in his earlier years he 
had been proficient both in playing the piano, violin, 'cello and 
other instruments, and also in composing; and during life he 
did his best to pursue his studies in both music and chemistry 
with equal enthusiasm. Like other Russian composers he owed 
much to the influence of Liszt at Weimar. His first symphony 
was written in 1862-1867; his opera Prince Igor, begun in 1869, 
was left unfinished at his death, and was completed by Rimsky- 
Korsakov and Glazounov (1889); his symphonic sketch, "In 
the Steppes " (1880) is, however, his best-known work. Borodin 
also wrote a second symphony (1871-1877), part of a third 
(orchestrated after his death by Glazounov), and a few string 
quartets and some fine songs. His music is characteristically 
Russian, and of an advanced modern type. He died suddenly 
at St Petersburg, on the 28th of February 1887. 



BORODINO— BORON 



267 



BORODINO, a village of Russia, 70 m. W. by S. of Moscow, 
on the Kolotscha, an affluent of the river Moskva, famous as the 
scene of a great battle between the army of Napoleon and the 
Russians under Kutusov on the 7th of September 1812. Though 
the battle is remembered chiefly for the terrible losses incurred 
by both sides, in many respects it is an excellent example of 
Napoleon's tactical methods. After preliminary fighting on 
the 5th of September both sides prepared for battle on the 6th, 
Napoleon holding back in the hope of confirming the enemy in 
his resolution to fight a decisive battle. For the same reason 
the French right wing, which could have manoeuvred the Russians 
from their position, was designedly weakened. The Russian 
right, bent back at an angle and strongly posted, was also 
neglected, for Napoleon intended to make a direct frontal attack. 
The enemy's right centre near the village of Borodino was to be 
attacked by the viceroy of Italy, Eugene, who was afterwards 
to roll up the Russian line towards its centre, the so-called 
" great redoubt," which was to be attacked directly from the 
front by Ney and Junot. Farther to the French right, Davout 
was to attack frontally a group of field works on which the 
Russian left centre was formed; and the extreme right of the 
French army was composed of the weak corps of Poniatowski. 
The cavalry corps were assigned to the various leaders named, 
and the Guard was held in reserve. The whole line was not more 
than about 2 m. long, giving an average of over 20 men per yard. 
When the Russians closed on their centre they were even more 
densely massed, and their reserves were subjected to an effective 
fire from the French field guns. At 6 a.m. on the 7 th of September 
the French attack began. By 8 a.m. the Russian centre was 
driven in, and though a furious counter-attack enabled Prince 
Bagration's troops to win back their original line, fresh French 
troops under Davout and Ney drove them back again. But 
the Russians, though they lost ground elsewhere, still clung to 
the great redoubt, and for a time the advance of the French was 
suspended by Napoleon's order, owing to a cavalry attack by 
the Russians on Eugene's extreme left. When this alarm was 
ended the advance was resumed. Napoleon had now collected 
a sufficient target for his guns. A terrific bombardment by the 
artillery was followed by the decisive charge of the battle, made 
by great masses of cavalry. The horsemen, followed by the 
infantry, charged at speed, broke the Russian line in two, and 
the French squadrons entered the gorge of the great redoubt just 
as Eugene's infantry climbed up its faces. In a fearful mitie the 
Russian garrison of the redoubt was almost annihilated. The 
defenders were now dislodged from their main line and the battle 
was practically at an end. Napoleon has been criticized for not 
using the Guard, which was intact, to complete the victory. 
There is, however, no evidence that any further expenditure of 
men would have had good results. Napoleon had imposed his 
will on the enemy so far that they ceded possession of Moscow 
without further resistance. That the defeat and losses of the' 
Russian field army did not end the war was due to the national 
spirit of the Russians, not to military miscalculations of Napoleon. 
Had it not been for this spirit, Borodino would have been 
decisive of the war without 'the final blow of the Guard. As 
it was, the Russians lost about 42,000 men out of 121,000; 
Napoleon's army (of which one-half consisted of the contingents 
of subject allies — Germany, Poland, Switzerland, Holland, &c.) 
32,000 out of 130,000 (Berndt, Zahl im Kriege). On the side of 
the French 31 general officers were killed, wounded or taken, 
and amongst the killed were General Montbrun, who fell at 
the head of his cavalry corps, and Auguste Caulaincourt, who 
took Montbrun's place and fell in the melee in the redoubt. 
The Russians lost 22 generals, amongst them Prince Bagra- 
tion, who died of his wounds after the battle, and to whose 
memory a monument was erected on the battle-field by the 
tsar Nicholas I. 

BOROLANITE, one of the most remarkable rocks of the 
British Isles, found on the shores of Loch Borolan in Sutherland- 
shire, after which it has been named. In this locality there is 
a considerable area of granite rich in red alkali felspar, and 
passing, by diminution in the amount of its quartz, into quartz- 



syenites (nordmarkites) and syenites. At the margins of the 
outcrop patches of nepheline-syenite occur; usually the nepheline 
is decomposed, but occasionally it is well-preserved; the other 
ingredients of the rock are brown garnet (melanite) and 
aegirine. The abundance of melanite is very unusual in igneous 
rocks, though some syenites, leucitophyres, and aegirine-felsites 
resemble borolanite in this respect. In places the nepheline- 
syenite assumes the form of a dark rock with large rounded white 
spots. These last consist of an intermixture of nepheline or 
sodalite and alkali-felspar. From the analogy of certain leucite- 
syenites which are known in Arkansas, it is very probable that 
these spots represent original leucites which have been changed 
into aggregates of the above-named minerals. They resemble 
leucite in their shape, but have not yet been proved to have 
its crystalline outlines. The " pseudo-leucites," as they have 
been called, measure one-quarter to three-quarters of an inch 
across. The dark matrix consists of biotite, aegirine-augite 
and melanite. Connected with the borolanite there are other 
types of nepheline-syenite and pegmatite. In Finland, melanite- 
bearing nepheline rocks have been found and described as 
Ijolite, but the only other locality for melanite-leucite-syenite 
is Magnet Cove in Arkansas. (J. S. F.) 

BORON (symbol B, atomic weight n), one of the non-metallic 
elements, occurring in nature in the form of boracic (boric) acid, 
and in various borates such as borax, tincal, boronatrocalcite 
and boracite. It was isolated by J. Gay Lussac and L. Thenard 
in 1808 by heating boron trioxide with potassium, in an iron tube. 
It was also isolated at about the same time by Sir H. Davy, 
from boracic acid. It may be obtained as a dark brown amor- 
phous powder by placing a mixture of 10 parts of the roughly 
powdered oxide with 6 parts of metallic sodium in a red-hot 
crucible, and covering the mixture with a layer of well-dried 
common salt. After the vigorous reaction has ceased and all 
the sodium has been used up, the mass is thrown into dilute 
hydrochloric acid, when the soluble sodium salts go into solution, 
and the insoluble boron remains as a brown powder, which may 
by filtered off and dried. H. Moissan {Ann. Chim. Phys., 1895, 6, 
p. 296) heats three parts of the oxide with one part of magnesium 
powder. The dark product obtained is washed with water, 
hydrochloric acid and hydrofluoric acid, and finally calcined 
again with the oxide or with borax, being protected from air 
during the operation by a layer of charcoal. Pure amorphous 
boron is a chestnut-coloured powder of specific gravity 2-45; 
it sublimes in the electric arc, is totally unaffected by air at 
ordinary temperatures, and burns on strong ignition with pro- 
duction of the oxide B 2 3 and the nitride BN. It combines 
directly with fluorine at ordinary temperature, and with chlorine, 
bromine and sulphur on heating. It does not react with the 
alkali metals, but combines with magnesium at a low red heat 
to form a boride, and with other metals at more or less elevated 
temperatures. It reduces many metallic oxides, such as lead 
monoxide and cupric oxide, and decomposes water at a red heat. 
Heated with sulphuric acid and with nitric acid it is oxidized 
to boric acid, whilst on fusion with alkaline carbonates and 
hydroxides it gives a borate of the alkali metal. Like silicon 
and carbon, very varying values had been given for its specific 
heat, until H. F. Weber showed that the specific heat increases 
rapidly with increasing temperature. By strongly heating a 
mixture of boron trioxide and aluminium, protected from the 
air by a layer of charcoal, F. Wohler and H. Sainte-Claire Deville 
obtained a grey product, from which, on dissolving out the 
aluminium with sodium hydroxide, they obtained a crystalline 
product, which they thought to be a modification of boron, 
but which was shown later to be a mixture of aluminium 
borides with more or less carbon. Boron dissolves in molten alu- 
minium, and on cooling, transparent, almost colourless crystals 
are obtained, possessing a lustre, hardness and refractivity near 
that of the diamond. In 1904 K. A. Kuhne (D.R.P. 147,87.1) 
described a process in which external heating is not necessary, 
a mixture of aluminium turnings, sulphur and boric acid being 
ignited by a hot iron rod, the resulting aluminium suiphide, 
formed as a by-product, being decomposed by water. 



268 



BOROUGH, S.— BOROUGH 



Boron hydride has probably never been isolated in the pure con- 
dition ; on heating boron trioxide with magnesium filings, a mag- 
nesium boride Mg s B 2 is obtained, and if this be decomposed with 
dilute hydrochloric acid a very evil-smelling gas, consisting of a 
mixture of hydrogen and boron hydride, is obtained. This mixture 
burns with a green flame forming boron trioxide; whilst boron is 
deposited on passing the gas mixture through a hot tube, or on 
depressing a cold surface in the gas flame. By cooling it with liquid 
air Sir W. Ramsay and H. S. Hatfield obtained from it a gas of 
composition B3H3. The mixture probably contained also some 
BH 3 (W. Ramsay and H. S. Hatfield, Proc. Chem. Soc, 17, p. 152). 
Boron fluoride BF 3 was first prepared in 1808 by Gay Lussacand 
L. Thenard and is best obtained by heating a mixture of the trioxide 
and fluorspar with concentrated sulphuric acid. It is a colourless 
pungent gas which is exceedingly soluble in water. It fumes strongly 
in air, and does not attack glass. It rapidly absorbs the elements 
of water wherever possible, so that a strip of paper plunged into 
the gas is rapidly charred. It does not burn, neither does it support 
combustion. A saturated solution of the gas, in water, is a colourless, 
oily, strongly fuming liquid which after a time decomposes, with 
separation of metaboric acid, leaving hydrofluoboric acid HF-BF3 
in solution. This acid cannot be isolated in the free condition, but 
many of its salts are known. Boron fluoride also combines with 
ammonia gas, equal volumes of the two gases giving a white crystal- 
line solid of composition BF 3 -NH 3 ; with excess of ammonia gas, 
colourless liquids BF 3 -2NH 3 and BFV3NH3 are produced, which on 
heating lose ammonia and are converted into the solid form. 

Boron chloride BCI3 results when amorphous boron is heated in 
chlorine gas, or more readily, on passing a stream of chlorine over 
a heated mixture of boron trioxide and charcoal, the volatile product 
being condensed in a tube surrounded by a freezing mixture. It is 
a colourless fuming liquid boiling at 17-18 C , and is readily decom- 
posed by water with formation of boric and hydrochloric acids. It 
unites readily with ammonia gas forming a white crystalline solid 
of composition 2BCl3-3NH 3 . 

Boron bromide BBr 3 can be formed by direct union of the two 
elements, but is best obtained by the method used for the preparation 
of the chloride. It is a colourless fuming liquid boiling at 90-5° C. 
With water and with ammonia it undergoes the same reactions as 
the chloride. Boron and iodine do not combine directly, but gaseous 
hydriodic acid reacts with amorphous boron to form the iodide, 
' BI3, which can also be obtained by passing boron chloride and 
hydriodic acid through a red-hot porcelain tube. It is a white 
crystalline solid of melting point 43 C. ; it boils at 210° C, and it 
can be distilled without decomposition. It is decomposed by water, 
and with a solution of yellow phosphorus in carbon bisulphide it gives 
a red powder of composition PBI 2 , which sublimes in vacuo at 
210 C. to red crystals, and when heated in a current of hydrogen 
loses its iodine and leaves a residue of boron phosphide PB. 

Boron nitride BN is formed when boron is burned either 
in air or in nitrogen, but can be obtained more readily by heating 
to redness in a platinum crucible a mixture of one part of anhydrous 
borax with two parts of dry ammonium chloride. After fusion, 
the melt is well washed with dilute hydrochloric acid and 
then with water, the nitride remaining as a white powder. 
It can also be prepared by heating borimide B 2 (NH) 3 ; or by 
heating boron trioxide with a metallic cyanide. It is insoluble in 
water and unaffected by most reagents, but when heated in a 
current of steam or boiled for some time with a caustic alkali, 
slowly decomposes with evolution of ammonia and the formation 
of boron trioxide or an alkaline borate; it dissolves slowly in 
hydrofluoric acid. 

Borimide B 2 (NH) 3 is obtained on long heating of the compound 
B 2 S 3 -6NH 3 in a stream of hydrogen, or ammonia gas at 115-120 C. 
It is a white solid which decomposes on heating into boron nitride 
and ammonia. Long-continued heating with water also decomposes 
it slowly. 

Boron sulphide B 2 S 3 can be obtained by the direct union of the 
two elements at a white heat or from the tri-iodide and sulphur at 
440 C., but is most conveniently prepared by heating a mixture of the 
trioxide and carbon in a stream of carbon bisulphide vapour. It 
forms slightly coloured small crystals possessing a strong disagree- 
able smell, and is rapidly decomposed by water with the formation 
of boric acid and sulphuretted hydrogen. _ A pentasulphide B 2 S 6 
is prepared, in an impure condition, by heating a solution of sulphur 
in carbon bisulphide with boron iodide, and forms a white crystalline 
powder which decomposes under the influence of water into sulphur, 
sulphuretted hydrogen and boric acid. 

Boron trioxide B 2 3 is the only known oxide of boron; and may 
be prepared by heating amorphous boron in oxygen, or better, by 
strongly igniting boric acid. After fusion the mass solidifies to a 
transparent vitreous solid which dissolves readily in water to form 
boric acid (q.v.) ; it is exceedingly hygroscopic and even on standing 
in moist air becomes opaque through absorption of water and for- 
mation of boric acid. Its specific gravity is 1-83 (J. Dumas). It is 
not volatile below a white heat, and consequently, if heated with 
salts of more volatile acids, it expels the acid forming oxide from 
such salts; for example, if potassium sulphate be heated with boron 
trioxide, sulphur trioxide is liberated and potassium borate formed. 
It also possesses the power of combining with most metallic oxides 



at high temperatures, forming borates, which in many cases show 
characteristic colours. Many organic compounds of boron are 
known; thus, from the action of the trichloride on ethyl alcohol 
or on methyl alcohol, ethyl borate B(OC 2 H 5 )3 and methyl borate 
B(OCH 3 ) 3 are obtained. These are colourless liquids boiling at 
119 C.and 72° C. respectively, and both are readily decomposed by 
water. By the action of zinc methyl on ethyl borate, in the requisite 
proportions, boron trimethyl is obtained, thus: — 2B(OC 2 H 6 ) 2 -|- 

q(-. 3 j_j as a colourless spontaneously 

inflammable gas of unbearable smell. Boron triethyl B(C 2 H 5 ) 3 is 
obtained in the same manner, by using zinc ethyl. It is a colourless 
spontaneously inflammable liquid of boiling point 95 C. By the 
action of one molecule of ethyl borate on two molecules of zinc ethyl, 
the compound B(C 2 H 5 ) 2 -OC 2 H 5 diethylboron ethoxide is obtained 
as a colourless liquid boiling at 102 C. By the action of water 
it is converted into B(C 2 H(j) 2 -OH, and this latter compound on 
exposure to air takes up oxygen slowly, forming the compound 
B-C 2 H 6 -OC 2 H s -OH, which, with water, gives B(C 2 H 6 )-(OH) 2 . From 
the condensation of two molecules of ethyl borate with one molecule 
of zinc ethyl the compound B2-C 2 H5-(OC 2 H 6 )5 is obtained as a colour- 
less liquid of boiling point 112° C. Boron triethyl and boron tri- 
methyl both combine with ammonia. ' - 

The atomic weight of boron has been determined by estimating 
the water content of pure borax (J. Berzelius), also by conversion 
of anhydrous borax into sodium chloride (W. Ramsay and E. Aston) 
and from analysis of the bromide and chloride (Sainte-Claire Deville) ; 
the values obtained ranging from 10-73 to 11-04. Boron can be 
estimated by precipitation as potassium fluoborate, which is insoluble 
in a mixture of potassium acetate and alcohol. For this purpose 
only boric acid or its potassium salt must be present; and to ensure 
this, the borate can be distilled with sulphuric acid and methyl 
alcohol and the volatile ester absorbed in potash. 

BOROUGH [Burrough, Burrowe, Borrows], STEVEN 
(1525-1584), English navigator, was born at Northam in Devon- 
shire on the 25th of September 1525. In 1553 he took part in 
the expedition which was despatched from the Thames under 
Sir Hugh Willoughby to look for a northern passage to Cathay 
and India, serving as master of the " Edward Bonaventure," 
on which Richard Chancellor sailed as pilot in chief. Separated 
by a storm from the " Bona Esperanza " and the " Bona Confi- 
dentia," the other two ships of the expedition, Borough proceeded 
on his voyage alone, and sailing into the White Sea, in the words 
of his epitaph, " discouered Moscouia by the Northerne sea 
passage to St Nicholas " (Archangel). In a second expedition, 
made in the " Serchthrift " in 1556, he discovered Kara Strait, 
between Novaya Zemlya and Vaygach island. In 1560 he was 
in charge of another expedition to Russia, and, probably in 
1558, he also made a voyage to Spain. At the beginning of 1563 
he was appointed chief pilot and one of the four masters of the 
queen's ships in the Medway, and in this office he spent the rest 
of his life. He died on the 12th of July 1584, and was buried at 
Chatham. His son, Christopher Borough, wrote a description 
of a trading expedition made in 1579-1581 from the White Sea 
to the Caspian and back. 

His younger brother, William Borough, born in 1536, also 
at Northam, served as an ordinary seaman in the " Edward 
Bonaventure" on her voyage to Russia in 1553, and subse- 
quently made many voyages to St Nicholas. Later he transferred 
his services from the merchant adventurers to the crown. As 
commander of the " Lion " he accompanied Sir Francis Drake 
in his Cadiz expedition of 1587, but he got himself into trouble 
by presuming to disagree with his chief concerning the wisdom 
of the attack on Lagos. He died in 1599. He was the author of 
A Discourse of the Variation of the Compas, or Magneticall Needle 
(1581), and some of the charts he made are preserved at the 
British Museum and Hatfield. 

BOROUGH (A.S. nominative burh, dative byrig, which pro- 
duces some of the place-names ending in bury, a sheltered or 
fortified place, the camp of refuge of a tribe, the stronghold of a 
chieftain; cf. Ger. Burg, Fr. bor, bore, bourg), the term for a 
town, considered as a unit of local government. 

History of the English Borough. — After the early English settle- 
ment, when Roman fortifications ceased to shelter hostile nations, 
their colonies and camps were used by the Anglo-Saxon invaders 
to form tribal strongholds; nevertheless burhs on the sites of 
Roman colonies show no continuity with Roman municipal 
organization. The resettlement of the Roman Durovernum as 



BOROUGH 



269 



the burh of the men of (East) Kent, under a changed name, the 
name " burh of the men of Kent," Cant-wara-byrig (Canterbury), 
illustrates this point. The burh of the men of West Kent was 
Hrofesceaster (Durobrivae), Rochester, and many other ceasters 
mark the existence of a Roman camp occupied by an early 
English burh. The tribal burh was protected by an earthen 
wall, and a general obligation to build and maintain burns at the 
royal command was enforced by Anglo-Saxon law. Offences in 
disturbance of the peace of the burh were punished by higher 
fines than breaches of the peace of the " ham " or ordinary 
dwelling. The burh was the home of the king -as well as the 
asylum of the tribe, and there is reason to think that the boundary 
of the borough was annually sanctified by a religious ceremony, 
and hence the long retention of a processional perambulation. 
Possibly the " hedge " or " wall " of the borough gave it, 
besides safety, a sanctity analogous to that enjoyed by the 
Germanic assembly while gathered within its " hedge," which 
the priests solemnly set up when the assembly gathered, and 
removed when it was over. While the " peace " of the Germanic 
assembly was essentially temporary, the " peace " of the burh 
was sacred all the year round. Its " hedge " was never removed. 
The sanctity of the burh was enjoyed by all the dwellings of the 
king, at first perhaps only during his term of residence. Neither 
in the early English language nor in the contemporary Latin was 
there any fixed usage differentiating the various words descriptive 
of the several forms of human settlement, and the tribal refuges 
cannot accordingly be clearly distinguished from villages or the 
strongholds of individuals by any purely nomenclative test. 
It is not till after the Danish invasions that it becomes easier to 
draw a distinction between the burhs that served as military 
strongholds for national defence and the royal vills which served 
no such purpose. Some of the royal vills eventually entered 
the class of boroughs, but by another route, and for the present 
the private stronghold and the royal dwelling may be neglected. 
It was the public stronghold and the administrative centre of a 
dependent district which was the source of the main features 
peculiar to the borough. 

Many causes tended to create peculiar conditions in the 
boroughs built for national defence. They were placed where 
artificial defence was most needed, at the junction of roads, in 
the plains, on the rivers, at the centres naturally marked out for 
trade, seldom where hills or marshes formed a sufficient natural 
defence. The burhs drew commerce by every channel; the 
camp and the palace, the administrative centre, the ecclesiastical 
centre (for the mother-church of the state was placed in its chief 
burh), all looked to the market for their maintenance. The 
burh was provided by law with a mint and royal moneyers and 
exchangers, with an authorized scale for weights and measures. 
Mercantile transactions in the burhs or ports, as they were called 
when their commercial rather than their military importance 
was accentuated, were placed by law under special legal privileges 
in order no doubt to secure the king's hold upon his toll. Over 
the burh or port was set a reeve, a royal officer answerable to the 
king for his dues from the burh, his rents for lands and houses, 
his customs on commerce, his share of the profits from judicial 
fines. At least from the 10th century the burh had a "moot" 
or court, the relation of which to the other courts is matter of 
speculation. A law of Edgar, about 960, required that it should 
meet three times a year, these being in all likelihood assemblies 
at which attendance was compulsory on all tenants of the 
burghal district, when pleas concerning life and liberty and land 
were held, and men were compelled to find pledges answerable 
for their good conduct. At these great meetings the borough 
reeve (gereja) presided, declaring the law and guiding the judg- 
ments given by the suitors of the court. The reeve was supported 
by a group of assistants, called in Devon the "witan," in the 
boroughs of the Danelaw by a group of (generally twelve) 
" lawmen," in other towns probably by a group of aldermen, 
senior burgesses, with military and police authority, whose 
office was in some cases hereditary. These persons assisted the 
reeve at the great meetings of the full court, and sat with him as 
judges at the subordinate meetings which were held to settle the 



unfinished causes and minor causes. There was no compulsion 
on those not specially summoned to attend these extra meetings. 
At these subordinate jurisdictional assemblies, held in public, 
and acting by the same authority as the annual gathering of all 
the burh-wara, other business concerning borough administration 
was decided, at least in later days, and it is to these assemblies 
that the origin of the town council may in many cases be ascribed. 
In the larger towns the division into wards, with a separate 
police system, can be traced at an early time, appearing as a unit 
of military organization, answerable for the defence of a gate of 
the town. The police system of London is described in detail in a 
record of 930-940. Here the free people were grouped in associa- 
tions of ten, each under the superintendence of a headman. The 
bishops and reeves who belonged to the "court of London" 
appear as the directors of the system, and in them we may see 
the aldermen of the wards of a later time. The use of the word 
bertha for ward at Canterbury, and the fact that the London 
wardmoot at a later time was used for the frankpledge system 
as well as for the organization of the muster, point to a connexion 
between the military and the police systems in the towns. At 
the end of the 9th and beginning of the 10th century there is 
evidence of a systematic " timbering " of new burhs, with the 
object of providing strongholds for the defence of Wessex against 
the Danes, and it appears that the surrounding districts were 
charged with their maintenance. In charters of this period a 
"haw," or enclosed area within a burh, was often conveyed by 
charter as if it were an apanage of the lands in the neighbourhood 
with which it was conveyed; the Norman settlers who succeeded 
to lands in the county succeeded therewith to houses in the burhs, 
for a close association existed between the " thegns " of the 
shire and the shirestow, an association partly perhaps of duty 
and also of privilege. The king granted borough " haws " as 
places of refuge in Kent, and in London he gave them with 
commercial privileges to his bishops. What has been called the 
" heterogeneous " tenure of the shirestow, one of the most 
conspicuous characteristics of that particular type of borough, 
was further increased by the liberty which some burgesses 
enjoyed to " commend " themselves to a lord of their own 
choosing, promising to that lord suit and service and perhaps 
rent in return for protection. Over these burgesses the lords 
could claim jurisdictional rights, and these were in some cases 
increased by royal grants of special rights within certain " sokes." 
The great boroughs were honeycombed with sokes, or areas of 
seignorial jurisdiction, within which the royal reeve's authority 
was greatly restricted while that of the lord's reeve took pre- 
cedence. Even the haws, being " burhs " or strongholds within 
a stronghold, enjoyed a local " peace " which protected from 
official intrusion. Besides heterogeneity of tenure and juris- 
diction in the borough, there was also heterogeneity of status; 
there were burh-thegns and cnihts, mercatores, burgesses of 
various kinds, the three groups representing perhaps military, 
commercial and agricultural elements. The burh generally 
shows signs of having been originally a village settlement, 
surrounded by open fields, of which the borough boundary 
before 1835 will suggest the outline. This area was as a rule 
eventually the area of borough jurisdiction. There is some 
evidence pointing to the fact that the restriction of the borough 
authority to this area is not ancient, but due to the Norman 
settlement. The wide districts over which the boroughs had had 
authority were placed under the control of the Norman castle 
which was itself built by means of the old English levy of " burh- 
work." The borough court was allowed to continue its work 
only within its own immediate territory, and, to prevent conflict, 
the castle was placed outside the borough. Losing their place in 
the national scheme of defence, the burgess " cnihts " made 
commerce their principal object under the encouragement of 
the old privileges of the walled place. 

Besides the great co-operative strongholds in which many lords 
had burgesses, there were small boroughs held by a single lord. 
In many cases boroughs of this " seignorial " type were created 
upon the royal estates. Out of the king's vill, as a rule the 
jurisdictional centre of a hundred, there was sometimes created 



270 



BOROUGH 



a borough. The lines' of division before Domesday Book are 
obscure, but it is probable that in some cases, by a royal grant 
of jurisdiction, the inhabitants of a populous royal vill, where a 
hundred court for the district was already held, were authorized 
to establish a permanent court, for the settlement of their dis- 
putes, distinct from the hundred court of the district. Boroughs 
of this type with a uniform tenure were created not only on the 
king's estates but also on those of his tenants-in-chief, and in 
1086 they were probably already numerous. A borough was 
usually, though perhaps not invariably, the companion of a 
Norman castle. In some cases a French " bourg " was created 
by the side of an English borough, and the two remained for 
many generations distinct in their laws and customs: in other 
cases a French " bourg " was settled by the side of an English 
village. A large number of the followers of the Norman lords ■ 
had been almost certainly town-dwellers in their own country, 
and lost none of their burghal privileges by the migration. 
Every castle needed for its maintenance a group of skilled 
artisans, and the lords wished to draw to the castle gates all kinds 
of commodities for the castle's provision. The strength of the 
garrison made the neighbourhood of the castle a place of danger 
to men unprotected by legal privilege; and in order to invite to 
its neighbourhood desirable settlers, legal privileges similar to 
those enjoyed in Norman or English boroughs were guaranteed 
to those who would build on the plots which were offered to 
colonists. A low fixed rental, release from the renders required 
of villeins, release from the jurisdiction of the castle, and the 
creation of a separate borough jurisdiction, with or without the 
right to choose their own officers, rules fixing the maximum of 
fees and fines, or promising assessment of the fines by the 
burgesses themselves, the cancelling of all the castellan's rights, 
especially the right to take a forced levy of food for the castle 
from all within the area of his jurisdiction, freedom from arbitrary 
tallage, freedom of movement, the right to alienate property 
and devise land, these and many other privileges named in the 
early seignorial charters were what constituted the Norman 
liber burgus of the seignorial type. Not all these privileges were 
tnjoyed by all boroughs; some very meagre releases of seignorial 
rights accompanied the lord's charter which created a borough 
and made burgesses out of villeins. However liberal the grant, 
the lord or his reeve still remained in close personal relation with 
the burgesses of such places, and this character, together with 
the uniformity of their tenure, continued to hold them apart 
from the boroughs of the old English type, where all varieties 
of personal relationship between the lords and their groups of 
tenants might subsist. The royal charters granting the right to 
retain old customs prevented the systematic introduction into 
the old boroughs of some of the incidents of feudalism. Rights of 
the king took precedence of those of the lord, and devise with the 
king's consent was legal. By these means the lords' position 
was weakened, and other seignorial claims were later evaded or 
contested. 'The rights which the lords failed to keep were divided 
between the king and the municipality; in London, for instance, 
the king obtained all escheats, while the borough court secured 
the right of wardship of burgess orphans. 

From Norman times the yearly profit of the royal boroughs 
was as a rule included in the general " farm " rendered for the 
county by the sheriff; sometimes it was rendered by a royal 
farmer apart from the county-farm. The king generally accepted 
a composition for all the various items due from the borough. 
The burgesses were united in their efforts to keep that com- 
position unchanged in amount, and to secure the provision of 
the right amount at the right time for fear that it should be 
increased by way of punishment. The levy of fines on rent 
arrear, and the distraints for debt due, which were obtained 
through the borough court, were a matter of interest to the 
burgesses of the court, and first taught the burgesses co-operative 
action. Money was raised, possibly by order of the borough 
court, to buy a charter from the king giving the right to choose 
officers who should answer directly to the exchequer and not 
through the sheriff of the county. The sheriff was in many cases 
also the constable of the castle, set by the Normans to overawe 



the English boroughs; his powers were great and dangerous 
enough to make him an officer specially obnoxious to the 
boroughs. Henry I. about 1131 gave the London citizens the 
right to choose their own sheriffs and a justiciar answerable for 
keeping the pleas of the crown. In 1130 the Lincoln citizens 
paid to hold their city in chief of the king. By the end of the 
1 2th century many towns paid by the hand of their own reeves, 
and John's charters began to make rules as to the freedom of 
choice to be allowed in the nomination of borough officers and 
as to the royal power of dismissal. In Richard I.'s reign London 
imitated the French communes in styling the chief officer a 
mayor; in 1208 Winchester also had a mayor, and the title 
soon became no rarity. The chartered right to choose two of 
more citizens to keep the pleas of the crown gave to many 
boroughs the control of their coroners, who occupied the position 
of the London justiciar of earlier days, subject to those con- 
siderable modifications which Henry II.'s systematizatiort of 
the criminal law had introduced. Burgesses who had gone for 
criminal and civil justice to their own court in disputes between 
themselves, or between themselves and strangers who were in 
their town, secured confirmation of this right by charter, not to 
exclude the justices in eyre, but to exempt themselves from the 
necessity of pleading in a distant court. The burgess, whether 
plaintiff or defendant, was a privileged person, and could claim 
in this respect a " benefit " somewhat similar to the benefit of 
clergy. In permitting the boroughs to answer through their own 
officers for his dues, the king handed oyer to the boroughs the 
farming of his rents and a large number of rights which would 
eventually prove to be sources of great profit. 

No records exist showing the nature of municipal proceedings 
at the time of the first purchase of charters. Certain it is that 
the communities in the 12th century became alive to the possi- 
bilities of their new position, that trade received a new impulse, 
and the vague constitutional powers of the borough court 
acquired a new need for definition. At first the selection of 
officers who were to treat with the exchequer and to keep the 
royal pleas was almost certainly restricted to a few rich persons 
who could find the necessary securities. Nominated probably 
in one of the smaller judicial assemblies, the choice was announced 
at the great Michaelmas assembly of the whole community, 
and it is not till the next century that we hear of any attempt 
of the " vulgus " to make a different selection from that of the 
magnates. The " vulgus " were able to take effective action by 
means of the several craft organizations, and first found the 
necessity to do so when taxation was heavy or when questions 
of trade legislation were mooted (see Gilds). The taxation of 
the boroughs in the reign of Henry II. was assessed by the 
king's justices, who fixed the sums due per capita; but if the 
borough made an offer of a gift, the assessment was made by the 
burgesses. In the first case the taxation fell on the magnates. 
In the levy per communam the assessment was made through 
the wardmoots (in London) and the burden fell on the poorer 
class. In Henry II.'s reign London was taxed by both methods, 
the barones majores by head, the barones minores through the 
wardmoot. The pressure of taxation led in the 13th century to 
a closer definition of the burghal constitutions; the commons 
sought to get an audit of accounts, and (in London) not only to 
hear but to treat of municipal affairs. By the end of the century 
London had definitely established two councils, that of the 
mayor and aldermen, representing the old borough court, and 
a common council, representing the voice of the commonalty, 
as expressed through the city wards. The choice of councillors 
in the wards rested probably with the aldermen and the ward 
jury summoned by them to make the presentments. In some 
cases juries were summoned not to represent different areas but 
different classes; thus at Lincoln there were in 1272 juries of the 
rich, the middling and the poor, chosen presumably by authority 
from groups divided by means of the tax roll. Elsewhere the 
several groups of traders and artisans made of their gilds all- 
powerful agencies for organizing joint action among classes of 
commons united by a trade interest, and the history of the towns 
becomes the history of the struggle between the gilds which 



BOROUGH 



271 



captured control of the council and the gilds which were excluded 
therefrom. Many municipal revolutions took place, and a large 
number of constitutional experiments were tried all over the 
country from the 13 th century onward. Schemes which directed 
a gradual co-optation, two to choose four, these six to choose 
more, and 30 in widening circles from a centre of officialdom, 
found much favour throughout the middle ages. A plan, like 
the London plan, of two companies, alderman and council, was 
widely favoured in the 14th century, perhaps in imitation of the 
Houses of Lords and Commons. The mayor was sometimes 
styled the " sovereign " and was given many prerogatives. 
Great respect was paid to the "ancients," those, namely, who had 
already held municipal office. Not till the 15th century were 
orderly arrangements for counting " voices " arrived at in a few 
of the most highly developed towns, and these were used only in 
the small assemblies of the governing body, not in the large 
electoral assemblies of the people. 

In Londom in the 13 th century there was a regular system for 
the admission of new members to the borough " franchise," 
which was at first regarded not as conferring any form of suffrage 
but as a means to secure a privileged position in the borough 
court and in the trade of the borough. Admission could be 
obtained by inheritance, by purchase or gift, in some places by 
marriage, and in London, at least from 1275, by a municipal 
register of apprenticeship. The new freeman in return for his 
privileges was bound to share with the other burgesses all the 
burdens of taxation, control, &c, which fell upon burgesses. 
Personal service was not always necessary, and in some towns 
there were many non-resident burgesses. When in later times 
admission to this freedom came to be used as means to secure 
the parliamentary franchise, the freedom of the borough was 
freely sold and given. The elections in which the commons of 
the boroughs first took interest were those of the borough 
magistrates. Where the commons succeeded for a time in 
asserting their right to take part in borough elections they were 
rarely able to keep it, not in all cases perhaps because their 
power was feared, but sometimes because of the riotous pro- 
ceedings which ensued. These led to government interference, 
which no party in the borough desired. The possibility of a 
forfeiture of their enfranchised position made the burgesses on 
the whole fairly submissive. In the 13th century London 
repeatedly was " taken into the king's hand," subjected to 
heavy fines and put under the constable of the Tower. In the 
15th century disturbances in the boroughs led to the issue of new 
constitutions, some of which were the outcome of royal charters, 
others the result of parliamentary legislation. The development 
of the law of corporations also at this time compelled the boroughs 
to seek new charters which should satisfy the now exacting 
demands of the law. The charters of incorporation were issued 
at a time when the state was looking more and more to the 
borough authorities as part of its executive and judicial staff, 
and thus the government was closely interested in the manner 
of their selection. The new charters were drafted in such a way 
as to narrow the popular control. The corporations were placed 
under a council and in a number of cases popular control was 
excluded altogether, the whole system being made one of co- 
optation. The absence of popular protest may be ascribed in 
part to the fact that the old popular control had been more 
nominal than real, and the new charter gave as a rule two 
councils of considerable size. These councils bore a heavy 
burden of taxation in meeting royal loans and benevolences, 
paying per capita like the magnates of the 12th century, and 
for a time there is on the whole little evidence of friction between 
the governors and the governed. Throughout, popular opinion 
in the closest of corporations had a means of expression, though 
none of execution, in the presentments of the leet juries and 
sessions juries. By means of their " verdicts " they could use 
threats against the governing body, express their resentment 
against acts of the council which benefited the governing body 
rather than the town, and call in the aid of the justices of assize 
where the members of the governing body were suspected of 
fraud- Elizabeth repeatedly declared her dislike of incorpora- 



tions " because of the abuses committed by their head rulers," 
but in her reign they were fairly easily controlled by the privy 
council, which directed their choice of members of parliament and 
secured supporters of the government policy to fill vacancies on 
the borough bench. The practice in Tudor and Stuart charters 
of specifying by name the members of the governing body and 
holders of special offices opened the way to a " purging " of the 
hostile spirits when new charters were required. There were 
also rather vaguely worded clauses authorizing the dismissal 
of officers for misconduct, though as a rule the appointments 
were for life. When under the Stuarts and under the Common- 
wealth political and religious feeling ran high in the boroughs, 
use was made of these clauses both by the majority on the 
council and by the central government to mould the character 
of the council by a drastic " purging." Another means of control 
first used under the Commonwealth was afforded by the various 
acts of parliament, which subjected all holders of municipal 
office to the test of an oath. Under the Commonwealth there 
was no improvement in the methods used by the central govern- 
ment to control the boroughs. All opponents of the ruling 
policy were disfranchised and disqualified for office by act of 
parliament in 1652. Cases arising out of the act were to be 
tried by commissioners, and the commissions of the major- 
generals gave them opportunity to control the borough policy. 
Few Commonwealth charters have been preserved, though 
several were issued in response to the requests of the corporations. 
In some cases the charters used words which appeared to 
point to an opportunity for popular elections in boroughs where 
a usage of election by the town council had been established. 
In 1598 the judges gave an opinion that the town councils could 
by by-law determine laws for the government of the town 
regardless of the terms of the charter. In the 18th century the 
judges decided to the contrary. But even where a usage of 
popular election was established, there were means of controlling 
the result of a parliamentary election. The close corporations, 
though their right to choose a member of parliament might be 
doubtful, had the sole right to admit new burgesses, and in order 
to determine parliamentary elections they enfranchised non- 
residents. Where conflicts arose over the choice of a member, 
and two selections were made, the matter came before the House 
of Commons. On various occasions the House decided in favour 
of the popularly elected candidate against the nominee of the 
town council, on the general principle that neither the royal 
charter nor a by-law could curtail this particular franchise. 
But as each case was separately determined by a body swayed 
by the dominant political party, no one principle was steadily 
adhered to in the trial of election petitions. The royal right to 
create boroughs was freely used by Elizabeth and James I. as a 
means' of securing a submissive parliament. The later Stuarts 
abandoned this method, and the few new boroughs made by the 
Georges were not made for political reasons. The object of the 
later Stuarts was to control the corporations already in existence, 
not to make new ones. Charles II. from the time of his restora- 
tion decided to exercise a strict control of the close corporations 
in order to secure not only submissive parliaments, but also a 
pliant executive among the borough justices, and pliant juries, 
which were impanelled at the selection of the borough officers. 
In 1660 it was made a rule that all future charters should reserve 
expressly to the crown the first nomination of the aldermen, 
recorder and town-clerk, and a proviso should be entered placing 
with the common council the return of the member of parliament. 
The Corporation Act of 1661 gave power to royal commissioners 
to settle the composition of the town councils, and to remove 
all who refused the sacraments of the Church of England or 
were suspected of disaffection, even though they offered to take 
the necessary oaths. Even so the difficulty of securing sub- 
missive juries was again so great in 1682 that a general attack 
on the borough franchises was begun by the crown. A London 
jury having returned a verdict hostile to the crown, after various 
attempts to bend the city to his will, Charles II. issued a quo 
warranto against the mayor and commonalty in order to charge 
the citizens with illegal encroachments upon their chartered 



ZJ2 



BOROUGH 



rights. The want of a sound philosophical principle in the laws 
which were intended to regulate the actions of organized groups 
of men made it easy for the crown judges to find flaws in the 
legality of the actions of the boroughs, and also made it possible 
for the Londoners to argue that no execution could be taken 
against the mayor, commonalty and citizens, a " body politic 
invisible "; that the indictment lay only against every particular 
member of the governing body; and that the corporation as a 
corporation was incapable of suffering a forfeiture or of making 
a surrender. The judges gave a judgment for the king, the 
charters were forfeited and the government placed with a court 
of aldermen of the king's own choosing. Until James II. yielded, 
there was no common council in London. The novelty of the 
proceedings of Charles II. and James II. lay in using the weapon 
of the quo warranto systematically to ensure a general revocation 
of charters. The new charters which were then granted required 
the king's consent for the more important appointments, and 
gave him power to remove officers without reason given. Under 
James II. in 1687 six commissioners were appointed to " regulate " 
the corporations and remove from them all persons who were 
opposed to the abolition of the penal laws against Catholics. 
The new appointments were made under a writ which ran, " We 
will and require you to elect " (a named person). When James 
II. sought to withdraw from his disastrous policy, he issued a 
proclamation (October 17, 1688) restoring to the boroughs their 
ancient charters. The governing charter thenceforth in many 
boroughs, though not in all, was the charter w"hich had established 
a close corporation, and from this time on to 1835 the boroughs 
made no progress in constitutional growth. The tendency for 
the close corporation to treat the members of the governing 
body as the only corporators, and to repudiate the idea that the 
corporation was answerable to the inhabitants of the borough 
if the corporate property was squandered, became more and 
more manifest as the history of the past slipped into oblivion. 
The corporators came to regard themselves as members of a 
club, legally warranted in dividing the lands and goods of the 
same among themselves whensoever such a division should seem 
profitable. Even where the constitution of the corporation was 
not close by charter, the franchise tended to become restricted 
to an ever-dwindling electorate, as the old methods for the 
extension of the municipal franchise by other means than 
inheritance died out of use. At Ipswich in 1833 the " freemen " 
numbered only one fifty-fifth of the population. If the electorate 
was increased, it was increased by the wholesale admission to 
the freedom of voters willing to vote as directed by the corpora- 
tion at parliamentary elections. The growth of corruption in the 
boroughs continued unchecked until the era of the Reform Bill. 
Several boroughs had by that time become insolvent, and some 
had recourse to their member of parliament to eke out their 
revenues. In Buckingham the mayor received the whole town 
revenue without rendering account; sometimes, however, 
heavy charges fell upon the officers. Before the Reform era 
dissatisfaction with the corporations was mainly shown by the 
number of local acts of parliament which placed under the 
authority of special commissioners a variety of administrative 
details, which if the corporation had not been suspected would 
certainly have been assigned to its care. The trust offered 
another convenient means of escape from difficulty, and in some 
towns out of the trust was developed a system of municipal 
administration where there was no recognized corporation. 
Thus at Peterborough the feoffees who had succeeded to the 
control of certain ancient charities constituted a form of town 
council with very restricted powers. In the 17th century 
Sheffield was brought under the act " to redress the misemploy- 
ment of lands given to charitable uses," and the municipal 
administration of what had been a borough passed into the 
hands of the trustees of the Burgery or town trust. 

The many special authorities created under act of parliament 
led to much confusion, conflict and overlapping, and increased 
the need for a general reform. The reform of the boroughs was 
treated as part of the question of parliamentary reform. In 
1832 the exclusive privileges of the corporations in parliamentary 



elections having been abolished and male occupiers enfranchised, 
the question of the municipal franchise was next dealt with. In 
1833 a commission inquired into the administration of the 
municipal corporations. The result of the inquiry was the 
Municipal Corporations Act 1835, which gave the municipal 
franchise to the ratepayers. In all the municipal corporations 
dealt with by the act, the town council was to consist of a mayor, 
aldermen and councillors, and the councils were given like 
powers, being divided into those with and those without a 
commission of the peace. The minutes were to be open to the 
inspection of any burgess, and an audit of accounts was required. 
The exclusive rights of retail trading, which in some towns were 
restricted to freemen of the borough, were abolished. The 
system of police, which in some places was still medieval in 
character, was placed under the control of the council. The 
various privileged areas within the bounds of a borough were 
with few exceptions made part of the borough. The powers of 
the council to alienate corporate property were closely restricted. 
The operations of the act were extended by later legislation, and 
the divers amendments and enactments which followed were con- 
solidated in the Municipal Corporations Act 1882. (M. Bat.) 

Irish Boroughs. — In Ireland the earliest traces of burghal life 
are connected with the maritime settlements on the southern 
and eastern coast. The invasion of Henry II. colonized these 
Ostman ports with Anglo-Norman communities, who brought 
with them, or afterwards obtained, municipal charters of a 
favourable kind. The English settlement obviously depended 
on the advantages which the burgesses possessed over the 
native population outside. Quite different from these were the 
new close boroughs which during the plantation of Ulster 
James I. introduced from England. The conquest was by this 
time completed, and by a rigorous enforcement of the Supremacy 
and Uniformity Acts the existing liberties of the older boroughs 
were almost entirely withdrawn. By the new rules published 
(in terms of the Act of Settlement and Explanation) in 1672 
resident traders were permitted to become freemen, but neither 
this regulation nor the ordinary admissions through birth, 
marriage and apprenticeship succeeded in giving to Ireland free 
and vigorous municipalities. The corrupt admission of non- 
resident freemen, in order to outvote the ancient freeholders 
in parliamentary elections, and the systematic exclusion of 
Roman Catholics, soon divorced the " commonalty " from true 
local interests, and made the corporations, which elected them- 
selves or selected the constituency, dangerously unpopular. 

Scottish Boroughs. — In Scotland burghs or burrows are divided 
into royal burghs, burghs of regality and burghs of barony. 
The first were erected by royal charter, and every burgess held 
direct of the crown. It was, therefore, impossible to subfeu the 
burgh lands, — a distinction still traceable in modern conveyanc- 
ing. Where perhaps no charter ever existed, the law on proof of 
immemorial possession of the privileges of a royal burgh has 
presumed that a charter of erection once existed. The charter 
gave power to elect provost, bailies and council, a power long 
exercised under the act of 1469, which directed the new council 
to be chosen annually by the retiring council, and the magistrates 
by both councils. The jurisdiction of these magistrates, which 
was specially reserved in the act of 1747 abolishing heritable 
jurisdictions, was originally cumulative with, and as large as, 
that of the sheriff. It is now confined to police offences, summary 
ejections, orders for interim aliment (for prisoners), payment of 
burgh dues and delivery of title deeds. Three head courts were 
held in the year, at which all burgesses were obliged to attend, 
and at which public business was done and private transactions 
were ratified. There were three classes of burgesses — burgesses 
in sua arte, members of one or other of the corporations; bur- 
gesses who were gild brothers; and simple burgesses. The 
Leges Burgorum apparently contemplate that all respectable 
inhabitants should have the franchise, but a ceremony of ad- 
mission was required, at which the applicant swore fealty and 
promised to watch and ward for the community, and to pay his 
" maill " to the king. These borough maills, or rents, and the 
great and small customs of burghs, formed a large part of the. 



BOROUGHBRIDGE— BOROUGH ENGLISH 



273 



royal revenue, and, although frequently leased or feued out for 
a fixed duty, were on the accession of James I. annexed to the 
crown as an alimentary fund. Burgh customs still stand in the 
peculiar position of being neither adjudgeable nor arrestable; 
they are therefore bad security. The early charters contain the 
usual privileges of holding a market, of exemption from toll or 
tribute, and that distraint will be allowed only for the burgess's 
own debts. There was also the usual strife between the gildry 
and the craftsmen, who were generally prohibited from trading, 
and of whom dyers, fleshers and shoemakers were forbidden to 
enter the gildry. Deacons, wardens and visitors were appointed 
by the crafts, and the rate of wages was fixed by the magistrates. 
The crafts in Scotland were frequently incorporated, not by royal 
charter, but, as in the case of the cordiners of Edinburgh, by 
seals of cause from the corporation. The trade history of the 
free burghs is very important. Thus in 1466 the privilege of 
importing and exporting merchandise was confined to freemen, 
burgesses and their factors. Ships were directed to trade to the 
king's free burghs, there to pay the customs, and to receive their 
acquets or custom-house seals; and in 1303 persons dwelling 
outside burghs were forbidden to " use any merchandise," or to 
sell wine or staple goods. An act of 1633, erroneously called a 
Ratification of the privileges of burghs, extended these privileges 
of buying and selling to retail as well as wholesale trade, but 
restricted their enjoyment to royal burghs. Accordingly, in 
1672, a general declaratory act was passed confirming to the 
freemen in royal burghs the wholesale trade in wine, wax, silk, 
dyeing materials, &c, permitting generally to all persons the 
export of native raw material, specially permitting the burgesses 
of barony and regality to export their own manufactures, and 
such goods as they may buy in " markets," and to import against 
these consignments certain materials for tillage, building, or for 
use in their own manufactures, with a general permission to 
retail all commodities. This extraordinary system was again 
changed in 1690 by an act which declared that freemen of royal 
burghs should have the sole right of importing everything by sea 
or land except bestial, and also of exporting by sea everything 
which was not native raw material, which might be freely 
exported by land. The gentry were always allowed to import 
for their personal consumption and to export an equal quantity 
of commodities. The act mentions that the royal burghs as an 
estate of the kingdom contributed one-sixth part of all public 
impositions, and were obliged to build and maintain prison- 
houses. Some of these trade privileges were not abolished till 
1846. 

In the north of Scotland there was an association of free 
burghs called the Hanse or Ansus; and the lord chamberlain, 
by his Iter, or circuit of visitation, maintained a common stand- 
ard of right and duties in all burghs, and examined the state of 
the " common good," the accounts of which in 1535 were 
appointed to be laid before the auditors in exchequer. The 
chamberlain latterly presided in the Curia Quatuor Burgorum 
(Edinburgh, Berwick, Stirling, Roxburgh), which not only made 
regulations in trade, but decided questions of private right 
(e.g. succession), according to the varying customs of burghs. 
This court frequently met at Haddington; in 1454 it was fixed 
at Edinburgh. The more modern convention of royal burghs 
(which appeared as a judicial persona in the Court of Session so 
late as 1839) probably dates from the act of James III. (1487, 
c. in), which appointed the commissioners of burghs, both north 
and south, to meet yearly at Inverkeithing " to treat of the 
welfare of merchandise, the good rule and statutes for the 
common profit of burghs, and to provide for remeid upon the 
skaith and injuries sustained within the burghs." Among the 
more important functions of this body (on whose decrees at one 
time summary diligence proceeded) were the prohibition of undue 
exactions within burghs, the revisal of the " set " or mode of 
municipal election, and the pro rata division among the burghs 
of the parliamentary subsidy required from the third estate. 
The reform of the municipalities, and the complete representation 
of the mercantile interests in the united parliament, deprived 
this body of any importance. 



Burghs of regality and of barony held in vassalage of some 
great lordship, lay or ecclesiastical, but were always in theory 
or in practice created by crown grant. They received jurisdiction 
in civil and criminal matters,' generally cumulative with that of 
the baron or the lord of regality, who in some cases obtained the 
right of nominating magistrates. Powers to hold markets and 
to levy customs were likewise given to these burghs. 

The Scottish burghs emerged slowly into political importance. 
In 1295 the procurators of six burghs ratified the agreement 
for the marriage of Edward Baliol; and in 1326 they were recog- 
nized as a third estate, granting a tenth penny on all rents 
for the king's life, if he should apply it for the public good. 
The commissioners of burghs received from the exchequer their 
costages or expenses of attending parliament. The burghs were 
represented in the judicial committee, and in the committee on 
articles appointed during the reign of James V. After the 
Reformation, in spite of the annexation of kirk lands to the crown, 
and the increased burdens laid on temporal lands, the proportion 
of general taxation borne by the burghs (viz. is. 6d.) was ex- 
pressly preserved by act 1587, c. 112. The number of commis- 
sioners, of course, fluctuated from time to time. Cromwell 
assigned ten members to the Scottish burghs in the second 
parliament of Three Nations (1654). The general practice until 
16 19 had been, apparently, that each burgh should send two 
members. In that year (by an arrangement with the convention 
of burghs) certain groups of burghs returned one member, 
Edinburgh returning two. Under art. 22 of the treaty of 
Union the number of members for royal burghs was fixed at 
fifteen, who were elected in Edinburgh by the magistrates 
and town council, and in the groups of burghs by delegates 
chosen ad hoc. (W. C. S.) 

See C. Gross, Bibliography of British Municipal History (1897), 
which contains all needful references up to that date; F. W. Mait- 
land, Township and Borough (1898) ; A. Ballard, Domesday Boroughs 
(1904) ; M. Bateson, Borough Customs (1904-1906) ; S. and B. Webb, 
English Local Government (3 vols., 1906-1908). For the character 
of the modern Scottish burgh see Mabel Atkinson, Local Government 
in Scotland (Edinburgh, 1904), where other works are mentioned. 

BOROUGHBRIDGE, a market town in the Ripon parliamentary 
division of the West Riding of Yorkshire, England; 22 m. N.W. 
of York on a branch of the North Eastern railway. Pop. (1901) 
830. It lies in the central plain of Yorkshire, on the river Ure 
near its confluence with the Swale. It is in the parish of Aid- 
borough, the village of that name (q.v.), celebrated for its Roman 
remains, lying a mile south-east. 

About half a mile to the west of Boroughbridge there are three 
upright stones called the Devil's Arrows, which are of uncertain 
origin but probably of the Celtic period. The manor of Borough- 
bridge, then called Burc, was held by Edward the Confessor and 
passed to William the Conqueror, but suffered so much from the 
ravages of his soldiers that by 1086 it had decreased in value from 
£10 to 55s. When the site of the Great North Road was altered, 
towards the end of the nth century, a bridge was built across the 
Ure, about half a mile above the Roman bridge at Aldborough, 
and called Burgh bridge or Ponteburgem. This caused a village 
to spring up, and it afterwards increased so much as to become a 
market town. In 1229 Boroughbridge, as part of the manor of 
Aldborough, was granted to Hubert de Burgh, but was forfeited 
a few years later by his son who fought against the king at Evesham. 
It then remained a royal manor until Charles I. granted it to several 
citizens of London, from whom it passed through numerous hands 
to the present owner. The history of Boroughbridge during the 
early 14th century centres round the war with Scotland, and cul- 
minates with the battle fought there in 1 321. When in 13 1 7 the 
Scots invaded England, they penetrated as far south as Borough- 
bridge and burnt the town. Boroughbridge was evidently a 
borough by prescription, and as such was called upon to return 
two members to parliament in 1299. It was not represented again 
until 1553, when the privilege was revived. The town was finally 
disfranchised in 1832. In 1504 the bailiff and inhabitants of 
Boroughbridge received a grant of two fairs, and Charles II. in 1670 
created three new fairs in the borough, on the 12th of June, the 
5th of August and the 12th of October, and leased them to Francis 
Calvert and Thomas Wilkinson for ninety-nine years. 

BOROUGH ENGLISH, a custom prevailing in certain ancient 
English boroughs, and in districts attached to them (where 
the lands are held in socage) , and also in certain copyhold manors 
(chiefly in Surrey, Middlesex, Suffolk and Sussex), by which in 
general lands descend to the youngest son, to the exclusion of all 



2JA- 



BORROMEAN ISLANDS— BORROMEO 



the other children, of the person dying seised and intestate. 
Descent to the youngest brother to the exclusion of all other 
collaterals, where there is no issue, is sometimes included in the 
general definition, but this is really a special custom to be 
proved from the court-rolls of the manor and from local reputa- 
tion — a custom which is sometimes extended to the youngest 
sister, uncle, aunt. Generally, however, Borough English, apart 
from specialties, may be said to differ from gavelkind in not 
including collaterals. It is often found in connexion with the 
distinct custom that the widow shall take as dower the whole 
and not merely one-third of her husband's lands. 

The origin of the custom of Borough English has been much 
disputed. Though frequently claimed to be of Saxon origin, 
there is no direct evidence of such being the case. The first 
mention of the custom in England occurs in Glanvil, without, 
however, any explanation as to its origin. Littleton's explana- 
tion, which is the more usually accepted, is that custom casts 
the inheritance upon the youngest, because after the death of 
his parents he is least able to support himself, and more likely 
to be left destitute of any other support. Blackstone derived 
Borough English from the usages of pastoral life, the elder sons 
migrating and the youngest remaining to look after the household. 
C. I. Elton claims it to be a survival of pre-Aryan times. It 
was referred to by the Normans as " the custom of the English 
towns." In the Yearbook of 22 Edward IV. fol. 32b it is described 
as the custom of Nottingham, which is made clear by the report 
of a trial in the first year of Edward III. where it was found 
that in Nottingham there were two districts, the one the Burgh- 
Frauncoyes, the other the Burgh-Engloyes, where descent was 
to the youngest son, from which circumstance the custom has 
derived its name. On the European continent the custom of 
junior-rights is not unknown, more particularly in Germany, 
and it has by some been ascribed to the jus primae nociis (q.v.). 
It is also said to exist amongst the Mongols. 

See also Gavelkind; Inheritance; Primogeniture; Tenure; 
Blackstone's Commentaries; Coke's Institutes; Corny n's Digest of 
the Law; Elton's Origin of English History; Pollock and Maitland, 
History of English Law. 

BORROMEAN ISLANDS, a group of four islands on the W. 
side of Lago Maggiore off Baveno and Stresa. The southern- 
most, the Isola Bella, is famous for its chateau and terraced 
gardens, constructed by Count Vitaliano Borromeo (d. 1690). 
To the N.W. is the Isola dei Pescatori, containing a fishing 
village; and to the N.E. of this the Isola Madre, the largest of 
the group, with a chateau and garden; and to the N. again, 
off Pallanza, is the little Isola S. Giovanni. 

BORROMEO, CARLO (1538-1584), saint and cardinal of the 
Roman Catholic Church, son of Ghiberto Borromeo, count of 
Arona, and Margarita de' Medici, was born at the castle of Arona 
on Lago Maggiore on the 2nd of October 1538. When he was 
about twelve years old, Giulio Cesare Borromeo resigned to him 
an abbacy, the revenue of which he applied wholly in charity to 
the poor. He studied the civil and canon law at Pavia. In 
1554 his father died, and, although he had an elder brother, 
Count Federigo, he was requested by the family to take the 
management of their domestic affairs. After a time, however, 
he resumed his studies, and in 1559 he took his doctor's degree. 
In 1560 his uncle, Cardinal Angelo de'Medici, was raised to the 
pontificate as Pius IV. Borromeo was made prothonotary, 
entrusted with both the public and the privy seal of the ecclesi- 
astical state, and created cardinal with the administration of 
Romagna and the March of Ancona, and the supervision of the 
Franciscans, the Carmelites and the knights of Malta. He was 
thus at the age of twenty-two practically the leading statesman 
of the papal court. Soon after he was raised to the archbishopric 
of Milan. In compliance with the pope's desire, he lived in great 
splendour; yet his own temperance and humility were never 
brought into question. He established an academy of learned 
persons, and published their memoirs as the Nodes Vaticanae. 
About the same time he also founded and endowed a college at 
Pavia, which he dedicated to Justina, virgin and martyr. On 
the death of his elder brother Federigo, he was advised to quit 



the church and marry, that his family might not become extinct. 
He declined the proposal, however, and became henceforward 
still more fervent in exercises of piety, and more zealous for the 
welfare of the church. Owing to his influence over Pius IV., 
he was able to facilitate the final deliberations of the council of 
Trent, and he took a large share in the drawing up of the 
Tridentine catechism (Catechismus Romanus). 

On the death of Pius IV. (1566), the skill and diligence of 
Borromeo contributed materially to suppressing the cabals of 
the conclave. Subsequently he devoted himself wholly to the 
reformation of his diocese, which had fallen into a most un- 
satisfactory condition owing to the prolonged absences of its 
previous archbishops. He made a series of pastoral visits, and 
restored decency and dignity to divine service. In conformity 
with the decrees of the council of Trent, he cleared the cathedral 
of its gorgeous tombs, rich ornaments, banners, arms, sparing 
not even the monuments of his own relatives. He divided the 
nave of the church into two compartments for the separation of 
the sexes. He extended his reforms to the collegiate churches 
(even to the fraternities of penitents and particularly that of St 
John the Baptist), and to the monasteries. The great abuses 
which had overrun the church at this time arose principally 
from the ignorance of the clergy. Borromeo, therefore, estab- 
lished seminaries, colleges and communities for the education 
of candidates for holy orders. The most remarkable, perhaps, 
of his foundations was the fraternity of the Oblates, a society 
whose members were pledged to give aid to the church when and 
where it might be required. He further paved the way for the 
" Golden " or " Borromean " league formed in 1586 by the Swiss 
Catholic cantons of Switzerland to expel heretics if necessary by 
armed force. 

In 1576, when Milan was visited by the plague, he went about 
giving directions for accommodating the sick and burying the 
dead, avoiding no danger and sparing no expense. He visited all 
the neighbouring parishes where the contagion raged, distributing 
money, providing accommodation for the sick, and punishing 
those, especially the clergy, who were remiss in discharging their 
duties. He met with much opposition to his reforms. The 
governor of the province, and many of the senators, apprehensive 
that the cardinal's ordinances and proceedings would encroach 
upon the civil jurisdiction, addressed remonstrances and com- 
plaints to the courts of Rome and Madrid. But Borromeo had 
more formidable difficulties to struggle with, in the inveterate 
opposition of several religious orders, particularly that of the 
Humiliati (Brothers of Humility Some members of that society 
formed a conspiracy against his life, and a shot was fired at him 
in the archiepiscopal chapel under circumstances which led to the 
belief that his escape was miraculous. The number of his enemies 
was increased by his successful attack on his Jesuit confessor 
Ribera, who with other members of the college of Milan was 
found to be guilty of unnatural offences. His manifold labours 
and austerities appear to have shortened his life. He was seized 
with an intermittent fever, and died at Milan on the 4th of 
November 1584. He was canonized in 1610, and his feast is 
celebrated on the 4th of November. 

Besides the Nodes Vaticanae, to which he appears to have 
contributed, the only literary relics of this intrepid and zealous 
reformer are some homilies, discourses and sermons, with a 
collection of letters. His sermons, which have little literary 
merit, were published by J. A. Sax (5 vols., Milan, 1 747-1 748), 
and have been translated into many languages. The record of 
his episcopate is to be found in the two volumes of the Ada 
Ecdesiae Mediolanensis (Milan, 1599). Contrary to his last 
wishes a memorial was erected to him in Milan cathedral, as well 
as a statue 70 ft. high on the hill above Arona, by his admirers 
who regarded him as the leader of a Counter-Reformation. 

His nephew, Federigo Borromeo (1564-1631), was archbishop 
of Milan from 1595, and in 1609 founded the Ambrosian library 
in that city. 

See G. P. Giussano, Vita di S. Carle Borromeo (1610, Eng. ed. by 
H. E. Manning, London, 1884) ; A. Sala, Documents circa la vita e 
la gesta di Borromeo (4 vols., Milan, 1857-1859) ; Chanoine Silvain, 



BORROMINI— BORROW 



27$ 



Histoire de St Charles Borromee (Milan, 1884); and A. Cantono, 
Un grande riformatore del secolo XVI (Florence, 1904); article 
" Borromaus " in Herzog-Hauck, Realencyklopddie (Leipzig, 1897). 

BORROMINI, FRANCESCO (1599-1667), Italian architect, 
was born at Bissone in 1 599. He was the chief representative of 
the style known in architecture as " baroque," which marked a 
fearless and often reckless departure from the traditional laws 
of the Renaissance, and often obtained originality only at the 
cost of beauty or wisdom. One of the main opponents of this 
style was Barocchio (q.v.). Borromini was much employed in 
the middle of the 17th century at Rome. His principal works 
are the church of St Agnese in Piazza Navona, the church of La 
Sapienza in Rome, the church of San Carlino alle Fontane, the 
church of the Collegio di Propaganda, and the restoration of 
San Giovanni in Laterano. . He died by his own hand at Rome in 
1667. Engravings of his chief compositions are to be found in 
the posthumous work, Francisci Borromini opus Architectonicum 
(1727). 

BORROW, GEORGE HENRY (1803-1881), English traveUer, 
linguist and author, was born at East Dereham, Norfolk, on the 
5th of July 1803, of a middle-class Cornish family. His father 
was a recruiting officer, and his mother a Norfolk lady of French 
extraction. From 1816 to 1818 Borrow attended, with no very 
great profit, the grammar school at Norwich. After leaving 
school he was articled to a firm of Norwich solicitors, where he 
neglected the law, but gave a great deal of desultory attention 
to languages. He was encouraged in these studies by William 
Taylor, the friend of Southey. On the death of his father, in 
1824 he went to London to seek his fortune as a literary ad- 
venturer. In 1826 he published a volume of Romantic Ballads 
translated from the Danish. Engaged by Sir Richard Phillips, 
the publisher, as a hack-writer at starvation wages, his ex- 
periences in London were bitter indeed. His struggles at last 
became so dire that if he would escape Chatterton's doom, he 
must leave London and either return to Norwich and share his 
mother's narrow income, or turn to account in some way the 
magnificent physical strength with which nature had endowed 
him. Determining on the latter of these courses, he left London 
on tramp. As he stood considerably more than 6 ft. in height, 
was a fairly trained athlete, and had a countenance of extra- 
ordinary impressiveness, if not ©f commanding beauty — Greek 
in type with a dash of the Hebrew — we may assume that there 
had never before appeared on the English high-roads so majestic- 
looking a tramp as he who, on an afternoon in May, left his 
squalid lodging with bundle and stick to begin life on the roads. 
Shaping his course to the south-west, he soon found himself on 
Salisbury Plain. And then his extraordinary adventures began. 
After a v/hile he became a travelling hedge-smith, and it was 
while pursuing this avocation that he made the acquaintance 
of the splendid road-girl, born at Long Melford workhouse, 
whom he has immortalized under the name of Isopel Berners. 
He was now brought much into contact with the gipsies, and 
this fact gave him the most important subject-matter for his 
writings. For picturesque as is Borrow's style, it is this subject- 
matter of his, the Romany world of Great Britain, which — if his 
pictures of that world are true — will keep his writings alive. 
Now that the better class of gipsies are migrating so rapidly to 
America that scarcely any are left in England, Borrow's pictures 
of them are challenged as being too idealistic. It is unfortunate 
that no one who knew Borrow, and the gryengroes or horse- 
dealers with whom he associated, and whom he depicted, has 
ever written about him and them. Full of " documents " as is 
Dr Knapp's painstaking biography, it cannot be said to give a 
vital picture of Borrow and his surroundings during this most 
interesting period of his life. It is this same peculiar class of 
gipsies (the gryengroes) with whom the present writer was 
brought into contact, and he can only refer, in justification of 
Borrow's descriptions of them, to certain publications of his own, 
where the whole question is discussed at length, and where he 
has set out to prove that Borrow's pictures of the section of the 
English gipsies he knew are not idealized. But there is one great 
blemish in all Borrow's dramatic scenes of gipsy life, wheresoever 



they may be laid. This was pointed out by the gentleman who 
" read " Zincali for Mr Murray, the publisher: — 

" The dialogues are amongst the best parts of the book; but in 
several of them the tone of the speakers, of those especially who 
are in humble life, is too correct and elevated, and therefore out of 
character. This takes away from their effect. I think it would be 
very advisable that Mr Borrow should go over them with reference 
to this point, simplifying a few of the terms of expression and 
introducing a few contractions — don'ts, can'ts, &c. This would 
improve them greatly." 

It is the same with his pictures of the English gipsies. The 
reader has only to compare the dialogues between gipsies given 
in that photographic study of Romany life, In Gipsy Tents, by 
F. H. Groome, with the dialogues in Lavengro and The Romany 
Rye, to see how the illusion in Borrow's narrative is disturbed 
by the uncolloquial locutions of the speakers. It is true, no 
doubt, that all Romanies, especially perhaps the English and 
Hungarian, have a passion for the use of high-sounding words, 
and the present writer has shown this in his remarks upon the 
Czigany Czindol, who is said to have taught the Czigany language 
to the archduke Joseph, often called the " Gipsy Archduke." 
But after all allowance is made for this racial peculiarity, Borrow's 
presentation of it considerably weakens our belief in Mr and Mrs 
Petulengro, Ursula, and the rest, to find them using complex 
sentences and bookish words which, even among English people, 
are rarely heard in conversation. As to the deep impression 
that Borrow made upon his gipsy friends, that is partly explained 
by the singular nobility of his appearance, for the gipsies of all 
countries are extremely sensitive upon matters of this kind. The 
silvery whiteness of the thick crop of hair which Borrow retained 
to the last seemed to add in a remarkable way to the nobility of 
his hairless face, but also it gave to the face a kind of strange 
look " not a bit like a Gorgio's," to use the words of one of his 
gipsy friends. Moreover, the shy, defiant, stand-off way which 
Borrow assumed in the company of his social equals left him 
entirely when he was with the gipsies. The result of this was 
that these wanderers knew him better than did his own country- 
men. 

Seven years after the events recorded in Lavengro and The 
Romany Rye Borrow obtained the post of agent to the Bible 
Society, in which capacity he visited St Petersburg (1833-1835) 
(where he published Tar gum, a collection of translations), and 
Spain, Portugal and Morocco (1835-1839). From 1837 to 1839 he 
acted as correspondent to the Morning Herald. The result of 
these travels and adventures was the publication, in 1841, of 
Zincali, or The Gypsies in Spain, the original MS. of which, in the 
hands of the present writer, shows how careful was Borrow's 
method of work. In 1843 appeared The Bible in Spain, when 
suddenly Borrow became famous. Every page of the book 
glows with freshness, picturesqueness and vivacity. In 1840 
he married Mary Clarke, the widow of a naval officer, and 
permanently settled at Oulton Broad, near Lowestoft, with her 
and her daughter. Here he began to write again. Very likely 
Borrow would never have told the world about his vagabond life 
in England as a hedge-smith had not The Bible in Spain made 
him famous as a wanderer. Lavengro appeared in 1851 with a 
success which, compared with that of The Bible in Spain, was 
only partial. He was much chagrined at this, and although 
Lavengro broke off in the midst of a scene in the Dingle, and only 
broke off there because the three volumes would hold no more, it 
was not until 1857 that he published the sequel, The Romany 
Rye. In 1844 he travelled in south-eastern Europe, and in 1854 
he made a tour with his step-daughter in Wales. This tour he 
described in Wild Wales, published in 1862. In 1874 he brought 
out a volume of ill-digested material upon the Romany tongue, 
Romano Lavo-lil, or Word-book of the Gypsy Language, a book 
which has been exhaustively analysed and criticized by Mr John 
Sampson. In the summer of 1874 he left London, bade adieu to 
Mr Murray and a few friends, and returned to Oulton. On the 
26th of July 1881 he was found dead in his house at Oulton, in 
his seventy-ninth year. 

Borrow was indisputably a linguist of wide knowledge, though 
he was not a scholar in the strict sense. The variety of his 



276 



BORSIPPA— BORZHOM 



attainments is shown by his translation of the Church of England 
Homilies into Manchu, of the Gospel of St Luke into the Git 
dialect of the Gitanos, of The Sleeping Bard from the Cambrian- 
British, and of Bluebeard into Turkish. But it is not Borrow's 
linguistic accomplishments that have kept his name fresh, and 
will continue to keep it fresh for many a generation to come. It 
is his character, his unique character as expressed, or partially 
expressed, in his books. Among all the "remarkable individuals " 
(to use his favourite expression) who during the middle of the 19th 
century figured in the world of letters, Borrow was surely the 
most eccentric, the most whimsical, and in many ways the most 
extraordinary. There was scarcely a point in which he resembled 
any other writer of his time. With regard to Lavengro and The 
Romany Rye, there has been very much discussion as to how 
much Dichlung is mingled with the Wahrheit in those fascinating 
books. Had it not been for the amazingly clumsy pieces of 
fiction which he threw into the narrative, few readers would have 
doubted the autobiographical nature of the two books. Such 
incidents as are here alluded to shed an air of unreality over the 
whole. It has been said by Dr Knapp that Borrow never 
created a character, and that to one who thoroughly knows the 
times and Borrow's writings the originals are easily recognizable. 
This is true, no doubt, as regards people whom he knew at 
Norwich, and indeed generally as regards those he knew before 
the period of his gipsy wanderings. It must not be supposed, 
however, that such a character as the man who " touched " to 
avert the evil chance is in any sense a portrait of an individual 
with whom he had been brought into contact. The character 
has so many of Borrow's own eccentricities that it might rather 
be called a portrait of himself. There was nothing that Borrow 
strove against with more energy than the curious impulse, which 
he seems to have shared with Dr Johnson, to touch the objects 
along his path in order to save himself from the evil chance. He 
never conquere d the superstition. In walking through Richmond 
Park with the present writer he would step out of his way 
constantly to touch a tree, and he was offended if the friend he 
was with seemed to observe it. Many of the peculiarities of the 
man who taught himself Chinese in order to distract his mind 
from painful thoughts were also Borrow's own. (T. W.-D.) 

BORSIPPA (Barsip in the Babylonian and Assyrian inscrip- 
tions; Borsif in the Talmud; mod. Birs or Birs-Nimrud), the 
Greek name of an ancient city about 15 m. S.W. of Babylon and 
10 m. from Hillah, on the Nahr Hiridieh, or Hindieh canal, 
formerly known as " the Euphrates of Borsippa," and even 
during the Arabic period called " the river of Birs." Borsippa 
was the sister city of Babylon, and is often called in the inscrip- 
tions Babylon II., also the " city without equal." Its patron god 
was Nebo or Nabu. Like Babylon Borsippa is not mentioned in 
the oldest inscriptions, but comes into importance first after 
Khammurabi had made Babylon the capital of the whole land, 
somewhere before 2000 B.C. He built or rebuilt the temple E-Zida 
at this place, dedicating it, however, to Marduk (Bel-Merodach). 
But although Khammurabi himself does not seem to have 
honoured Nebo (q.v.), subsequent kings recognized him as the 
deity of E-Zida and made him the son of Marduk (q.v.). Each 
new year his image was taken to visit his father, in Babylon, who 
in his turn gave him escort homeward, and his temple was second 
in wealth and importance only to E-Saggila, the temple of Marduk 
\n Babylon. As with Babylon, so with Borsippa, the time of 
Nebuchadrezzar was the period of its greatest prosperity. In 
general Borsippa shared the fate of Babylon, falling into decay 
after the time of Alexander, and finally in the middle ages into 
ruins. The site of the ancient city is represented by two large 
ruin mounds. Of these the north-westerly, the lower of the two, 
but the larger in superficial area, is called Ibrahim Khalll, 
from a ziara, or shrine, of Abraham, the friend of God, which 
stands on its highest point. According to Arabic lore, based on 
Jewish legends, at this spot Nimrod sought to throw Abraham 
into a fiery furnace, from which he was saved by the grace of God. 
Excavations were first conducted here by the French Expedition 
Scientifique en Mesopotamie in 1852, with small result. In 1879 
and 1880 Hormuzd Rassam conducted more extensive, although 



unsystematic, excavations in this mound, finding a considerable 
quantity of inscribed tablets and the like, now in the British 
Museum; but by far the greater part of this ruin still remains 
unexplored. The south-westerly mound, the Birs proper, is 
probably the most conspicuous and striking ruin in all Irak. On 
the top of a hill over 100 ft. high rises a pointed mass of vitrified 
brick split down the centre, over 40 ft. high, about which lie huge 
masses of vitrified brick, some as much as 1 5 ft. in diameter, and 
also single enamelled bricks, generally bearing an inscription of 
Nebuchadrezzar, twisted, curled and broken, apparently by 
great heat. Jewish and Arabic tradition makes this the Tower 
of Babel, which was supposed to have been destroyed by light- 
ning. Excavations conducted here by Sir Henry Rawlinson in 
1854 showed it to be the stage tower or ziggurat, called the 
" house of the seven divisions of heaven and earth," of E-Zida, 
the temple of Nebo. On a large platform rose seven solid 
terraces, each smaller than the one below it, the lowest being 
272 ft. square and 26 ft. high. Each of these terraces was faced 
with bricks of a different colour. The approach to this ziggurat 
was toward the north-east, and on this side lay also the principal 
rooms of the temple of which this was the tower. These rooms 
were partly excavated by Hormuzd Rassam in 1879-1880. In 
its final form this temple and tower were the work of Nebuchad- 
rezzar, but from the clay cylinders found by Sir Henry Rawlinson 
in two of the corners of the tower it appears that he restored an 
incomplete ziggurat of a former king, " which was long since 
fallen into decay." Some of the best authorities believe that it 
was this ambitious but incomplete and ruinous ziggurat, existing 
before the time of Nebuchadrezzar, which gave occasion to or 
afforded local attachment for the Biblical story of the Tower of 
Babel. 

Authorities. — H. C. Rawlinson, Journal of the Royal Asiatic 
Society (i860); J. Oppert, Expedition scientifique en Mesopotamie 
(Paris, 1863); F. Delitzsch, Wo lag das Parodies? (Leipzig, 1881); 
J. P. Peters, Nippur (New York and London, 1896); H. Rassam, 
Asshur and the Land of Nimrod (London and New York, 1897); 
M. Jastrow, Religion of Babylonia and Assyria (Boston, 1898); see 
also Babylon, Babel. (J. p. Pe.) 

BORT, or Boart, an inferior kind of diamond, unfit for 
cutting but useful as an abrasive agent. The typical bort 
occurs in small spherical masses, of greyish colour, rough or 
drusy on the surface, and showing on fracture a radiate crystalline 
structure. These masses, known in Brazil as bolas, are often 
called " shot bort " or " round bort." Much of the bort consists 
of irregular aggregates of imperfect crystals. In trade, the 
term bort is extended to all small and impure diamonds, and 
crystalline fragments of diamond, useless as gem-stones. A 
large proportion of the output of some of the South African mines 
consists of such material. This bort is crushed in steel mortars to 
form diamond powder, which is largely used in lapidaries' work. 

BORY DE SAINT-VINCENT, JEAN BAPTISTE GEORGE 
MARIE (1780-1846), French naturalist, was born at Agen in 
1780. He was sent as naturalist with Captain Nicholas Baudin's 
expedition to Australia in 1798, but left the vessel at Mauritius, 
and spent two years in exploring Reunion and other islands. 
Joining the army on his return, he was present at the battles of 
Ulm and Austerlitz, and in 1808 went to Spain with Marshal 
Soult. His attachment to the Napoleonic dynasty and dislike 
to the Bourbons were shown in various ways during 1815, and 
his name was consequently placed on the list of the proscribed; 
but after wandering in disguise from place to place he was 
allowed quietly to return to Paris in 1820. In 1829 he was 
placed at the head of a scientific expedition to the Morea, and in 
1839 he had charge of the exploration of Algeria. He died on 
the 23rd of December 1846. He was editor of the Dictionnaire 
classique d'histoire naturelle, and among his separate productions 
were: — Essais sur les lies Fortunees (1802); Voyage dans les 
lies d'Afrique (1803); Voyage souterrain, ou description du 
plateau de Saint- Pierre de Maestricht et de ses vastes cryptes ( 1 8 2 1 ) ; 
L'Homme, essai zoologique sur le genre humain (1827); Resume 
de la geographie de la Ptninsule (1838). 

BORZHOM, a watering-place of Russian Transcaucasia, in 
the government of Tiflis, and 93 m. by rail W. of the city of 



BOS-.BOSCAWEN 



2 7 ; 



Tiflis. Pop. (1897) 5800. It is situated at an altitude of 2750 ft. 
in the Borzhom gorge, a narrow rift in the Little Caucasus 
mountains, and on the Kura. Its warm climate, its two hot 
springs (71 f °-8 2° Fahr. ) and its beautiful parks make it a favourite 
summer resort, and give it its popular name of " the pearl of 
Caucasus." The bottled mineral waters are very extensively 
exported. 

BOS, LAMBERT (1670-1717), Dutch scholar and critic, was 
born at Workum in Friesland, where his father was headmaster 
of the school. He went to the university of Franeker (suppressed 
by Napoleon in 181 1), and was appointed professor of Greek 
there in 1704; after an uneventful life he died at Franeker in 
1717. His most famous work, Ellipses Graecae (1702), was 
translated into English by John Seager (1830); and his Anti- 
quiiates Graecae (17 14) passed through several editions. He also 
published Velus Teslamentum, Ex Versione Ixx. Interpretum 
(1709); notes on Thomas Magister (1698); Exercitationes 
Philologicae (1700); Animadversiones ad Scriptores quosdam 
Graecos (17 15); and two small treatises on Accents and Greek 
Syntax. 

BOSA, a seaport and episcopal see on the W. coast of Sardinia, 
in the province of Cagliari, 30 m. W. of Macomer by rail. Pop. 
(1901) 6846. The height above the town is crowned by a castle 
of the Malaspina family. The cathedral, founded in the 12th 
century, restored in the 15th, and rebuilt in 1806, is fine. There 
are some tanneries, and the fishing industry is important, but 
the coral production of Sicily has entirely destroyed that of Bosa 
since 1887. The district produces oil and wine. The present 
town of Bosa was founded in 1112 by the Malaspina, ijm. from 
the site of the ancient town (Bosa or Calmedia), where a well- 
preserved church still exists. The old town is of Roman origin, 
but is only mentioned by Pliny and Ptolemy, and as a station on 
the coast-road in the Itineraries (Corp. Inscr. Lat. x. 7939 seq.). 
One of the inscriptions preserved in the old cathedral records 
the erection of four silver statues, of Antoninus Pius, his wife 
Faustina and their two sons. 

BOSBOOM-TOUSSAINT, ANNA LOUISA GEERTRUIDA 
(181 2-1886), Dutch novelist, was born at Alkmaar in north 
Holland on the 16th of September 181 2. Her father, named 
Toussaint, a local chemist of Huguenot descent, gave her a fair 
education, and at an early period of her career she developed a 
taste for historical research, fostered, perhaps, by a forced 
indoor life, the result of weak health. In 1851 she married the 
Dutch painter, Johannes Bosboom (1817-1891), and thereafter 
was known as Mrs Bosboom-Toussaint. Her first romance, 
Almagro, appeared in 1837, followed by the Graaj van Devonshire 
{The Earl of Devonshire) in 1838; the Engelschen te Rome {The 
English at Rome) in 1840, and Het Huis Lauernesse {The House 
of Lauernesse) in 1841, an episode of the Reformation, translated 
into many European languages. These stories, mainly founded 
upon some of the most interesting epochs of Dutch history, 
betrayed a remarkable grasp of facts and situations, combined 
with an undoubted mastery over her mother tongue, though her 
style is sometimes involved, and not always faultless. Ten 
years (1840— 1850) were mainly devoted to further studies, the 
result of which was revealed in 1851-1854, when her Leycester 
in Nederland (3 vols.), Vrouwen van het Leyceslersche Tydperk 
{Women of Leicester's Epoch, 3 vols.), and Gideon Florensz (3 vols.) 
appeared, a series dealing with Robert Dudley's adventures 
in the Low Countries. After 1870 Mrs Bosboom-Toussaint 
abandoned historical romance for the modern society novel, 
but her Delftsche Wonderdokter {The Necromancer of Delft, 1871, 
3 vols.) and Majoor Frans (1875, 3 vols.) did not command the 
success of her earlier works. Major Frank has been translated 
into English (1885). She died at the Hague on the 13th of 
April 1886. Her novels have been published there in a collected 
edition (1885-1888, 25 vols.). 

BOSC, LOUIS AUGUSTIN GUILLAUME (1759-1828), French 
naturalist, was born at Paris on the 29th of January 1759. He 
was educated at the college of Dijon, where he showed a taste for 
botany, and he followed up his studies in Paris at the Jardin des 
Plantes, where he made the acquaintance of Mme M. J. P. 



Roland. At the age of eighteen he obtained a government 
appointment, and he rose to be one of the chief officials in the 
postal department. Under the ministry of J. M. Roland in 1792 
he also held the post of superintendent of prisons, but the violent 
outbreaks of 1793 drove him from office, and compelled him to 
take refuge in flight. For some months he lay concealed at 
Sainte-Radegonde, in the forest of Montmorency, barely subsist- 
ing on roots and vegetables. He was enabled to return to Paris 
on the fall of Robespierre, and under the title Appel a Vimpartiale 
posterity par la citoyenne Roland published a manuscript Mme 
Roland had entrusted to him before her execution. Soon 
afterwards he set out for America, resolving to explore the 
natural riches of that country. The immense materials he 
gathered were never published in a complete form, but much 
went to enrich the works of B. G. E. de Lacepede, P. A. Latreille 
and others. After his return, on the establishment of the 
Directory, he was reinstated in his old office. Of this he was 
again deprived by the coup d'etat of 1799, and for a time he was 
in great destitution; but by his copious contributions to scientific 
literature he contrived to support himself and to lay the founda- 
tions of a solid reputation. He was engaged on the new Diction- 
naire d'histoire naturelle, and on the Encyclopedic methodique, he 
edited the Diclionnaire raisonne et universel d' agriculture, and was 
one of the editors of the Annates de V 'agriculture francaise. He 
was made inspector of the gardens at Versailles, and of the public 
nurseries belonging to the ministry of the interior. The last 
years of his life were devoted to an elaborate work on the vine, 
for which he had amassed an immense quantity of materials, 
but his death at Paris on the 10th of July 1828 prevented its 
completion. 

BOSCAN ALMOGAVER, JUAN (1490 ?-i 542), Spanish poet, 
was born about the close of the 1 5th century. He was a Catalan 
of patrician birth, and, after some years of military service, 
became tutor to the duke of Alva. His poems were published in 
1 543 at Barcelona by his widow. They are divided into sections 
which mark the stages of Boscan's poetical evolution. The first 
book contains poems in the old Castilian metres, written in his 
youth, before 1526, in which year he became acquainted with the 
Venetian ambassador, Andrea Navagiero, who urged him to adopt 
Italian measures, and this advice gave a new turn to Boscan's 
activity. The remaining books contain a number of pieces in the 
Italian manner, the longest of these being Hero y Leander, a poem 
in blank verse, based on Musaeus. Boscan's best effort, the 
Octava Rima, is a skilful imitation of Petrarch and Bembo. 
Boscan also published in 1534 an admirable translation of 
Castiglione's // Corlegiano. Italian measures had been introduced 
into Spanish literature by Santillana and Villalpando; it is 
Boscan's distinction to have naturalized these forms definitively, 
and to have founded a poetic school. 

The best edition of his poems is that issued at Madrid in 1875 by 
W. J. Knapp; for his indebtedness to earlier writers, see Francesco 
Flamini, Studi di storia literaria italiana e straniera (Livorno, 1895). 

BOSCASTLE, a small seaport and watering-place in the 
Launceston parliamentary division of Cornwall, England, 5 m. 
N. of Camelford station on the London & South-Western railway. 
Pop. (civil parish of Forrabury, 1901) 329. The village rises 
steeply above a very narrow cove on the north coast, sheltered, 
but difficult of access, vessels having to be warped into it by 
means of hawsers. A mound on a hill above the harbour marks 
the site of a Norman castle. The parish church of St Symphorian, 
Forrabury, also stands high, overlooking the Atlantic from 
Willapark Point. The tower is without bells, and the tradition 
that a ship bearing a peal hither was wrecked within sight of the 
harbour, and that the lost bells may still be heard to toll beneath 
the waves, has been made famous by a ballad of the Cornish 
poet Robert Stephen Hawker, vicar of Moorwinstow. The coast 
scenery near Boscastle is severely beautiful, with abrupt cliffs 
fully exposed to the sea, and broken only by a few picturesque 
inlets such as Crackington Cove and Pentargan Cove. Inland 
are bare moors, diversified by narrow dales. 

BOSCAWEN, EDWARD (1711-1761), British admiral, was 
born on the 19th of August 1 7 1 1 . He was the third son of Hugh, 



278 



BOSCH— BOSCOVICH 



1st Viscount Falmouth! He early entered the navy, and in 1739 
distinguished himself at the taking of Porto Bellow At the siege 
of Cartagena, in March 1 741, at the head of a party of seamen, he 
took a battery of fifteen 24-pounders, while exposed to the fire of 
another fort. On his return to England in the following year he 
married, and entered parliament as member for Truro. In 1744 
he captured the French frigate " Medee," commanded by M. de 
Hocquart, the first ship taken in the war. In May 1747 he 
signalized himself in the engagement off Cape Finisterre, and 
was wounded in the shoulder with a musket-ball. Hocquart 
again became his prisoner, and the French ships, ten in number, 
were taken. On the 15th of July he was made rear-admiral and 
commander-in-chief of the expedition to the East Indies. On 
the 29th of July 1748 he arrived off Fort St David's, and soon 
after laid siege to Pondicherry; but the sickness of his men and 
the approach of the monsoons led to the raising of the siege. 
Soon afterwards he received news of the peace, and Madras was 
delivered up to him by the French. In April 1750 he arrived in 
England, and was the next year made one of the lords of the 
Admiralty, and chosen an elder brother of the Trinity House. 
In February 1755 he was appointed vice-admiral, and in April he 
intercepted the French squadron bound to North America, and 
took the " Alcide " and"Lys"of sixty-four guns each. Hoc- 
quart became his prisoner for the third time, and Boscawen 
returned to Spithead with his prizes and 1500 prisoners. For 
this exploit, he received the thanks of parliament. In 1758 he 
was appointed admiral of the blue and commander-in-chief of 
the expedition to Cape Breton, when, in conjunction with 
General Amherst, he took the fortress of Louisburg, and the 
island of Cape Breton — services for which he again received the 
thanks of the House of Commons. In 1759, being appointed to 
command in the Mediterranean, he pursued the French fleet, 
commanded by M. de la Clue, and after a sharp engagement in 
Lagos Bay took three large ships and burnt two, returning to 
Spithead with his prizes and 2000 prisoners. The victory 
defeated the proposed concentration of the French fleet in 
Brest to cover an invasion of England. In December 1760 he 
was appointed general of the marines, with a salary of £3000 per 
annum, and was also sworn a member of the privy council. He 
died at his seat near Guildford on the 10th of January 1761. 

BOSCH (or Bos), JEROM (c. 1460-1518), the name generally 
given, from his birthplace Hertogenbosch, to Hieronymus van 
Aeken, the Dutch painter. He was probably a pupil of Albert 
Ouwater, and may be called the Breughel of the 15th century, 
for he devoted himself to the invention of bizarre types, diableries, 
and scenes of the kind generally associated with Breughel, whose 
art is to a great extent based on Bosch's. He was a satirist much 
in advance of his time, and one of the most original and ingenious 
artists of the 15 th century. He exercised great influence on 
Lucas Cranach, who frequently copied his paintings. His works 
were much admired in Spain, especially by Philip II., at whose 
court Bosch painted for some time. One of his chief works is the 
" Last Judgment " at the Berlin gallery, which also owns a 
little " St Jerome in the Desert." " The Fall of the Rebellious 
Angels " and the " St Anthony " triptych are in the Brussels 
museum, and two important triptychs are at the Munich gallery. 
The Lippmann collection in Berlin contains an important 
" Adoration of the Magi," the Antwerp museum a " Passion," 
and a practically unknown painting from his brush is at the 
Naples museum. 

BOSCOVICH, ROGER JOSEPH (i 7 ii?-i787), Italian mathe^ 
matician and natural philosopher, one of the earliest of foreign 
savants to adopt Newton's gravitation theory, was born at 
Ragusa in Dalmatia on the 18th of May 1711, according to the 
usual account, but ten years earlier according to Lalande (Eloge, 
1792). In his fifteenth year, after passing through the usual 
elementary studies, he entered the Society of Jesus. On com- 
pleting his noviciate, which was spent at Rome, he studied 
mathematics and physics at the Collegium Romanum; and so 
brilliant was his progress in these sciences that in 1740 he was 
appointed professor of mathematics in the college. For this 
post he was especially fitted by his acquaintance with recent 



advances in science, and by his skill in a classical severity of 
demonstration, acquired by a thorough study of the works of the 
Greek geometricians. Several years before this appointment he 
had made himself a name by an elegant solution of the problem 
to find the sun's equator and determine the period of its rotation 
by observation of the spots on its surface. Notwithstanding 
the arduous duties of his professorship he found time for investi- 
gation in all the fields of physical science; and he published a 
very large number of dissertations, some of them of considerable 
length, on a wide variety of subjects. Among these subjects 
were the transit of Mercury, the Aurora Borealis, the figure of 
the earth, the observation of the fixed stars, the inequalities in 
terrestrial gravitation, the application of mathematics to the 
theory of the telescope, the limits of certainty in astronomical 
observations, the solid of greatest attraction, the cycloid, the 
logistic curve, the theory of comets, the tides, the law of con- 
tinuity, the double refraction micrometer, various problems of 
spherical trigonometry, &c. In 1742 he was consulted, with 
other men of science, by the pope, Benedict XIV., as to the 
best means of securing the stability of the dome of St Peter's, 
Rome, in which a crack had been discovered. His suggestion was 
adopted. Shortly after he engaged to take part in the Portuguese 
expedition for the survey of Brazil, and the measurement of a 
degree of the meridian; but he yielded to the urgent request of 
the pope that he would remain in Italy and undertake a similar 
task there. Accordingly, in conjunction with Christopher Maire, 
an English Jesuit, he measured an arc of two degrees between 
Rome and Rimini. The operations were begun towards the 
close of 1750, and were completed in about two years. An 
account of them was published in 1755, entitled De Litteraria 
expeditione per pontificam ditionem ad dimetiendos duos meridiani 
gradus a PP. Maire et Boscovich. The value of this work was 
increased by a carefully prepared map of the States of the Church. 
A French translation appeared in 1770. A dispute having 
arisen between the grand duke of Tuscany and the republic of 
Lucca with respect to the drainage of a lake, Boscovich was sent, 
in 1757, as agent of Lucca to Vienna, and succeeded in bringing 
about a satisfactory arrangement of the matter. In the following 
year he published at Vienna his famous work, Theoria philpsophiae 
naturalis redacta ad unicam legem virium in nalura existentium, 
containing his atomic theory (see Molecule) . Another occasion 
for the exercise of his diplomatic ability soon after presented 
itself. A suspicion having arisen on the part of the British 
government that ships of war had been fitted out in the port of 
Ragusa for the service of France, and that the neutrality of 
Ragusa had thus been violated, Boscovich was selected to 
undertake an embassy to London (1760), to vindicate the 
character of his native place and satisfy the government. This 
mission he discharged successfully, with credit to himself and 
satisfaction to his countrymen. During his stay in England he 
was elected a fellow of the Royal Society. He soon after paid 
this society the compliment of dedicating to it his Latin poem, 
entitled De Solis et Lunae Defectibus (London, 1764). This 
prolix composition, one of a class which at that time was much in 
vogue — metrical epitomes of the facts of science — contains in 
about five thousand lines, illustrated by voluminous notes, a 
compendium of astronomy. It was for the most part written 
on horseback, during the author's rides in the country while 
engaged in his meridian measurements. The book is character- 
ized by G. B. J. Delambre as " uninstructive to an astronomer 
and unintelligible to any one else." 

On leaving England Boscovich travelled in Turkey, but ill- 
health compelled him soon to return to Italy. In 1764 he was 
called to the chair of mathematics at the university of Pavia, 
and this post he held, together with the directorship of the 
observatory of Brera, for six years. He was invited by the 
Royal Society of London to undertake an expedition to California 
to'observe the transit of Venus in 1769; but this was prevented 
by the recent decree of the Spanish government for the expulsion 
of the Jesuits from its dominions. The vanity, egotism and 
petulance of Boscovich provoked his rivals and made him many 
enemies, so that in hope of peace he was driven to frequent 



BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA 



279 



change of residence. About 1770 he removed to Milan, where he 
continued to teach and to hold the directorship of the observatory 
of Brera; but being deprived of his post by the intrigues of his 
associates he was about to retire to his native place, when the 
news reached him (1773) of the suppression of his order in Italy. 
Uncertainty as to his future led him to accept an invitation 
from the king of France to Paris, where he was naturalized 
and was appointed director of optics for the marine, an office 
instituted for him, with a pension of 8000 livres. He remained 
there ten years, but his position became irksome, and at length 
intolerable. He continued, however, to devote himself diligently 
to the pursuits of science, and published many remarkable 
memoirs. Among them were an elegant solution of the problem 
to determine the orbit of a comet from three observations, and 
memoirs on the micrometer and achromatic telescopes. In 
1783 he returned to Italy, and spent two years at Bassano, 
where he occupied himself with the publication of his Opera 
pertinenlia ad opticam et astronomiam, b"c, which appeared in 
1785 in five volumes quarto. After a visit of some months to 
the convent of Vallombrosa, he went to Milan and resumed his 
literary labours. But his health was failing, his reputation 
was on the wane, his works did not sell, and he gradually sank 
a prey to illness and disappointment. He fell into melancholy, 
imbecility, and at last madness, with lucid intervals, and died 
at Milan on the 15th (13th) of February 1787. In addition to the 
works already mentioned Boscovich published Elemenla universae 
matheseos (1754), the substance of the course of study prepared 
for his pupils; and a narrative of his travels, entitled Giornale 
di un viaggio da Constantinopoli in Polonia, of which several 
editions and a French translation appeared. His latest labour 
was the editing of the Latin poems of his friend Benedict Stay 
on the philosophy of Descartes, with scientific annotations and 
supplements. (W. L. R. C.) 

BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA, or Bosnia-Herzegovina, 
two provinces formerly included in European Turkey, which 
now, together with Dalmatia, form the southernmost territories 
of the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy. The name Herzegovina is 
also written Hertzegovina, Hertsegovina or, in Croatian, Herce- 
govina. In shape roughly resembling an equilateral triangle, 
with base uppermost, Bosnia and Herzegovina cover an area of 
19,696 sq. m., in the north-west of the Balkan Peninsula. They 
are bounded N. and N.W. by Croatia-Slavonia; W. and S.W. by 
Dalmatia; S.E. by Montenegro and the Sanjak of Novibazar; 
and N.E. by Servia. Opposite to the promontory of Sabbioncello, 
and at the entrance to the Bocche di Cattaro, the frontier of 
Herzegovina comes down to the Adriatic; but these two strips 
of coast do not contain any good harbour, and extend only for a 
total distance of 14J m. Bosnia is altogether an inland territory. 

1. Physical Features. — Along the Dalmatian border, and 
through the centre of Bosnia, runs the backbone of the Dinaric 
Alps, which attain their greatest altitudes (6000-7500 ft.) near 
Travnik, Serajevo and Mostar. There are numerous high valleys 
shut in among the mountains of this range; the most noteworthy 
being the plain of Livno, which lies parallel to the Dalmatian 
border, at a height of 500 ft. above the sea. The zone of highlands 
throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina reaches a mean altitude of 
1500 ft., while summits of more than 4000 ft. occur frequently. 
To the north-east of the Dinaric Alps extends a region of 
mountain, moor and forest, with deeply sunk alluvial basins, 
which finally expand into the lowlands of the Posavina, or Vale 
of the Save, forming the southernmost fringe of the Hungarian 
Alfold. Bosnia belongs wholly to the watershed of the Save, 
and its rivers to the Danubian system, no large stream finding 
a way to the Adriatic. The Save flows eastward along the 
northern frontier for 23 7 m. It is joined by four main tributaries, 
the Drina, Bosna, Vrbas and Una. The Drina is formed on the 
Montenegrin frontier by the united streams of the Tara and 
Piva; curving north-eastwards past Visegrad, it marches for 
102 m. with Servian territory, and falls into the Save at Racha, 
after a total course of 155 m. The Bosna issues from many 
springs near Serajevo, and winds for 107 m. northward, through 
a succession of fertile glens, reaching the Save 1 m. west of Samac. 



Farther west, the Vrbas cuts a channel through the Dinaric Alps, 
and, after passing Jajce and Banjaluka, meets the Save 94 m. 
from its own headwaters. The Una rises on the Croatian 
border, and, after skirting the Pljesevica Planina, in Croatia, 
turns sharply to the north-east; serving as a frontier stream 
for 37 m. before entering the Save at Jasenovac. Its length is 
98 m. At Novi it is joined by the Sana, a considerable affluent. 

Herzegovina, which lies south of Bosnia, in a parallelogram 
defined by Montenegro, Dalmatia, the Dinaric Alps, and an 
irregular line drawn from a point 25 m. west-north-west of Mostar 
to the bend of the river Narenta, differs in many respects from 
the larger territory. Its mountains, which belong to the Adriatic 
watershed, and form a continuation of the Montenegrin highlands, 
are less rounded and more dolomitic in character. They descend 
in parallel ridges of grey Karst limestone, south-westwards to 
the sea; their last summits reappear in the multitude of rocky 
islands along the Dalmatian littoral. As in the peaks of Orjen, 
Orobac, Samotica and Veliki Kap, their height often exceeds 
6000 ft. West of the Narenta, their flanks are in places covered 
with forests of beech and pine, but north-east of that river they 
present for the most part a scene of barren desolation. Their 
monotony is varied only by the fruitful river-valleys and poljes, 
or upland hollows, where the smaller towns and villages are 
grouped; the districts or cantons thus formed are walled round 
by a natural rampart of limestone. These poljes may be described 
as oases in what is otherwise a desert expanse of mountains. 
The surface of some, as notably the Mostarsko Blato, lying west 
of Mostar, is marshy, and in spring forms a lake; others are 
watered by streams which disappear in swallow-holes of the 
rock, and make their way by underground channels either to 
the sea or the Narenta. The most conspicuous example of these 
is the TrebinjcHca, which disappears in two swallow-holes in 
Popovopolye, and after making its way by a subterranean 
passage through a range of mountains, wells up in the mighty 
source of Ombla near Ragusa, and hurries in undiminished 
volume to the Adriatic. The Narenta, or Neretva, is the one 
large river of Herzegovina which flows above ground throughout 
its length. Rising on the Montenegrin border, under the Lebrsnik 
mountains, it flows north-westwards at the foot of the Dinaric 
Alps; and, near Konjica, sweeps round suddenly to the south, 
and falls into the Adriatic near Metkovic, after traversing 125 m. 
North of Mostar, it cleaves a passage through the celebrated 
Narenta defile, a narrow gorge, 12 m. long, overshadowed 
by mountains which rise on either side and culminate in 
Lupoglav (6796 ft.) on the east, and Cvrstnica (7205 ft.) on 
the west. 

2. Geology and Minerals. — Geologically, the highlands of 
Bosnia and Herzegovina are to be regarded, in both their 
orographic and tectonic character, as a continuation of the 
South Alpine calcareous belt. Along the west frontier there 
appear broad and strongly marked zones of Cretaceous limestone, 
alternating with Jurassic and Triassic, joined by a strip of 
Palaeozoic formations running from the north-west corner of 
Bosnia. Next, proceeding from this region in an easterly 
direction, are the Neogene freshwater formations, filling up 
the greatest part of the north-east of Bosnia, as also a zone of 
flysch intermingled with several strips of eruptive rock. In the 
south-east of Bosnia the predominant formations are Triassic 
and Palaeozoic strata with red sandstone and quartzite. Along 
the whole northern rim of Bosnia, as also in the fluvial and Karst 
valleys {poljes), are found diluvial and alluvial formations, 
interrupted at one place by an isolated granite layer. Bosnia is 
rich in minerals, including coal, iron, copper, chrome, manganese, 
cinnabar, zinc and mercury, besides marble and much excellent 
building stone. Among the mountains, gold and silver were 
worked by the Romans, and, in the middle ages, by the 
Ragusans. After 1881 the Mining Company of Bosnia began to 
develop the coal and iron fields; and from 1886 its operations 
were continued by the government. Valuable salt is obtained 
from the pits at Dolnja Tuzla, and the southern part of Herze- 
govina yields asphalt and lignite. Mineral springs also abound, 
and those of Ilidze, near Serajevo, have been utilized since the 



28o 



BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA 



days of the Romans; but the majority remained unexploited at 
the beginning of the 20th century. 

3. Climate. — In climate Bosnia differs considerably from 
Herzegovina. In both alike the scirocco, bringing rain from the 
south-west, is a prevalent wind, as well as the bora, the fearful 
north-north-easter of Illyria, which, sweeping down the lateral 
valleys of the Dinaric Alps, overwhelms everything in its path. 
The snow-fall is slight, and, except on a few of the loftier peaks, 
the snow soon melts. In Bosnia the weather resembles that of 
the south Austrian highlands, generally mild, though apt to be 
bitterly cold in winter. In Serajevo the mean annual tempera- 
ture is 50° Fahr. Herzegovina has more affinity to the Dalmatian 
mountains, oppressively hot in summer, when the mercury often 
rises beyond no Fahr. The winter rains of the Karst region 
show that it belongs to the sub-tropical climatic zone. 

4. Fauna. — In 1893 the bones of a cave-bear (Ursus spelaeus) 
were taken from a cavern of the Bjelasnica range, in Herze- 
govina, a discovery without parallel in the Balkan Peninsula. 
Of existing species the bear, wild-boar, badger, roe-deer and 
chamois may occasionally be seen in the remotest wilds of 
mountain and forest. Hares are uncommon, and the last red- 
deer was shot in 18 14; but wolves, otters and squirrels abound. 
Snipe, woodcock, ducks and rails, in vast flocks, haunt the banks 
of the Drina and Save; while the crane, pelican, wild-swan and 
wild-goose are fairly plentiful. The lammergeier {Gypaetus 
barbatus) had almost become extinct in 1900; but several 
varieties of eagle and falcon are left. Falconry was long a 
pastime of the Moslem landlords. The destruction of game, 
recklessly carried out under Turkish rule, is prevented by the 
laws of 1880, 1883 and 1893, which enforced a close time, and 
rendered shooting-licences necessary. The list of reptiles in- 
cludes the venomous Vipera ammodytes and Pelias berus, while 
scorpions and lizards infest the stony wastes of the Karst. In 
the museum at Serajevo there is a large entomological collec- 
tion, including the remarkable Pogonus anophthalmus, from the 
underground Karst caves. The caves are rich in curious kinds 
of fish, Paraphoxinus Gethaldii, which is unknown elsewhere, 
Chondrostoma phoximus, Phoxinellus alepidatus and others, 
which are caught and eaten by the peasantry. In Herzegovina, 
although many of the high mountain tarns are unproductive, 
the eel-fisheries of the Narenta are of considerable value. Leech- 
gathering is a characteristic Bosnian industry. The streams of 
both territories yield excellent trout and crayfish; salmon, 
sturgeon and sterlet, from the Danube, are netted in the Save. 

5. Flora. — Serajevo museum has a collection of the Bosnian 
flora, representing over 3000 species; among them, the rare 
P is Veronica crinita, Pinus leucodermis, Picea omorica and 

Daphne Blagayana. About 50% of the occupied 
territory is clothed with forest. " Bosnia begins with the forest," 
says a native proverb, " Herzegovina with the rock "; and this 
account is, broadly speaking, accurate, although the Bosnian Karst 
is as bare as that of Herzegovina. Below the mountain crests, 
where only the hardiest lichens and mosses can survive, comes 
a belt of large timber, including many giant trees, 200 ft. high, 
and 20 ft. in girth at the level of a man's shoulder. Dense 
brushwood prevails on the foothills. There are three main 
zones of woodland. Up to 2500 ft. among the ranges of northern 
Bosnia, the sunnier slopes are overgrown by oaks, the shadier by 
beeches. Farther south, in central Bosnia, the oak rarely 
mounts beyond the foothills, being superseded by the beech, elm, 
ash, fir and pine, up to 5000 ft. The third zone is characterized 
by the predominance, up to 6000 ft., of the fir, pine and other 
conifers. In all three zones occur the chestnut, aspen, willow 
(especially Salix laurea), hornbeam, birch, alder, juniper and 
yew; while the mountain ash, hazel, wild plum, wild pear and 
other wild fruit trees are found at rarer intervals. Until 1878 
the forests were almost neglected; afterwards, the government 
was forced to levy a graduated tax on goats, owing to the damage 
they inflicted upon young trees, and to curtail the popular rights 
of cutting timber and fir- wood and of pasturage. These measures 
were largely successful, but in 1902 the export of oak staves was 
discontinued owing to a shortage of supply. 



6. Agriculture. — In 1895, according to the agricultural survey, 
the surface of Bosnia and Herzegovina was laid out as follows: — 

Acres. 

Plough-land 2,355,499 

Garden-ground 103,040 

Meadow 739,200 

Vineyards . . . . . 12,598 

Pasture 1,875,840 

Forest 5,670,619 

Unproductive 210,998 

Apart from the arid wastes of the Karst, the soil is well adapted 
for the growing of cereals, especially Indian corn; olives, vines, 
mulberries, figs, pomegranates, melons, oranges, lemons, rice 
and tobacco flourish in Herzegovina and the more sheltered 
portions of Bosnia. Near Doboj, on the Bosna, there is a state 
sugar-refinery, for which beetroot is largely grown in the vicinity. 
Pyrethrum cinerariaefolium is exported for the manufacture of 
insect-powder, and sunflowers are cultivated for the oil contained 
in their seeds. The plum-orchards of the Posavina furnish 
prunes and a spirit called slivovica, shlivovitsa or sliwowitz. 
This district is the headquarters of a thriving trade in pigs. 
Poultry, bees and silkworms are commonly kept. On the whole 
agriculture is backward, despite the richness of the soil; for the 
cultivators are a very conservative race, and prefer the methods 
and implements of their ancestors. Many improvements 
were, nevertheless, introduced by the government after 1878. 
Machinery was lent to the farmers, and free grants of seed were 
made. Model farms were established at Livno and at Gacko, on 
the Montenegrin border; a school of viticulture near Mostar; 
a model poultry-farm at Prijedor, close to the Croatian boundary; 
a school of agriculture and dairy farming at Ilidze; and another 
school at Modric, near the mouth of the Bosna, where a certain 
number of village schoolmasters are annually trained, for six 
weeks, in practical husbandry. Seed is distributed, and agricul- 
tural machinery lent, by the government. To better the breeds 
of live-stock, a stud-farm was opened near Serajevo, and foreign 
horses, cattle, sheep and poultry are imported. 

7. Land Tenure. — The zadruga, or household community, 
more common in Servia (q.v.), survives to a small extent in Bosnia 
and Herzegovina; but, as a rule, the tenure of land resembles 
the system called metayage. At the time of the Austrian occupa- 
tion (1878) it was regulated by a Turkish enactment 1 of the 12th 
of September 1859. Apart from gardens and house-property, 
all land was, according to this enactment, owned by the state; 
in practice, it was held by the Moslem begs or beys (nobles) and 
agas (landlords), who let it to the peasantry. The landlord 
received from his tenant (kmei) a fixed percentage, usually one 
third (tretina), of the annual produce; and, of the remaining two 
thirds, the cash equivalent of one tenth (desetina) went to the 
state. The amount of the desetina was always fixed first, and 
served as a basis for the assessment of the tretina, which, however, 
was generally paid in kind. At any time the tenant could re- 
linquish his holding; but he could only be evicted for refusing 
to pay his tretina, for wilful neglect of his land or for damage 
done to it. The landlord was bound to keep his tenants' dwellings 
and outhouses in repair. Should he desire to sell his estates, the 
right of pre-emption belonged to the tenants, or, in default, to 
the neighbours. Thus foreign speculators in land were excluded, 
while a class of peasant proprietors was created; its numbers 
being increased by the custom that, if any man reclaimed a piece 
of waste land, it became his own property after ten years. The 
Turkish land-system remained in force during the entire period 
of the occupation (1878-1908). It had worked, on the whole, 
satisfactorily; and between 1885 and 1895 the number of peasants 
farming their own land rose from 117,000 to 200,000. One 
conspicuous feature of the Bosnian land-system is the Moslem 
Vakuf, or ecclesiastical property, consisting of estates dedicated 
to such charitable purposes as poor-relief, and the endowment 
of mosques, schools, hospitals, cemeteries and baths. It is 
administered by a central board of Moslem officials, who meet in 

1 This was soon modified in detail. Arrears of debt, for instance, 
were made recoverable for one year only, instead of the ten years 
allowed by Turkish law. 



BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA 



281 



Serajevo, under state supervision. Its income rose to £25,000 in 
1895, having quadrupled itself in ten years. The Vakuf tenants 
were at that time extremely prosperous, for their rent had been 
fixed for ten years in advance on the basis of the year's harvest, 
and so had not risen proportionately to the value of their holdings. 

8. Industries and Commerce. — Beside agriculture, which em- 
ployed over 88% of the whole population in 1895, the other 
industries are insignificant. Chief among them are weaving and 
leather and metal work, carried on by the workmen in their own 
houses. There are also government workshops, opened with a 
view to a higher technical and artistic development of the house 
industry. More particularly, chased and inlaid metallic wares, 
bez (thin cotton) and carpet - weaving receive government 
support. Besides the sugar-refinery already mentioned, there 
were in 1900 four tobacco factories, a national printing-press, an 
annular furnace for brick-burning, an iron-foundry and several 
blast-furnaces, under the management of the state. Among the 
larger private establishments there existed in the same year seven 
breweries, one brandy distillery, two jam, two soap and candle 
factories, two building and furniture works, a factory for spinning 
thread, one iron and steel works, one paper and one ammonia 
and soda factory, and one mineral-oil refinery. 

In respect of foreign trade Bosnia and Herzegovina were in 
1882 included in the customs and commercial system of Austria- 
Hungary, to the extinction of all intermediate imposts. Since 
1898 special statistics have been drawn up respecting their trade 
also with Austria and Hungary. According to these statistics 
the most important articles of export are coal and turf, fruit, 
minerals, soda, iron and steel, and cattle. Other articles of export 
are chemicals, dyeing and tanning stuffs, tobacco, sugar-beet 
and kitchen-salt. The imports consist principally of food stuffs, 
building materials, drinks, sugar, machinery, glass, fats, clothes, 
wooden and stone wares, and various manufactured goods. 

There is a national bank in Serajevo, which carries on a 
hypothecary credit business and manages the wholesale trade of 
the tobacco factories. There are savings banks in Banjaluka, 
Bjelina and Brcka. 

9. Communications. — The construction of carriage-roads, 
wholly neglected by the Turks, was carried out on a large scale 
by the Austrians. Two railways were also built, in connexion 
with the Hungarian state system. One crosses the Una at 
Kostajnica, and, after skirting the right bank of that river as far 
as Novi, strikes eastward to Banjaluka. The other, a narrow- 
gauge line, crosses the Save at Bosna Brod, and follows the Bosna 
to Serajevo, throwing out branches eastward beyond Dolnja 
Tuzla, and westward to Jajce and Bugojno. It then pierces 
through the mountains of northern Herzegovina, traverses the 
Narenta valley, and runs almost parallel with the coast to 
Trebinje, Ragusa and the Bocche di Cattaro. Up to this point 
the railways of the occupied territory were complete in 1901. 
A farther line, from Serajevo to the frontiers of Servia and 
Novibazar, was undertaken in 1902, and by 1906 782 m. of 
railway were open. Small steamers ply on the Drina, Save and 
Una, but the Bosna, though broad from its very source, is, like 
theVrbas, too full of shallows to be utilized; while the Narenta 
only begins to be navigable when it enters Dalmatia. All the 
railway lines, like the postal, telegraphic and telephonic services, 
are state property. In many of the principal towns there are 
also government hotels. 

Serajevo, with 41,543 inhabitants in 1895, is the capital of 
the combined provinces, and other important places are Mostar 
(17,010), the capital of Herzegovina, Banjaluka (14,812), Dolnja. 
Tuzla (11,034), Travnik (6626), Livno (5273), Visoko(5ooo), Foca 
(4217), Jajce (3929) and Trebinje (2966). All these are described 
in separate articles. 

10. Population and National Characteristics. — In 1895 the 
population, which tends to increase slowly, with a preponderance 
of males over females, numbered 1,568,092. The alien element 
is small, consisting chiefly of Austro-Hungarians, gipsies, 
Italians and Jews. Spanish is a comomon language of the Jews, 
whose ancestors fled hither, during the 16th century, to escape 
! ':e Inquisition. The natives are officially described as Bosniaks, 



but classify themselves according to religion. Thus the Roman 
Catholics prefer the name of Croats, Hrvats or Latins; the 
Orthodox, of Serbs; the Moslems, of Turks. All alike belong 
to the Serbo-Croatian branch of the Slavonic race; and all 
speak a language almost identical with Servian, though written 
by the Roman Catholics in Latin instead of Cyrillic letters. 
A full account of this language, and its literature, is given under 
Servia and Croatia-Slavonia. To avoid offending either 
" Serbs " or " Croats," it is officially designated " Bosnisch." 
In some parts of Herzegovina the dress, manners and physical 
type of the peasantry are akin to those of Montenegro. The 
Bosnians or Bosniaks resemble their Servian kinsfolk in both 
appearance and character. They have the same love for poetry, 
music and romance; the same intense pride in their race and 
history; many of the same superstitions and customs. The 
Christians retain the Servian costume, modified in detail, as 
by the occasional use of the turban or fez. The " Turkish " 
women have in some districts abandoned the veil; but in 
others they even cover the eyes when they leave home. Poly- 
gamy is almost unknown, possibly because many of the " Turks " 
are descended from the austere Bogomils, who were, in most 
cases, converted to Islam, but more probably because the 
" Turks " are as a rule too poor to provide for more than one 
wife on the scale required by Islamic law. In general, the people 
of Bosnia and Herzegovina are sober and thrifty, subsisting 
chiefly on Indian corn, dried meat, milk and vegetables. Their 
houses are built of timber and thatch, or clay tiles, except in the 
Karst region, where stone is more plentiful than wood. Family 
ties are strong, and the women are not ill-treated, although 
they share in all kinds of manual labour. 

n. Government. — At the time of the Austrian annexation in 
1908, the only remaining token of Ottoman suzerainty was that 
the foreign consuls received their exequatur from Turkey, instead 
of Austria; otherwise the government of the country was 
conducted in the name of the Austrian emperor, through the 
imperial minister of finance at Vienna, who controlled the civil 
service for the occupied territory. Its central bureau, with 
departments of the interior, religion and education, finance 
and justice, was established at Serajevo; and its members were 
largely recruited among the Austrian Slavs, who were better 
able than the Germans to comprehend the local customs and 
language. A consultative assembly, composed of the highest 
ecclesiastical authorities, together with 1 2 popular representatives, 
also met at Serajevo. For administrative purposes the country 
was divided into 6 districts or prefectures (kreise), which were 
subdivided into 49 subprefectures (bezirke). 

Every large town has a mayor and deputy mayor, appointed 
by the government, and a town council, of whom one third are 
similarly appointed, while the citizens choose the rest; a pro- 
portionate number of councillors representing each religious 
community. To ensure economy, the decisions of this body are 
supervised by a government commissioner. The commune is 
preserved, somewhat as in Servia (q.v.), but with modified 
powers. Each district has its court of law, where cases are 
tried by three official judges and two assessors, selected from 
the leading citizens. The assessors vote equally with the judges, 
and three votes decide the verdict. Except where the litigants 
and witnesses are German, the Serbo-Croatian language is used. 
An appeal, on points of law alone, may be carried to the supreme 
court in Serajevo, and there tried by five judges without assessors. 
In cases not involving a sum greater than 300 florins (£25), no 
appeal will lie; and where only 50 florins (£4:3:4) are in 
question,- the case is summarily decided at the Bagatelle Gericht, 
or court for trifling cases. The number of lawyers admitted to 
practice is strictly limited. As far as possible, the Turkish law 
was retained during the period of occupation; all cases between 
Moslems were settled in separate courts by Moslem judges, 
against whom there was an appeal to the supreme court, aided 
by assessors. All able-bodied males are liable, on reaching their 
21st year, for 3 years' service with the colours, and 9 years in the 
reserve. The garrison numbers about 20,000 Austrian troops, 
and there are 7100 native troops. The principal military 



282 



BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA 



stations are Bjelina, Zvornik, Visegrad, Gorazda, Foca, Bilek, 
Avtovac and Trebinje, along the eastern frontier; Mostar and 
Stolac in the south; Livno in the west; and Bihafi in the north. 

12. Religion. — In 1895 43% of the population were Orthodox 
Christians, 35% Moslems and 21% Roman Catholics. The 
patriarch of Constantinople is the nominal head of the Orthodox 
priesthood; but by an arrangement concluded in 1879, his 
authority was delegated to the Austrian emperor, in exchange 
for a revenue equal to the tribute previously paid by the clergy 
of the provinces; and his nominations for the metropolitanate 
of Serajevo, and the bishoprics of Dolnja Tuzla, Banjaluka and 
Mostar require the imperial assent. Under Turkish rale the 
communes chose their own parish priests, but this right is now 
vested in the government. The Roman Catholics have an 
archbishop in Serajevo, a bishop in Mostar and an apostolic 
administrator in Banjaluka. Serajevo is also the seat of the 
Jewish chief rabbi; and of the highest Moslem ecclesiastic, or 
reis-el-ulema, who with his council is nominated and paid by the 
government. The inferior Moslem clergy draw their stipends 
from the Vakuf. Considerable bitterness prevails between the 
rival confessions, each aiming at political ascendancy, but the 
government favours none. In order to conciliate even the 
Moslems, who include the bulk of the great landholders and of the 
urban population, its representatives visit the mosques in state 
on festivals; grants are made for the Mecca pilgrimage; and 
even the howling Dervishes in Serajevo are maintained by the 
state. 

13. Education. — Education for boys and girls between the 
ages of seven and fifteen is free, but not compulsory. The 
state supports primary schools (352 in 1905), where reading, 
writing, arithmetic and history are taught; and separate 
instruction is given by the Orthodox, Roman Catholic, Jewish 
and Moslem clergy. There are also various private schools, 
belonging to the different religious communities. These receive 
a grant from the government, which nevertheless encourages 
all parents to send their children to its own schools. One of the 
earliest and best-known private schools is the orphanage at 
Serajevo, founded in 1869 by two English ladies, Miss Irby and 
Miss Mackenzie. In the Moslem schools, which, in 1905, com- 
prised 855 mehtebs or primary schools, and 41 madrasas or high 
schools, instruction is usually given in Turkish or Arabic; while 
in Orthodox schools the books are printed in Cyrillic characters. 

For higher education there were in 1908 three gymnasia, a real- 
school at Banjaluka, a technical college and a teachers' training- 
college at Serajevo, where, also, is the state school for Moslem 
law-students, called scheriatschule from the sheri or Turkish 
code; and various theological, commercial and art institutes. 
Promising pupils are frequently sent to Vienna University, 
with scholarships, which may be forfeited if the holders engage 
in political agitation. 

14. Antiquities. — Up to 1900 no traces of palaeolithic man 
had been discovered in Bosnia or Herzegovina; but many 
later prehistoric remains are preserved in Serajevo museum. 
The neolithic station of Butmir, near Ilidze, was probably a 
lake-dwellers' colony, and has yielded numerous stone and 
horn implements, clay figures and pottery. Not far off, similar 
relics were found at Sobunar, Zlatiste and Debelobrdo; iron 
and bronze ornaments, vessels and weapons, often of elaborate 
design, occur in the huts and cemeteries of Glasinac, and in the 
cemetery of Jezerine, where they are associated with objects in 
silver, tin, amber, glass, &c. Among the numerous finds made 
in other districts may be mentioned the discovery, at Vrankamer, 
near Bihac, of 98 African coins, the oldest of which dates from 
300 B.C. Many vestiges of Roman rule survive, such as roads, 
mines, ruins, tombs, coins, frescoes and inscriptions. Such 
remains 'occur frequently near Bihac, Foca, Livno, Jajce and 
Serajevo; and especially near the sources of the Drina. The 
period between the downfall of Roman power, late in the 5th 
century, and the growth of a Bosnian state, in the nth, is 
poorer in antiquities. The later middle ages are represented by 
several monasteries, and many castles, such as those of Dervent, 
Doboj, Maglaj, 2epce and Vranduk, on the Bosna; Bihac, on 



the Una; Prijedor and Kljud, on the Sana; and Stolac, Gabela, 
Irebinje and Konjica, in Herzegovina. The bridge across the 
Narenta, at Konjica, is said to date from the 10th century. A 
group of signs carved on some rocks near Visegrad have been 
regarded as cuneiform writing, but are probably medieval 
masonic symbols. In a few cases, such as the Begova Dzamia 
at Serajevo, the Foca mosques and the Mostar bridge, the 
buildings raised by the Turks are of high architectural merit. 
More remarkable are the tombstones, generally measuring 6 ft. 
in length, 3 in height and 3 in breadth, which have been supposed 
to mark the graves of the Bogomils. These are, as a rule, quite 
unadorned, a few only being decorated with rude bas-reliefs of 
animals, plants, weapons, the crescent and star, or, very rarely, 
the cross. 

15. History. — Under Roman rule Bosnia had no separate 
name or history, and until the great Slavonic immigration of 
636 it remained an undifferentiated part of Ulyria 
(q.v.). Owing to the scarcity of authoritative docu- otttle 
ments, it is impossible to describe in detail the events Banate. 
of the next three centuries. During this period Bosnia 
became the generally accepted name for the valley of the Bosna 
(ancient Basanius); and subsequently for several outlying and 
tributary principalities, notably those of Soli, afterwards Tuzla; 
Usora, along the south-eastern bank of the Save; Donji Kraj, 
the later Krajina, Kraina or Turkish Croatia, in the north-west; 
and Rama, the modern district of Livno. The old Illyrian 
population was rapidly absorbed or expelled, its Latin institutions 
being replaced by the autonomous tribal divisions, or Zupanates, 
of the Slavs. Pressure from Hungary and Byzantium gradually 
welded these isolated social units into a single nation, whose 
ruler was known as the Ban (q.v.).* But the central power 
remained weak, and the country possessed no strong natural 
frontiers. It seems probable that the bans were originally 
viceroys of the Croatian kings, who resumed their sovereignty 
over Bosnia from 958 to 1010. Thenceforward, until 1180, the 
bans continued subject to the Eastern empire or Hungary, with 
brief intervals of independence. The territory now called 
Herzegovina was also subject to various foreign powers. It 
comprised the principalities of Tribunia or Travunja, with its 
capital at Trebinje; and Hlum or Hum, the Zachlumia of 
Constantine Porphyrogenitus, who gives a clear picture of this 
region as it was in the 10th century* 1 

The schism between Eastern and Western Christendom left 
Bosnia divided between the Greek and Latin Churches. Early 
in the 12th century a new religion, that of the Bogomils 
(q.v.), was introduced, and denounced as heretical, coatro-* 
Its converts nevertheless included many of the Bosnian versies. 
nobles and the ban Kulin (1180-1204), whose reign 
was long proverbial for its prosperity, owing to the flourishing 
state of commerce and agriculture, and the extensive mining 
operations carried on by the Ragusans. An unusually able 
ruler, connected by marriage with the powerful Servian dynasty 
of Nemanya, and by treaty with the republic of Ragusa, 2 Kulin 
perceived in the new doctrines a barrier between his subjects 
and Hungary. He was compelled to recant, under strong 
pressure from Pope Innocent III. and Bela III. of Hungary; 
but, despite all efforts, Bogomilism incessantly gained ground. 
In 1232 Stephen, the successor of Kulin, was dethroned by the 
native magnates, who chose instead Matthew Ninoslav, a 
Bogomil. This event illustrates the three dominant character- 
istics of Bosnian history: the strength of the aristocracy; the 
corresponding weakness of the central authority, enhanced by 
the lack of any definite rule of inheritance; and the supreme 
influence of religion. Threatened by Pope Gregory IX. with a 
crusade, Ninoslav was baptized, only to abjure Christianity in 
1233. For six years he withstood the Hungarian crusaders, led 
by Kaloman, duke of Croatia; in 1241 the Tatar invasion of 

1 De Administrando Imperio, 33 and 34. The names of Chulmia 
and Chelmo, applied to this region by later Latin and Italian 
chroniclers, are occasionally adopted by English writers. 

2 For the commercial and political relations of Ragusa and Bosnia, 
see L. Villari, The Republic of Ragusa (London, 1904). 



BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA 



283 



Hungary afforded him a brief respite; and in 1244 peace was 
concluded after a Bosnian campaign against Croatia. A renewal 
of the crusade proving equally vain, in 1247 Pope Innocent III. 
entered into friendly negotiations with the ban, whose country 
was for the moment an independent and formidable state. The 
importance attached to its conversion is well attested by the 
correspondence of Pope Gregory IX. with Ninoslav and various 
Bosnian ecclesiastics. 1 

On the death of Ninoslav in 1250, vigorous efforts were made 
to exterminate the Bpgomil heresy; and to this end, Bela IV., 
Period of who appeared as the champion of Roman Catholicism, 
Hungarian secured the election of his nominee Prijesda to the 
suprem- banate. Direct Hungarian suzerainty lasted until 
acy ' 1299, the bans preserving only a shadow of their 

former power. From 1299 to 1322 the country was ruled by 
the Croatian princes, Paul and Mladen Subic, who, though 
vassals of Hungary, reunited the provinces of Upper and Lower 
Bosnia, created by the Hungarians in order to prevent the 
growth of a dangerous national unity. A rising of the native 
magnates in 1322 resulted in the election of the Bogomil, 
Stephen Kotromanic, last and greatest of the Bosnian bans. 

At this period the Servian empire had reached its zenith; 
Hungary, governed by the feeble monarch, Charles Robert of 
Anjou, was striving to crush the insurgent magnates 
Step"*" f Croatia; Venice, whose commercial interests were 
manic. imperilled, desired to restore peace and maintain the 
balance of power. Dread of Servia impelled Kotro- 
manic' to aid Hungary. In an unsuccessful war against the 
Croats (1322-26), from which Venice derived the sole advantage, 
the ban appears to have learned the value of sea-power; immedi- 
ately afterwards he occupied the principality of Hlum and the 
Dalmatian littoral between Spalato and the river Narenta. 
Ragusa furnished him with money and a fleet, in return for 
a guarantee of protection; commercial treaties with Venice 
further strengthened his position; and the Vatican, which had 
instigated the Croats to invade the dominions of their heretical 
neighbour (1337-40), was conciliated by his conversion to 
Roman Catholicism. Defeated by the Servian tsar Dushan, 
and driven to ally himself with Servia and Venice against Louis I. 
of Hungary, Kotromanic returned to his allegiance in 1344. 
Four years later his influence brought about a truce between 
Hungary and the Venetians, who had agreed with Bosnia for 
mutual support against the Croats; and in 1353, the year of his 
death, his daughter Elizabeth was married to King Louis. 
. Stephen Tvrtko, the nephew and successor of Kotromanic, was a 
minor, and for thirteen years his mother, Helena, acted as regent. 
Establish- Confronted by civil war, and deprived of Hlum by 
ment of the Hungarians, she was compelled to acknowledge 
the the suzerainty of Stephen Dushan, and afterwards 

Bosnian f l ou j s _ But in 1366 Tvrtko overcame all opposition 
at home, and forthwith embarked on a career of 
conquest, recapturing Hlum and annexing part of Dalmatia. 
The death of Stephen Dushan, in 1356, had left his empire 
defenceless against the Hungarians, Turks and other enemies; 
and to win help from Bosnia the Servian tsar Lazar ceded to 
Tvrtko a large tract of territory, including the principality of 
Tribunia. In 1376 Tvrtko was crowned as " Stephen I., king of 
Bosnia, Servia, and all the Sea-coast," although Lazar retained 
his own title and a diminished authority. The death of Louis in 
1392, the regency of his widow Elizabeth, and a fresh outbreak 
in Croatia, enabled Tvrtko to fulfil his predecessor's designs by 
establishing a maritime state. With Venetian aid he wrested 
from Hungary the entire Adriatic littoral between Fiume and 
Cattaro, except the city of Zara; thus adding Dalmatia to his 
kingdom at the moment when Servia was lost through the Otto- 
man victory of Kossovo (1389). At his coronation he had 
proclaimed his purpose to revive the ancient Servian empire; 
in 1378 he had married the daughter of the last Bulgarian tsar; 
and it is probable that he dreamed of founding an empire which 
should extend from the Adriatic to the Black Sea. The disaster 
1 Given by Theiner, Vetera monumenta Hungariam . . . illustrantia, 
1- 73-185- 



of Kossovo, though fatal to his ambition, did not immediately 
react on Bosnia itself; and when Tvrtko died in 1391, his 
kingdom was still at the summit of its prosperity. 

Kotromanic and Tvrtko had known how to crush or conciliate 
their turbulent magnates, whose power reasserted itself under 
Dabisa (Stephen II., 1391-1398), a brother of Tvrtko. 
Sigismond of Hungary profited by the disorder that Decline of 
ensued to regain Croatia and Dalmatia; and in 1398 Bosn ; an 
the Turks, aided by renegade Slavs, 2 overran Bosnia, kingdom. 
Ostoja (Stephen III., 1398-1418), an illegitimate son 
of Tvrtko, proved a puppet in the hands of Hrvoje Vukcic, 
duke of Spalato, Sandalj Hranic, 3 and other leaders of the 
aristocracy, who fought indifferently against the Turks, the Hun- 
garians, the king or one another. Some upheld a rival claimant 
to the throne in Tvrtkovic, a legitimate son of Tvrtko, and all 
took sides in the incessant feud between Bogomils and Roman 
Catholics. During the reigns of Ostojic (Stephen IV., 1418-1421) 
and Tvrtkovic (Stephen V., 1421-1444) Bosnia was thus left an 
easy prey to the Turks, who exacted a yearly tribute, after 
again ravaging the country, and carrying off many thousands 
of slaves, with a vast store of plunder. 

The losses inflicted on the Turks by Hunyadi Janos, and the 
attempt to organize a defensive league among the neighbouring 
Christian lands, temporarily averted the ruin of 
Bosnia under ThomasOstojic (Stephen VI. ,1444-1461). conquest. 
Hoping to gain active support from the Vatican, 
Ostojic renounced Bogomilism, and persecuted his former 
co-religionists, until the menace of an insurrection forced him 
to grant an amnesty. His position was endangered by the 
growing power of his father-in-law, Stephen Vukcic, an ardent 
Bogomil, who had united Tribunia and Hlum into a single 
principality. Vukcic — or Cosaccia, as he is frequently called 
by the contemporary chroniclers, from his birthplace, Cosac — 
was the first and last holder of the title " Duke of St Sava," 
conferred on him by the emperor Frederick III. in 1448; and 
from this title is derived the name Herzegovina, or " the Duchy." 
Hardly had the king become reconciled with this formidable 
antagonist, when, in 1453, the death of Hunyadi, and the fall 
of Constantinople, left Bosnia defenceless against the Turks. 
In 1460 it was again invaded. Venice and the Papacy were 
'unable, and Hungary unwilling, to render assistance; while 
the Croats proved actively hostile. Ostojic died in 1461, and 
his successor Tomasevic (Stephen VII., 1461-1463) surrendered 
to the Turks and was beheaded. Herzegovina, where VukSic 
offered a desperate resistance, held out until 1483; but apart 
from the heroic defence of Jajce, the efforts of the Bosnians 
were feeble and inglorious, many of the Bogomils joining the 
enemy. From 1463 the greater part of the country submitted 
to the Turks; but the districts of Jajce and Srebrenica were 
occupied by Hungarian garrisons, and organized as a separate 
"banate" or "kingdom of Bosnia," until 1526, when the 
Hungarian power was broken at Mohacs. In 1528 Jajce sur- 
rendered, after repelling every attack by the Turkish armies for 
65 years. 

The fall of Jajce was the consummation of theTurkish conquest. 
It was followed by the flight of large bodies of Christian refugees. 
Many of the Roman Catholics withdrew into Croatia-Slavonia 
and south Hungary, where they ultimately fell again under 
Ottoman dominion. Others found shelter in Rome or Venice, 
and a large number settled in Ragusa, where they doubtless 
contributed to the remarkable literary development ofthei6th . 
and 17th centuries in which the use of the Bosnian dialect was 
a characteristic feature. Some of the most daring spirits waged 
war on their conquesors from Clissa in Dalmatia, and afterwards 
from Zengg in maritime Croatia, where they formed the notorious 
pirate community of the Uskoks (q.v.). There was less induce- 
ment for the Orthodox inhabitants to emigrate, because almost 

2 This is the first recorded instance of such an alliance. The Slavs 
were probably Bogomils. 

3 These magnates played a considerable part in the politics of 
south-eastetn Europe; see especially their correspondence with the 
Venetian Republic, given by Shafarik, Acta archivi Veneti, &c. 



284 



BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA 



all the neighbouring lands were governed by Moslems or Roman 
Catholics; and at home the peasants were permitted to retain 
their creed and communal organization. Judged by its influence. 
on Bosnian politics, the Orthodox community was relatively 
unimportant at the Turkish conquest; and its subsequent 
growth is perhaps due to the official recognition of the Greek 
Church, as the representative of Christianity in Turkey. The 
Christian aristocracy lost its privileges, but its ancient titles of 
duke (vojvod) and count (knez) did not disappear. The first was 
retained by the leaders who still carried on the struggle for liberty 
in Montenegro; the second was transferred to the headmen of 
the communes. Many of the Franciscans refused to abandon their 
work, and in 1463 they received a charter from the sultan 
Mahomet II., which is still preserved in the monastery of Fojnica, 
near Travnik. This toleration of religious orders, though it did 
not prevent occasional outrages, remained to the last character- 
istic of Turkish policy in Bosnia; and even in 1868 a colony of 
Trappist monks was permitted to settle in Banjaluka. 

The Turkish triumph was the opportunity of the Bogomils, 
who thenceforth, assuming a new character, controlled the 
Bosnia destinies of their country for more than three centuries. 
under Bosnia was regarded by successive sultans as the 
Turkish gateway into Hungary; hatred of the Hungarians 

and their religion was hereditary among the Bogo- 
mils. Thus the desire for vengeance and the prospect of a 
brilliant military career impelled the Bogomil magnates to 
adopt the creed of Islam, which, in its austerity, presented 
some points of resemblance to their own doctrines. The nominal 
governor of the country was the Turkish vali, who resided at 
Banjaluka or Travnik, and rarely interfered in local affairs, if 
the taxes were duly paid. Below him ranked the newly con- 
verted Moslem aristocracy, who adopted the dress, titles and 
etiquette of the Turkish court, without relinquishing their 
language or many of their old customs. They dwelt in fortified 
towns or castles, where the vali was only admitted on sufferance 
for a few days; and, at the outset, they formed a separate 
military caste, headed by 48 kapetans — landholders exercising 
unfettered authority over their retainers and Christian serfs, 
but bound, in return, to provide a company of mounted troops 
for the service of their sovereign. Their favourite pursuits were 
fighting, either against a common enemy or among themselves', 
hunting, hawking and listening to the minstrels who celebrated 
their exploits. Their yearly visits to Serajevo assumed in time 
the character of an informal parliament, for the discussion of 
national questions; and their rights tended always to increase, 
and to become hereditary, in fact, though not in law. In every 
important campaign of the Turkish armies, these descendants 
of the Bogomils were represented; they amassed considerable 
wealth from the spoils of war, and frequently rose to high 
military and administrative positions. Thus, in 1570, Ali Pasha, 
a native of Herzegovina, became grand vizier; and he was 
succeeded by the distinguished soldier and statesman, Mahomet 
Beg Sokolovic, a Bosnian. Below the feudal nobility and their 
Moslem soldiers came the Christian serfs, tillers of the soil and 
taxpayers, whose lives and property were at the mercy of their 
lords. The hardships of their lot, and, above all, the system by 
which the strongest of their sons were carried off as recruits for 
the corps of janissaries (q.v.), frequently drove them to brigand- 
age, and occasionally to open revolt. 

These conditions lasted until the 19th century, and meanwhile 
the country was involved in the series of wars waged by the 

Turks against Austria, Hungary and Venice. In the 
history Krajina and all along the Montenegrin frontier, 
1528-1821. Moslems and Christians carried on a ceaseless feud, 

irrespective of any treaties concluded by their rulers; 
while the Turkish campaigns in Hungary provided constant 
occupation for the nobles during a large part of the 16th and 
17th centuries. But after the Ottoman defeat at Vienna 
in 1683, the situation changed. Instead of extending the 
foreign conquests of their sultan, the Bosnians were hard 
pressed to defend their own borders. Zvornik fell before the 
Austro-Hungarian army in 1688, and the Turkish vali, who was 



still officially styled the " vali of Hungary," removed his head- 
quarters from Banjaluka to Travnik, a more southerly, and 
therefore a safer capital. Two years later, the imperial troops 
reached Dolnja Tuzla, and retired with 3000 Roman Catholic 
emigrants. Serajevo was burned in 1697 by Eugene of Savoy, 
who similarly deported 40,000 Christians. The treaties of 
Carlowitz (1699) and Passarowitz (1718) deprived the Turks of 
all the Primorje, or littoral of Herzegovina, except the narrow 
enclaves of Klek and Suttorina, left to sunder the Ragusan 
dominions from those of Venice. At the same time a strip of 
territory in northern Bosnia was ceded to Austria, which was 
thus able to control both banks of the Save. This territory was 
restored to Turkey in 1739, at the peace of Belgrade; 1 but in 
1790 it was reoccupied by Austrian troops. Finally, in 1791, 
the treaty of Sistova again fixed the line of the Save and Una 
as the Bosnian frontier. 

The reform of the Ottoman government contemplated by the 
sultan Mahmud II. (1808-1839) was bitterly resented in Bosnia, 
where Turkish prestige had already been weakened 
by the establishment of Servian autonomy under r ? b \^ ns 
Karageorge. Many of the janissaries had married 
and settled on the land, forming a strongly conservative 
and fanatical caste, friendly to the Moslem nobles, who now 
dreaded the curtailment of their own privileges. Their oppor- 
tunity came in 1820, when the Porte was striving to repress the 
insurrections in Moldavia, Albania and Greece. A first Bosnian 
revolt was crushed in 182 1; a second, due principally to the 
massacre of the janissaries, was quelled with much bloodshed 
in 1827. After the Russo-Turkish War of 1828-29, a further 
attempt at reform was initiated by the sultan and his grand 
vizier, Reshid Pasha. Two years later came a most formidable 
outbreak; the sultan was denounced as false to Islam, and the 
Bosnian nobles gathered at Banjaluka, determined to march 
on Constantinople, and reconquer the Ottoman empire for the 
true faith. A holy war was preached by their leader, Hussein 
Aga Berberli, a brilliant soldier and orator, who called himself 
Zmaj Bosanski, the " Dragon of Bosnia," and was regarded by 
his followers as a saint. The Moslems of Herzegovina, under 
Ali Pasha Rizvanbegovic, remained loyal to the Porte, but in 
Bosnia Hussein Aga encountered little resistance. At Kossovo 
he was reinforced by 20,000 Albanians, led by the rebel Mustapha 
Pasha; and within a few weeks the united armies occupied the 
whole of Bulgaria, and a large part of Macedonia. Their career 
was checked by Reshid Pasha, who persuaded the two victorious 
commanders to intrigue against one another, secured the division 
of their forces, and then fell upon each in turn. The rout of the 
Albanians at Prilipe and the capture of Mustapha at Scutari 
were followed by an invasion of Bosnia. After a desperate 
defence, Hussein Aga fled to Esseg in Croatia-Slavonia; his 
appeal for pardon was rejected, and in 1832 he was banished 
for life to Tribizond. The power of the Bosnian nobles, though 
shaken by their defeat, remained unbroken; and they resisted 
vigorously when their kapetanates were abolished in 1837; and 
again when a measure of equality before the law was conceded 
to the Christians in 1839. In Herzegovina, Ali Pasha Rizvan- 
begovifi reaped the reward of his fidelity. He was left free to 
tyrannize over his Christian subjects, a king in all but name. 
In 1840 he descended from his mountain stronghold of Stolac 
to wage war upon the vladika Peter II. of Montenegro, and 
simultaneously to suppress a Christian rising. Peace was 
arranged at Ragusa in 1842, and it was rumoured that Ali had 
concluded a secret alliance with Montenegro, hoping to shake 
off the suzerainty of the sultan, and to found an entirely inde- 
pendent kingdom. It is impossible to verify this charge, but 
during the troubled years that ensued, Ali pursued an elaborate 
policy of intrigue. He sent large bribes to influential persons 
at Constantinople; he aided the Turkish vali to repress the 
Christians, who had again revolted; and he supported the 
Bosnian nobles against reforms imposed by the vali. At last, 
in 1850, a Turkish army was despatched to restore quiet. Ali 

*For details of these events see Umar Effendi, History of the War 
in Bosnia (1737-1739)- Translated by C. Fraser (London, 1830). 



BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA 



285 



Pasha openly professed himself a loyal subject, but secretly 
sent reinforcements to the rebel aristocracy. The Turks proved 
everywhere successful. After a cordial reception by their 
commander Omer or Omar Pasha, Ali was imprisoned; he was 
shortly afterwards assassinated, lest his lavish bribery of Turkish 
officials should restore him to favour, and bring disgrace on his 
captor (March 185 1). 

The downfall of the Moslem aristocracy resulted in an import- 
ant administrative change: Serajevo, which had long been the 

commercial centre of the country, and the jealously 
c °" oa guarded stronghold of the nobles, superseded Travnik 
serfs. as the official capital, and the residence of the vali. 

A variety of other reforms, including the reorganization 
of Moslem education, were introduced by Omer Pasha, who 
governed the country until i860. But as the administration 
grew stronger, the position of the peasantry became worse. 
They had now to satisfy the imperial tax-farmers and excisemen, 
as well as their feudal lords. The begs and agas continued to 
exact their forced labour and one- third of their produce; the 
central government imposed a tithe which had become an 
eighth by 1875. Three kinds of cattle- tax, the tax for exemption 
from military service, levied on every newborn male, forced 
labour on the roads, forced loan of horses, a heavy excise on 
grapes and tobacco, and a variety of lesser taxes combined to 
burden the Christian serfs; but even more galling than the 
amount was the manner in which these dues were exacted — 
the extortionate assessments of tax-farmers and excisemen, the 
brutal licence of the soldiery who were quartered on recalcitrant 
villagers. A crisis was precipitated by the example of Servian 
independence, the hope of Austrian intervention, and the public 
bankruptcy of Turkey. 

Sporadic insurrections had already broken out among the 
Bosnian Christians, and on the 1st of July 1875 the villagers 

of Nevesinje, which gives its name to a mountain 
Christian ran g e east f Mostar, rose against the Turks. Within 
1S7S. a Iew weeks the whole country was involved. The 

Herzegovinians, under their leaders Peko Pavlovic, 
Socica, Ljubibratic, and others, held out for a year against all 
the forces that Turkey could despatch against them. 1 In July 

1876 Servia and Montenegro joined the struggle, and in April 

1877 Russia declared war on the sultan. 

The Austro-Hungarian occupation, authorized on the 13th of 
July 1878 by the treaty of Berlin (arts. 23 and 26), was not 
Austro- easily effected; and, owing to the difficulty of military 
Hungarian operations among the mountains, it was necessary to 
occupa- employ a force of 200,000 men. Haji Loja, the 
MW-/90S native leader, was supported by a body of Albanians 
and mutinous Turkish troops, while the whole Moslem 
population bitterly resented the proposed change. The 
losses on both sides were very heavy, and, besides those 
who fell in battle, many of the insurgents were executed under 
martial law. But after a series of stubbornly contested engage- 
ments, the Austrian general, Philippovic, entered Serajevo on 
the 19th of August, and ended the campaign on the 20th of 
September, by the capture of Bihac in the north-west, and of 
Klobuk in Herzegovina. The government of the country was 
then handed over to the imperial ministry of finance; but the 
bureaucratic methods of the finance ministers, Baron von 
Hoffmann and Joseph de Szlavy, resulted only in the insurrec- 
tion of 1881-82. Order was restored in June 1882, when the 
administration was entrusted to Benjamin von Kallay (?.»•), 
as imperial minister of finance. Kallay retained this position 
until his death on the 13 th of July 1903, when he was succeeded 
by Baron Stephan Burian de Rajecz. During this period life 
and property were rendered secure, and great progress was 
achieved, on the lines already indicated, in creating an efficient 
civil service, harmonizing Moslem law with new enactments, 
promoting commerce, carrying out important public works, 
and reorganizing the fiscal and educational systems. All classes 

1 For the Christian rebellion and its causes; see A. J. Evans, 
Through Bosnia and Herzegovina on Foot (London, 1876) ; and W. J. 
Stillman, Herzegovina and the Late Uprising (London, 1877). 



and creeds were treated impartially; and, although the admini- 
stration has been reproached alike for undue harshness and 
undue leniency, neither accusation can be sustained. Critics 
have also urged that Kallay fostered the desire for material 
welfare at the cost of every other national ideal; that, despite 
his own popularity, he never secured the goodwill of the people 
for Austria-Hungary; that he left the agrarian difficulty un- 
solved, and the hostile religious factions unreconciled. These 
charges are not wholly unfounded; but the chief social and 
political evils in Bosnia and Herzegovina may be traced to 
historical causes operative long before the Austro-Hungarian 
occupation, and above all to the political ambition of the rival 
churches. Justly to estimate the work done by Kallay, it is 
only necessary to point to the contrast between Bosnia in 1882 
and Bosnia in 1903; for in 21 years the anarchy and ruin 
entailed by four centuries of misrule were transformed into 
a condition of prosperity unsurpassed in south-eastern 
Europe. 

It was no doubt natural that Austrian statesmen should wish 
to end the anomalous situation created by the treaty of Berlin, 
by incorporating Bosnia and Herzegovina into the 
Dual Monarchy. The treaty had contemplated the Austrian 
evacuation of the occupied provinces after the restora- tlon. 
tion of order and prosperity; and this had been 
expressly stipulated in an agreement signed by the Austro- 
Hungarian and Ottoman plenipotentiaries at Berlin, as a con- 
dition of Turkish assent to the provisions of the treaty. But the 
Turkish reform movement of 1908 seemed to promise a revival 
of Ottoman power, which might in time have enabled the Turks 
to demand the promised evacuation, and thus to reap all the 
ultimate benefits of the Austrian administration. The reforms 
in Turkey certainly encouraged the Serb and Moslem inhabitants 
of the occupied territory to petition the emperor for the grant of 
a constitution similar to that in force in the provinces of Austria 
proper. But the Austro-Hungarian government, profiting by 
the weakness of Russia after the war with Japan, and aware that 
the proclamation of Bulgarian independence was imminent, had 
already decided to annex Bosnia and Herzegovina, in spite of 
the pledges given at Berlin, and although the proposal was 
unpopular in Hungary. Its decision, after being communicated 
to the sovereigns of the powers signatory to the treaty of Berlin, 
in a series of autograph letters from the emperor Francis Joseph, 
was made known to Bosnia and Herzegovina in an imperial 
rescript published on the 7th of October 1908. The Serb and 
Moslem delegates, who had started on the same day for Budapest, 
to present their petition to the emperor, learned from the rescript 
that the government intended to concede to their compatriots 
" a share in the legislation and administration of provincial 
affairs, and equal protection for all religious beliefs, languages 
and racial distinctions." The separate administration was, 
however, to be maintained, and the rescript did not promise 
that the new provincial diet would be more than a consultative 
assembly, elected on a strictly limited franchise. 

Bibliography. — G. Capus, A travers la Bosnie et V Herzegovine 
(Paris, 1896) contains a detailed and fully illustrated account of the 
combined provinces, their resources and population. J. Asboth, An 
Official Tour through Bosnia and Herzegovina (London, 1890) is 
valuable for details of local history, antiquities and topography: 

A. Bordeaux, La Bosnie populaire (Paris, 1904) for social life and 
mining. Much information is also contained in the works by 
Lamouche, Miller, Thomson, Joanne, Cambon, Millet, Hamard and 
Laveleye, cited under the heading Balkan Peninsula. See also 

B. Nikasinovic, Bosnien und die Herzegovina unter der Verwaltung der 
osterreich-ungarischen Monarchic (Berlin, 1901, &c), and M. Oransz, 
Auf dem Rade dutch Kroatien und Bosnien (Vienna, 1903). The best 
map is that of the Austrian General Staff. See also for geology, 
J. Cvijic, Morphologische und glaciate Studien aus Bosnien (Vienna, 
1900) ; F. Katzer, Geologischer Fiihrer durch Bosnien und Herzegovina 
(Serajevo, 1903) ; P. Ballif, Wasserbauten in Bosnien und Herze- 
govina (Vienna, 1896). Sport: " Snaffle," In the Land of the Bora 
(London, 1897). Agriculture and Commerce: annual British consular 
reports, and the official Ergebnisse der Viehzahlungen (1879 and 1895), 
and Landwirlschaft in Bosnien und Herzegovina (1899). The chief 
official publications are in German. For antiquities, see R. Munro, 
Through Bosnia-Herzegovina and Dalmatia (Edinburgh, 1900); 
A. J. Evans, Illyrian Letters (London, 1878) ; W. Radimsky Die 



286 



BOSPORUS— BOSPORUS CIMMERIUS 



neolithisclx Station von Butmir (Vienna 1895-1898); P. Ballif, 
Romische Strassen in Bosnien und Herzegovina (Vienna, 1893, &c). 
No adequate history of Bosnia was published up to the 20th century ; 
but the chief materials for such a work are contained in the following 
books : — A. Theiner, Vetera monumenta historica Hungarian! sacram 
Ulustrantia (Rome, i860) and Vetera monumenta Slavorum Meridio- 
nalium (1. Rome, 1863; 2 Agram, 1875), — these are collections of 
Latin documents from the Vatican library; V. Makushev, Monu- 
menta historica Slavorum Meridionalium (Belgrade, 1885); Y. 
Shafarik, Acta archivi Yeneti spectantia ad historiam Serborum, &c. 
(Belgrade, 1860-1862) ; F. Miklosich, Monumenta Serbica (Vienna, 
1858). Other important authorities are G. Lucio, De Regno Dal- 
matiae et Croatiae (Amsterdam, 1666); M. Orbini, Regno degli Slavi 
(Pesaro 1601); D. Farlatus and others, Illyricum Sacrum (Venice, 
1751-1819) ; C. du Fresne du Cange, Illyricum vetus et novum (1746) ; 
M. Simek Politische Geschichte des Konigreiches Bosnien und Rama 
(Vienna, 1787). The best modern history, though valueless for 
the period after 1463', is by P. Coquelle, Histoire du Montenegro et 
de la Bosnie (Paris, 1895). See also V. Klaic, Geschichte Bosniens 
(Leipzig 1884). J. Spalaikovitch (Spalajkovic), in La Bosnie et 
VHerzegovine (Paris, 1897), give a critical account of the Austro- 
Hungarian administration. (K. G. J.) 

BOSPORUS, or Bosphortjs (Gr. B6o-xopos = ox-ford, tradition- 
ally connected with Io, daughter of Inachus, who, in the form of 
a heifer, crossed the Thracian Bosporus on her wanderings). 
By the ancients this name, signifying a strait, was especially 
applied to the Bosporus Cimmerius (see below), and the Bosporus 
Thracius; but when used without any adjective it now denotes 
the latter, which unites the Black Sea with the Sea of Marmora 
and forms part of the boundary between Europe and Asia. The 
channel is 18 m. long, and has a maximum breadth at the 
northern entrance of 2 j m., a minimum breadth of about 800 yds., 
and a depth varying from 20 to 66 fathoms in mid-stream. In 
the centre there is a rapid current from the Black Sea to the Sea 
of Marmora, but a counter-current sets in the opposite direction 
below the surface and along the shores. The surface current 
varies in speed, but averages nearly 3 m. an hour; though at 
narrow places it may run at double this pace. The strait is very 
rarely frozen over, though history records a few instances; and 
the Golden Horn, the inlet on either side of which Constantinople 
lies, has been partially frozen over occasionally in modern times. 
The shores of the Bosporus are composed in the northern portion 
of different volcanic rocks, such as dolerite, granite and trachyte; 
but along the remaining course of the channel the prevailing 
formations are Devonian, consisting of sandstones, marls, 
quartzose conglomerates, and calcareous deposits of various 
kinds. The scenery on both sides is of the most varied and 
beautiful description, many villages lining each well-wooded 
shore, while on the European side are numerous fine residences 
of the wealthy class of Constantinople. The Bosporus is under 
Turkish dominion, and by treaty of 1841, confirmed by the 
treaty of Berlin in 1878 and at other times, no ship of war other 
than Turkish may pass through the strait (or through the 
Dardanelles) without the countenance of the Porte. (See also 
Constantinople.) 

BOSPORUS CIMMERIUS, the ancient name for the Straits 
of Kerch or Yenikale, connecting the Black Sea and the Sea of 
Azov; the Cimmerii (q.v.) were the ancient inhabitants. The 
straits are about 25 m. long and 2\ m. broad at the narrowest, 
and are formed by an eastern extension of the Crimea and the 
peninsula of Taman, a kind of continuation of the Caucasus. 
This in ancient times seems to have formed a group of islands 
intersected by arms of the Hypanis or Kuban and various 
sounds now silted up. The whole district was dotted with Greek 
cities; on the west side, Panticapaeum (Kerch, q.v.), the chief of 
all, often itself called Bosporus, and Nymphaeum (Eltegen) ; on 
the east Phanagoria (Sennaja),Cepi,Hermonassa,Portus Sindicus, 
Gorgippia (Anapa). These were mostly settled by Milesians, 
Panticapaeum in the 7th or early in the 6th century B.C., but 
Phanagoria (c. 540 B.C.) was a colony of Teos, and Nymphaeum 
.had some connexion with Athens — at least it appears to have 
been a member of the Delian Confederacy. The towns have left 
hardly any architectural or sculptural remains, but the numerous 
barrows in their neighbourhood have yielded very beautiful 
objects now mostly preserved in the Hermitage in St Petersburg. 
They comprise especially gold work, vases exported from Athens, 



textiles and specimens of carpentry and marquetry. The 
numerous terra-cottas are rather rude in style. 

According to Diodorus Siculus (xii. 31) the locality was 
governed from 480 to 438 B.C. by the Archaeanactidae, probably 
a ruling family, who gave place to a tyrant Spartocus (438-431 
B.C.), apparently a Thracian. He founded a dynasty which seems 
to have endured until c. no B.C. The Spartocids have left many 
inscriptions which tell us that the earlier members of the house 
ruled as archons of the Greek cities and kings of various native 
tribes, notably the Sindi of the island district and other branches 
of the Maitae (Maeotae). The text of Diodorus, the inscriptions 
and the coins do not supply sufficient material for a complete 
list of them. Satyrus (431-387), the successor of Spartocus, 
established his rule over the whole district, adding Nymphaeum 
to his dominions and laying siege to Theodosia, which was a 
serious commercial rival by reason of its ice-free port and direct 
proximity to the cornfields of the eastern Crimea. It was 
reserved for his son Leucon (387-347) to take this city. He 
was succeeded by his two sons conjointly, Spartocus II. and 
Paerisades; the former died in 342 and his brother reigned alone 
until 310. Then followed a civil war in which Eumelus (3 10-303) 
was successful. His successor was Spartocus III. (303-283) and 
after him Paerisades II. Succeeding princes repeated the family 
names, but we cannot assign them any certain order. We know 
only that the last of them, a Paerisades, unable to make headway 
against the power of the natives, called in the help of Diophantus, 
general of Mithradates VI. (the Great) of Pontus, promising to 
hand over his kingdom to that prince. He was slain "by a 
Scythian Saumacus who led a rebellion against him. The house 
of Spartocus was well known as a line of enlightened and wise 
princes; although Greek opinion could not deny that they were, 
strictly speaking, tyrants, they are always described as dynasts. 
They maintained close relations with Athens, their best customers 
for the Bosporan corn export, of which Leucon I. set the staple 
at Theodosia, where the Attic ships were allowed special privileges. 
We have many references to this in the Attic orators. In return 
the Athenians granted him Athenian citizenship and set up 
decrees in honour of him and his sons. Mithradates the Great 
entrusted the Bosporus Cimmerius to his son Machares, who, 
however, deserted to the Romans. But even when driven out 
of his own kingdom by Pompey, Mithradates was strong enough 
to regain the Bosporus Cimmerius, and Machares slew himself. 
Subsequently the Bosporans again rose in revolt under Pharnaces, 
another of the old king's sons. After the death of Mithradates 
(b.c 63), this Pharnaces (63-47) made his submission to Pompey, 
but tried to regain his dominion during the civil war. He was 
defeated by Caesar at Zela,and on his return to Rome was slain 
by a pretender Asander who married his daughter Dynamis, and 
in spite of Roman nominees ruled as archon, and later as king, 
until 16 B.C. After his death Dynamis was compelled to marry 
an adventurer Scribonius, but the Romans under Agrippa inter- 
fered and set Polemon (14-8) in his place. To him succeeded 
Aspurgus (8 b. c.-a. d. 38 ?), son of Asander, who founded a line 
of kings which endured with certain interruptions until a.d. 341. 
These kings, who mostly bore the Thracian names of Cotys, 
Rhescuporis, Rhoemetalces, and the native name Sauromates, 
claimed descent from Mithradates the Great, and used the 
Pontic era (starting from 297 B.C.) introduced by him, regularly 
placing dates upon their coins and inscriptions. Hence we know 
their names and dates fairly well, though scarcely any events of 
their reigns are recorded. Their kingdom covered the eastern 
half of the Crimea and the Taman peninsula, and extended along 
the east coast of the Sea of Azov to Tanais at the mouth of the 
Don, a great mart for trade with the interior. They carried on 
a perpetual war with the native tribes, and in this were sup- 
ported by their Roman suzerains, who even lent the assistance of 
garrison and fleet. At times rival kings of some other race arose 
and probably produced some disorganization. At one of these 
periods (a.d. 255) the Goths and Borani were enabled to seize 
Bosporan shipping and raid the shores of Asia Minor. With the 
last coin of the last Rhescuporis, a.d. 341 , materials for a connected 
history of the Bosporus Cimmerius come to an end. The 



BOSQUET— BOSSUET 



287 



kingdom probably succumbed to the Huns established in the 
neighbourhood. In later times it seems in some sort to have 
been revived under Byzantine protection, and from time to time 
Byzantine officers built fortresses and exercised authority at 
Bosporus, which was constituted an archbishopric. They also 
held Ta Matarcha on the Asiatic side of the strait, a town which 
in the 10th and nth centuries became the seat of the Russian 
principality of Tmutarakan, which in its turn gave place to Tatar 
domination. 

The Bosporan kingdom is interesting as the first Hellenistic 
state, the first, that is to say, in which a mixed population 
adopted the Greek language and civilization. It depended for 
its prosperity upon the export of wheat, fish and slaves, and this 
commerce supported a class whose wealth and vulgarity are 
exemplified by the contents of the numerous tombs to which 
reference has been made. In later times a Jewish element was 
added to the population, and under its influence were developed 
in all the cities of the kingdom, especially Tanais, societies of 
" worshippers of the highest God," apparently professing a 
monotheism which without being distinctively Jewish or Christian 
was purer than any found among the inhabitants of the Empire. 

We possess a large series of coins of Panticapaeum and other 
cities from the 5th century B.C. The gold staters of Panticapaeum 
bearing Pan's head and a griffin are specially remarkable for their 
weight and fine workmanship. We have also coins with the 
names of the later Spartocids and a singularly complete series 
of dated solidi issued by the later or Achaemenian dynasty; in 
them may be noticed the swift degeneration of the gold solidus 
through silver and potin to bronze (see also Numismatics). 

See, for history, introduction to V. V. Latyshev, Insert, orae 
Septent. Ponti Euxini { vol. ii. (St Petersburg, 1890) ; art. " Bosporus" 
(2) by C. G. Brandis in Pauly-Wissowa, Realencycl. vol. iii. 757 
(Stuttgart, 1899); E. H. Minns, Scythians and Greeks (Cambridge, 
1907). For inscriptions, Latyshev as above and vol. iv. (St Peters- 
burg, 1901). Coins: B. Koehne, Musee Kotschoubey (St Petersburg, 
1855). Religious Societies: E. Schiirer in Sitzber. d. k. pr. Akad. d. 
Wissenschaft zu Berlin (1897), i. pp. 200-227. Excavations: Anti- 
suites du Bosphore cimmerien (St Petersburg, 1854, repr. Paris, 
1892) and Compte rendu and Bulletin de la Commission Imp. Archeo- 
logique de St-Petersbourg. (E. H. M.) 

BOSQUET, PIERRE FRANQOIS JOSEPH (1810-1861), French 
marshal, entered the artillery in 1833, and a year later went to 
Algeria. Here he soon did good service, and made himself 
remarkable not only for technical skill but the moral qualities 
indispensable for high command. Becoming captain in 1839, 
he greatly distinguished himself at the actions of Sidi-Lakhdar 
and Oued-Melah. He was soon afterwards given the command 
of a battalion of native tirailleurs, and in 1843 was thanked in 
general orders for his brilliant work against the Flittahs. In 
1845 he became lieutenant-colonel, and in 1847 colonel of a 
French line regiment. In the following year he was in charge 
of the Oran district, where his swift suppression of an insurrection 
won him further promotion to the grade of general of brigade, 
in whichjank he went through the campaign of Kabulia, receiving 
a severe wound. In 1853 he returned to France after nineteen 
years' absence, a general of division. Bosquet was amongst the 
earliest chosen to serve in the Crimean War, and at the battle 
of the Alma his division led the French attack. When the 
Anglo-French troops formed the siege of Sevastopol, Bosquet's 
corps of two divisions protected them against interruption. 
His timely intervention at Inkerman (November 5, 1854) 
secured the victory for the allies. During 1855 Bosquet's corps 
occupied the right wing of the besieging armies opposite the 
Mamelon and Malakov. He himself led his corps at the storming 
of the Mamelon (June 7), and at the grand assault of the 8th of 
September he was in command of the whole of the storming 
troops. In the struggle for the Malakov he received another 
serious wound. At the age of forty-five Bosquet, now one of the 
foremost soldiers in Europe, became a senator and a marshal of 
France, but his health was broken, and he lived only a few years 
longer. He had the grand cross of the Bath, the grand cross 
of the Legion of Honour, and the Medjidieh of the 1st class. 

BOSS. (1) (From the O. Eng. boce, a swelling, cf. Ital. bozza, 
and Fr. bosse, possibly connected with the O. Ger. bozan, to beat) , 



a round protuberance; the projecting centre or " umbo " of a 
buckler; in geology a projection of rock through strata of 
another species; in architecture, the projecting keystone of the 
ribs of a vault which masks their junction; the term is also 
applied to similar projecting blocks at every intersection. The 
boss was often richly carved, generally with conventional 
foliage but sometimes with angels, animals or grotesque figures. 
The boss was also employed in the flat timber ceilings of the 
15th century, where it formed the junction of cross-ribs. (2) 
(From the Dutch baas, a word used by the Dutch settlers in 
New York for " master," and so generally used by the Kaffirs in 
South Africa; connected with the Ger. Base, cousin, meaning 
a " chief kinsman," the head of a household or family), a col- 
loquial term, first used in America, for an employer, a foreman, 
and generally any one who gives orders, especially in American 
political slang for the manager of a party organization. 

BOSSI, GIUSEPPE (1777-1816), Italian painter and writer 
on art, was born at the village of Busto Arsizio, near Milan. 
He was educated at the college of Monza; and his early fondness 
for drawing was fostered by the director of the college, who 
supplied him with prints after the works of Agostino Caracci 
for copies. He then studied at the academy of Brera at Milan, 
and about 1795 went to Rome, where he formed an intimate 
friendship with Canova. On his return to Milan he became 
assistant secretary, and then secretary, of the Academy of Fine 
Arts. He rendered important service in the organization of this 
new institution. In 1804, in conjunction with Oriani, he drew 
up the rules of the three academies of art of Bologna, Venice 
and Milan, and soon after was rewarded with the decoration of 
the Iron Crown. On the occasion of the visit of Napoleon I. 
to Milan in 1805, Bossi exhibited a drawing of the Last Judgment 
of Michelangelo, and pictures representing Aurora and Night, 
Oedipus and Creon, and the Italian Parnassus. By command 
of Prince Eugene, viceroy of Italy, Bossi undertook to make a 
copy of the Last Supper of Leonardo, then almost obliterated, 
for the purpose of getting it rendered in mosaic. The drawing 
was made from the remains of the original with the aid of copies 
and the best prints. The mosaic was executed by Raffaelli, 
and was placed in the imperial gallery of Vienna. Bossi made 
another copy in oil, which was placed in the museum of Brera. 
This museum owed to him a fine collection of casts of great 
works of sculpture acquired at Paris, Rome and Florence. 
Bossi devoted a large part of his life to the study of the works 
of Leonardo; and his last work was a series of drawings in 
monochrome representing incidents in the life of that great 
master. He left unfinished a large cartoon in black chalk of the 
Dead Christ in the bosom of Mary, with John and the Magdalene. 
In 1810 he published a special work in large quarto, entitled 
Del Cenacolo di Leonardo da Vinci, which had the merit of greatly 
interesting Goethe. His other works are DelleOpinioni di Leonardo 
intorno alia simmetria de' cor pi umani ( 1 8 1 1 ) , and Del Tipo dell' arte 
della pittura (1816). Bossi died,at Milan on the 15th of Decem- 
ber 1816. A monument by Canova was erected to his memory 
in the Ambrosian library, and a bust was placed in the Brera. 

BOSSU, RENE LE (1631-1680), French critic, was born in 
Paris on the 16th of March 163 1. He studied at Nanterre, and 
in 1649 became one of the regular canons of Sainte-Genevieve. 
He wrote Parallhle des principes de la physique d'Aristole et de 
celle de RenS Descartes (1674), and a Traite du poeme ipique, 
highly praised by Boileau, the leading doctrine of which was that 
the subject should be chosen before the characters, and that the 
action should be arranged without reference to the personages 
who are to figure in the scene. He died on the 14th of March 1680. 

BOSSUET, JAQUES BENIGNE (1627-1704), French divine, 
orator and writer, was born at Dijon on the 27th of September 
1627. He came of a family of prosperous Burgundian lawyers; 
his father was a judge of the parliament (a provincial high court) 
at Dijon, afterwards at Metz. The boy was sent to school with 
the Jesuits of Dijon till 1642, when he went up to the college of 
Navarre in Paris to begin the study of theology; for a pious 
mother had brought him up to look on the priesthood as his 
natural vocation. At Navarre he gained a great reputation for 



288 



BOSSUET 



hard work; fellow-students nicknamed him Bos suelus aratro— 
an ox broken in to the plough. But his abilities became known 
beyond the college walls. He was taken up by the Hotel de 
Rambouillet, a great centre of aristocratic culture and the original 
home of the Precieuses. Here he became the subject of a 
celebrated experiment. A dispute having arisen about extempore 
preaching, the boy of sixteen was put up, late one night, to 
deliver an impromptu discourse. He acquitted himself as well 
as in more conventional examinations. In 1652 he took a brilliant 
degree in divinity, and was ordained priest. The next seven years 
he spent at Metz, where his father's influence had got him a 
canonry at the early age of thirteen; to this was now added the 
more important office of archdeacon. He was plunged at once 
into the thick of controversy; for nearly half Metz was Protestant, 
and Bossuet's first appearance in print was a refutation of the 
Huguenot pastor Paul Ferry (1655). To reconcile the Protestants 
with the Roman Church became the great object of his dreams; 
and for this purpose he began to train himself carefully for the 
pulpit, an all-important centre of influence in a land where 
political assemblies were unknown, and novels and newspapers 
scarcely born. Not that he reached perfection at a bound. His 
youthful imagination was unbridled, and his ideas ran easily into 
a kind of paradoxical subtlety, redolent of the divinity school. 
But these blemishes vanished when he settled in Paris (1659), 
and three years later mounted the pulpit of the Chapel Royal. 

In Paris the congregations had no mercy on purely clerical 
logic or clerical taste; if a preacher wished to catch their ear, 
he must manage to address them in terms they would agree to 
consider sensible and well-bred. Not that Bossuet thought too 
much of their good opinion. Having very stern ideas of the 
dignity of a priest, he refused to descend to the usual devices 
for arousing popular interest. The narrative element in his 
sermons grows shorter with each year. He never drew satirical 
pictures, like his great rival Bourdaloue. He would not write 
out his discourses in full, much less learn them off by heart: 
of the two hundred printed in his Works all but a fraction are 
rough drafts. No wonder ladies like Mme de Sevigne forsook 
him, when Bourdaloue dawned on the Paris horizon in 1669; 
though Fenelon and La Bruyere, two much sounder critics, 
refused to follow their example. Bossuet possessed the full 
equipment of the orator, voice, language, flexibility and strength. 
He never needed to strain for effect; his genius struck out at a 
single blow the thought, the feeling and the word. What he said 
of Martin Luther applies peculiarly to himself: he could "fling 
his fury into theses," and thus unite the dry light of argument 
with the fire and heat of passion. These qualities reach their 
highest point in the Or arsons funebres. Bossuet was always best 
when at work on a large canvas; besides, here no conscientious 
scruples intervened to prevent him giving much time and thought 
to the artistic side of his subject. For the Oraison, as its name 
betokened, stood midway between the sermon proper and what 
would nowadays be called a J)iographical sketch. At least, 
that was what Bossuet made it; for on this field he stood not 
merely first, but alone. His three great masterpieces were 
delivered at the funerals of Henrietta Maria, widow of Charles 
I. (1669), her daughter, Henrietta, duchess of Orleans (1670), 
and the great soldier Conde (1687). 

Apart from these state occasions, Bossuet seldom appeared in 
a Paris pulpit after 1669. In that year he was gazetted bishop 
of Condom in Gascony, though he resigned the charge on being 
appointed tutor to the dauphin, only child of Louis XIV., and 
now a boy of nine (1670). The choice was scarcely fortunate. 
Bossuet unbent as far as he could, but his genius was by no 
means fitted to enter into the feelings of a child; and the 
dauphin was a cross, ungainly, sullen lad, who grew up to be a 
merely genealogical incident at his father's court. Probably 
no one was happier than the tutor, when his charge's 
sixteenth birthday came round, and he was promptly married 
off to a Bavarian princess. Still the nine years at court were by 
no means wasted. Hitherto Bossuet had published nothing, 
except his answer to Ferry. Now he sat down to write for his 
pupil's instruction — or rather, to fit himself to give that instruc- 



tion — a remarkable trilogy. First came the Traits de la con- 
naissance de Dieu el de soi-meme, then the Discours sur I'histoire 
universelle, lastly the Politique tiree de I'Ecriture Sainte. The 
three books fit into each other. The Traite is a general sketch 
of the nature of God and the nature of man. The Discours 
is a history of God's dealings with humanity in the past. The 
Politique is a code of rights and duties drawn up in the light 
thrown by those dealings. Not that Bossuet literally supposed 
that the last word of political wisdom had been said by the Old 
Testament. His conclusions are only " drawn from Holy 
Scripture," because he wished to gain the highest possible 
sanction for the institutions of his country — to hallow the France 
of Louis XIV. by proving its astonishing likeness to the Israel 
of Solomon. Then, too, the veil of Holy Scripture enabled him 
to speak out more boldly than court-etiquette would have other- 
wise allowed, to remind the son of Louis XIV. that kings have 
duties as well as rights. Louis had often forgotten these duties, 
but Louis' son would bear them in mind. The tutor's imagination 
looked forward to a time when France would blossom into 
Utopia, with a Christian philosopher on the throne. That is 
what made him so stalwart a champion of authority in all its 
forms: " le roi, JSsus-Christ et I'Eglise, Dieu en ces trois noms," 
he says in a characteristic letter. And the object of his books 
is to provide authority with a rational basis. For Bossuet's 
worship of authority by no means killed his confidence in reason; 
what it did was to make him doubt the honesty of those who 
reasoned otherwise than himself. The whole chain of argument 
seemed to him so clear and simple. Philosophy proved that 
a God exists, and that He shapes and governs the course of 
human affairs. History showed that this governance is, for the 
most part, indirect, exercised through certain venerable corpora- 
tions, as well civil as ecclesiastical, all of which demand implicit 
obedience as the immediate representatives of God. Thus all 
revolt, whether civil or religious, is a direct defiance of the 
Almighty. Cromwell becomes a moral monster, and the revoca- 
tion of the edict of Nantes is " the greatest achievement of the 
second Constantine." Not that Bossuet glorified the status quo 
simply as a clerical bigot. The France of his youth had known 
the misery of divided counsels and civil war; the France of his 
manhood, brought together undet an absolute sovereign, had 
suddenly shot up into a splendour only comparable with ancient 
Rome. Why not, then, strain every nerve to hold innovation 
at bay and prolong that splendour for all time? Bossuet's 
own Discours sur I'histoire universelle might have furnished an 
answer, for there the fall of many empires is detailed. But then 
the Discours was composed under a single preoccupation. To 
Bossuet the establishment of Christianity was the one point of 
real importance in the whole history of the world. Over Mahomet 
and the East he passed without a word; on Greece and Rome 
he only touched in so far as they formed part of the Praeparatio 
Evangelica. And yet his Discours is far more than a theological 
pamphlet. Pascal, in utter scorn for science, might refer the 
rise and fall of empires to Providence or chance — the nose of 
Cleopatra, or " a little grain of sand " in the English lord 
protector's veins. Bossuet held fast to his principle that God 
works through secondary causes. "It is His will that every 
great change should have its roots in the ages that went before 
it." Bossuet, accordingly, made a heroic attempt to grapple 
with origins and causes, and in this way his book deserves its 
place as one of the very first of philosophic histories. 

From writing history he turned to history in the making. 
In 1681 he was gazetted bishop of Meaux; but before he 
could take possession of his see, he was drawn into a 
violent quarrel between Louis XIV. and the pope (see 
Gallicanism). Here he found himself between two fires. To 
support the pope meant supporting the Jesuits; and he hated 
their casuists and devotion aisie almost as much as Pascal himself. 
To oppose the pope was to play into the hands of Louis, who 
was frankly anxious to humble the Church before the State. So 
Bossuet steered a middle course. Before the general assembly of 
the French clergy he preached a great sermon on the unity of the 
Church, and made it a magnificent plea for compromise. As Louis 



BOSTANAI— BOSTON 



289 



insisted on his clergy making an anti-papal declaration, Bossuet 
got leave to draw it up, and made it as moderate as he could. 
And when the pope declared it null and void, he set to work on 
a gigantic Defensio Cleri Gallicani, only published after his death. 

The Gallican storm a little abated, he turned back to a project 
very near his heart. Ever since the early days at Metz he had 
been busy with schemes for uniting the Huguenots to the Roman 
Church. In 1668 he converted Turenne; in 1670 he published 
an Exposition de la foi catholique, so moderate in tone that 
adversaries were driven to accuse him of having fraudulently 
watered down the Roman dogmas to suit a Protestant taste. 
Finally in 1688 appeared his great Histoire des variations des 
iglises protestantes, perhaps the most brilliant of all his works. 
Few writers could have made the Justification controversy 
interesting or even intelligible. His argument is simple enough. 
Without rules an organized society cannot hold together, and 
rules require an authorized interpreter. The Protestant churches 
had thrown over this interpreter; and Bossuet had small trouble 
in showing that, the longer they lived, the more they varied on 
increasingly important points. For the moment the Protestants 
were pulverized; but before long they began to ask whether 
variation was necessarily so great an evil. Between 1691 and 
1 701 Bossuet corresponded with Leibnitz with a view to reunion, 
but negotiations broke down precisely at this point. Individual 
Roman doctrines Leibnitz thought his countrymen might accept, 
but he flatly refused to guarantee that they would necessarily 
believe to-morrow what they believe to-day. " We prefer," he 
said, " a church eternally variable and for ever moving forwards." 
Next, Protestant writers began to accumulate some startling 
proofs of Rome's own variations; and here they were backed up 
by Richard Simon, a priest of the Paris Oratory, and the father 
of Biblical criticism in France. He accused St Augustine, 
Bossuet's own special master, of having corrupted the primitive 
doctrine of Grace. Bossuet set to work on a Defense de la 
tradition, but Simon calmly went on to raise issues graver still. 
Under a veil of politely ironical circumlocutions, such as did not 
deceive the bishop of Meaux, he claimed his right to interpret 
the Bible like any other book. Bossuet denounced him again 
and again; Simon told his friends he would wait until " the old 
fellow " was no more. Another Oratorian proved more dangerous 
still. Simon had endangered miracles by applying to them lay 
rules of evidence, but Malebranche abrogated miracles altogether. 
It was blasphemous, he argued, to suppose that the Author of 
nature would break through a reign of law He had Himself 
established. Bossuet might scribble nova, mira, falsa, in the 
margins of his book and urge on Fenelon to attack- them; 
Malebranche politely met his threats by saying that to be refuted 
by such a pen would do him too much honour. These repeated 
checks soured Bossuet's temper. In his earlier controversies he 
had borne himself with great magnanimity, and the Huguenot 
ministers he refuted found him a kindly advocate at court. 
Even his approval of the revocation of the edict of Nantes 
stopped far short of approving dragonades within his diocese of 
Meaux. But now his patience was wearing out. A dissertation 
by one Father Caffaro, an obscure Italian monk, became his 
excuse for writing certain violent Maximes sur la eomtdie (1694) 
wherein he made an outrageous attack on the memory of Moliere, 
dead more than twenty years. Three years later he was battling 
with Fenelon over the love of God, and employing methods of 
controversy at least as odious as Fenelon's own (1697-1699). 
All that can be said in his defence is that Fenelon, four-and- 
twenty years his junior, was an old pupil, who had suddenly 
grown into a rival; and that on the matter of principle most 
authorities thought him right. 

Amid these gloomy occupations Bossuet's life came slowly to 
an end. Till he was over seventy he had scarcely known what 
illness was; but in 1702 he was attacked by the stone. Two 
years later he was a hopeless invalid, and on the 12th of April 
1704 he passed quietly away. Of his private life there is little 
to record. Meaux found him an excellent and devoted bishop, 
much more attentive to diocesan concerns than his more stirring 
occupations would seem to allow. In general society he was 
iv. 10 



kindly and affable enough, though somewhat ill at ease. Until 
he was over forty, he had lived among purely ecclesiastical 
surroundings; and it was probably want of self-confidence, 
more than want of moral courage, that made him shut his eyes 
a little too closely to the disorders of Louis XIV.'s private life. 
After all, he was not the king's confessor; and to " reform " 
Louis, before age and Mme de Maintenon had sobered him down, 
would have taxed the powers of Daniel or Ezekiel. But in his 
books Bossuet was anything but timid. AH of them, even the 
attacks on Simon, breathe an air of masculine belief in reason, 
rare enough among the apologists of any age. Bossuet would 
willingly have undertaken, as Malebranche actually undertook, 
to make an intelligent Chinaman accept all his ideas, if only he 
could be induced to lend them his attention. But his best praise 
is to have brought all the powers of language to paint an undying 
picture of a vanished world, where religion and letters, laws and 
science, were conceived of as fixed unalterable planets, circling 
for ever round one central Sun. 

Authorities. — -The best edition of Bossuet's sermons is the QLuvres 
oratoires de Bossuet, edited by Abbe Lebarq, in 6 vols. (Paris, 1890- 
1896). His complete works were edited by Lachat, in 31 vols.(Paris, 
1862-1864). A complete list of the innumerable works relating to 
him will be found in the Bossuet number of the Bibliotheque des 
bibliographies critiques, compiled by Canon Charles Urbain, and 
published by the Societe des fitudes Historiques (Paris, 1900). The 
general reader will find all he requires in the respective studies of 
M. Rebelliau, Bossuet (Paris, 1900), and M. Gustave Lanson, Bossuet 
(Paris, 1901). In English there is a modest Bossuet by Mrs Sidney 
Lear (London, 1874), and two remarkable studies by Sir J. Fitz- 
James Stephen in the second volume of his Horae Sabbaticae (London, 
1892). (St. C.) 

BOSTANAI, the name of the first exilarch under Mahommedan 
rule, in the middle of the 7th century. The exilarchs had their 
seat in Persia, and were practically the secular heads of the 
Jewish community in the Orient. 

BOSTON, THOMAS (1676-1732), Scottish divine, was born at 
Duns on the 17th of March 1676. His father, John Boston, and 
his mother, Alison Trotter, were both Covenanters. He was 
educated at Edinburgh, and licensed in 1697 by the presbytery 
of Chirnside. In 1699 he became minister of the small parish of 
Simprin, where there were in all " not more than 90 examinable 
persons." In 1704 he found, while visiting a member of his 
flock, a book which had been brought into Scotland by a common- 
wealth soldier. This was the famous Marrow of Modern Divinity, 
by Edward Fisher, a compendium of the opinions of leading 
Reformation divines on the doctrine of grace and the offer of the 
Gospel. Its object was to demonstrate the unconditional freeness 
of the Gospel. It cleared away such conditions as repentance, 
or some degree of outward or inward reformation, and argued 
that where Christ is heartily received, full repentance and a new 
life follow. On Boston's recommendation, Hog of Carnock 
reprinted The Marrow in 17 18; and Boston also published 
an edition with notes of his own. The book, being attacked 
from the standpoint of high Calvinism, became the standard 
of a far-reaching movement in Scottish Presbyterianism. The 
" Marrow men " were marked by the zeal of their service and 
the effect of their preaching. As they remained Calvinists they 
could not preach a' universal atonement; they were in fact 
extreme particular redemptionists. In 1707 Boston was trans- 
lated to Ettrick. He distinguished himself by being the only 
member of the assembly who entered a protest against what 
he deemed the inadequate sentence passed on John Simson, 
professor of divinity at Glasgow, who was accused of heterodox 
teaching on the Incarnation. He died on the 20th of May 1732. 
His books, The Fourfold State, The Crook in the Lot, and his Body 
of Divinity and Miscellanies, long exercised a powerful influence 
over the Scottish peasantry. 

His Memoirs were published in 1776 (ed. G. D. Low, 1908). An 
edition of his works in 12 volumes appeared in 1849. (D. Mk.) 

BOSTON, a municipal and parliamentary borough and seaport 
of Lincolnshire, England, on the river Witham, 4 m. from its 
mouth in the Wash, 107 m. N. of London by the Great Northern 
railway. Pop. (1901) 15,667. It lies in a flat agricultural 
fen district, drained by numerous cuts, some of which are 
navigable. The church of St Botolph is a superb Decorated 

II 



290 



BOSTON 



building, one of the largest and finest parish churches in the 
kingdom. A Decorated chapel in it, formerly desecrated, was 
restored to sacred use by citizens of Boston, Massachusetts, 
U.S.A., in 1857, in memory of the connexion of that city with the 
English town. The western tower, commonly known as Boston 
Stump, forms a landmark for 40 m. Its foundations were the 
first to be laid of the present church (which is on the site of 
an earlier one), but the construction was arrested until the 
Perpendicular period, of the work of which it is a magnificent 
example. It somewhat resembles the completed tower of 
Antwerp cathedral, and is crowned by a graceful octagonal 
lantern, the whole being nearly 290 ft. in height. The church of 
Skirbeck, 1 m. south-east, though extensively restored, retains 
good Early English details. Other buildings of interest are the 
guildhall, a 15th-century structure of brick; Shodfriars Hall, 
a half-timbered house adjacent to slight remains of a Dominican 
priory; the free grammar school, founded in 1554, with a fine 
gateway of wrought iron of the 17th century brought from St 
Botolph's church; and the Hussey Tower of brick, part of a 
mansion of the 16th century. Public institutions include a 
people's park and large municipal buildings (1904). 

As a port Boston was of ancient importance, but in the 18th 
century the river had silted up so far as to exclude vessels ex- 
ceeding about 50 tons. In 188 2- 1884 a dock some 7 acres in 
extent was constructed, with an entrance lock giving access to 
the quay sides for vessels of 3000 tons. The bed of the river 
was deepened to 27 ft. for 3 m. below the town, and a new cut 
of 3 m. was made from the mouth into deep water. An iron 
swing-bridge connects the dock with the Great Northern railway. 
There is a repairing slipway accommodating vessels of 800 tons. 
Imports, principally timber, grain, cotton and linseed, increased 
owing to these improvements from £116,179 i n x 88i to £816,698 
in 1899; and exports (coal, machinery and manufactured goods) 
from £83,000 in 1883 to £261,873 in 1899. The deep-sea and 
coastal fisheries are important. Engineering, oil-cake, tobacco, 
sail and rope works are the principal industries in the town. 
Boston returns one member to parliament. The parliamentary 
borough falls within the Holland or Spalding division of the 
county. The municipal borough is under a mayor, 6 aldermen 
and 18 councillors. Area, 2727 acres. 

Boston (Icanhoe, St Botolph or Botolph's Town) derives its name 
from St Botolph, who in 654 founded a monastery here, which was 
destroyed by the Danes, 870. Although not mentioned in Domesday, 
Boston was probably granted as part of Skirbeck to Alan, -earl of 
Brittany. The excellent commercial position of the town at the 
mouth of the Witham explains its speedy rise into importance. 
King John by charter of 1204 granted the bailiff of Boston sole 
jurisdiction in the town. By the 13th century it was a great com- 
mercial centre second only to London in paying £780 for two years 
to the fifteenth levied in 1205, and Edward III. made it a staple 
port for wool in 1369. The Hanseatic and Flemish merchants 
largely increased its prosperity, but on the withdrawal of the Han- 
seatic League about 1470 and the break-upof the gild system Boston's 
prosperity began to wane, and for some centuries it remained almost 
without trade. Nevertheless it was raised to the rank of a free 
borough by Henry VIII.'s charter of 1546, confirmed by Edward VI. 
in 1547, by Mary in 1553, by Elizabeth (who granted a court of 
admiralty) in 1558 and 1573, and by James I. in 1608. Boston sent 
members to the great councils in 1337, 1352 and 1353; and from 
1552 to 1885 two members were returned to each parliament. The 
Redistribution Act 1885 reduced the representation to one member. 
In 1257 a market was granted to the abbot of Crowland and in 1308 
to John, earl of Brittany. The great annual mart was held before 
1218 and attended by many German and other merchants. Two 
annual fairs and two weekly markets were granted by Henry VIII.'s 
charter, and are still held. The Great Mart survives only in the 
Beast Mart held on the nth of December. 

See Pishey Thompson, History and Antiquities of Boston and the 
Hundred of Skirbeck (Boston, 1856) ; George Jebb, Guide to the 
Church of St Botolph, with Notes on the History of Boston ; Victoria 
County History: Lincolnshire. 

BOSTON, the capital of the state of Massachusetts, U.S.A., 
in Suffolk county; lat. 42 21' 27-6" N, long. 71 3' 30" W. Pop. 
(1900) 560,892, (197,129 being foreign born); (1905, state census) 
595,580; (1910), 670,585. Boston is the terminus of the Boston & 
Albany (New York Central), the Old Colony system of the New 
Yofk, New Haven & Hartford, and the Boston & Maine railway 
systems, each of which controls several minor roads once in- 



dependent. The city lies on Massachusetts bay, on what was 
once a pear-shaped peninsula attached to the mainland by a 
narrow, marshy neck, often swept by the spray and water. 
On the north is the Charles river, which widens here into a broad, 
originally much broader, inner harbour or back-bay. The surface 
of the peninsula was very hilly and irregular, the shore-line was 
deeply indented with coves, and there were salt marshes that 
fringed the neck and the river-channel and were left oozy by 
the ebbing tides. Until after the War of Independence the 
primitive topography remained unchanged, but it wrs afterwards 
subjected to changes greater than those effected on the site of 
any other American city. The area of the original Boston was 
only 783 acres, but by the filling in of tidal flats (since 1804) 
this was increased to 1829 acres; while the larger corporate 
Boston of the present day — including the annexed territories of 
South Boston (1804), Roxbury (1868), Charlestown, Dorchester, 
Brighton and West Roxbury (1874)— comprehends almost 
43 sq. m. The beautiful Public Garden and the finest residential 
quarter of the city — the Back Bay, so called from that inner 
harbour from whose waters it was reclaimed (1856-1886) — stand 
on what was once the narrowest, but to-day is the widest and 
fairest portion of the original site. Whole forests, vast quarries 
of granite, and hills of gravel were used in fringing the water 
margins, constructing wharves, piers and causeways, redeeming 
flats, and furnishing piling and solid foundations for buildings. 
At the edge of the Common, which is now well within the city, 
the British troops in 1775 took their boats on the eve of the 
battle of Lexington; and the post-office, now in the very heart 
of the business section of the city, stands on the original shore-line. 
The reclaimed territory is level and excellently drained. The 
original territory still preserves to a large degree its irregularity 
of surface, but its hills have been much degraded or wholly razed. 
Beacon Hill, so called from its ancient use as a signal warning 
station, is still the most conspicuous topographical feature of 
the city, but it has been changed from a bold and picturesque 
eminence into a gentle slope. After the great fire of 1872 it 
became possible, in the reconstruction of the business district, 
to widen and straighten its streets and create squares, and so 
provide for the traffic that had long outgrown the narrow, 
crooked ways of the older city. Atlantic Avenue, along the 
harbour front, was created, and Washington Street, the chief 
business artery, was largely remade after 1866. It is probable 
that up to 1875, at least, there had been a larger outlay of labour, 
material and money, in reducing, levelling and reclaiming 
territory, and in straightening and widening thoroughfares J in 
Boston, than had been expended for the same purposes in all 
the other chief cities of the United States together. Washington 
Street, still narrow, is perhaps the most crowded and congested 
thoroughfare in America. The finest residence streets are in the 
Back Bay, which is laid out, in sharp contrast with the older 
quarters, in a regular, rectangular arrangement. The North 
End, the original city and afterwards the fashionable quarter, 
is now given over to the Jews and foreign colonies. 

The harbour islands, three of which have been ceded to the 
United States for the purpose of fortification, are numerous, 
and render the navigation of the shipping channels difficult 
and easily guarded. Though tortuous of access, the channels 
afford a clear passage of 27-35 ft. since great improvements were 
undertaken by the national government in 1892, 1899, 1902 and 
1907, and the harbour, when reached, is secure. It affords nearly 
60 sq. m. of anchorage, but the wharf line, for lack of early 
reservation, is not so large as it might and should have been. 
The islands in the harbour, now bare, were for the most part 
heavily wooded when first occupied. It has been found impossible 
to afforest them on account of the roughness of the sea-air, and 
the wash from their bluffs into the harbour has involved large 
expense in the erection of sea-walls. Castle Island has been 
fortified since the earliest days; Fort Independence, on this 
island, and Forts Winthrop and Warren on neighbouring islands, 
constitute permanent harbour defences. The broad watercourses 

1 On the alteration of streets alone $26,691,496 were expended 
from 1822 to 1880. 



BOSTON 



291 



around the peninsula are spanned by causeways and bridges, 
East Boston only, that the harbours may be open to the navy- 
yard at Charlestown, being reached by ferry (1870), and by 
the electric subway under the harbour. • At the Charlestown 
navy-yard (1800) there are docks, manufactories, foundries, 
machine-shops, ordnance stores, rope-walks, furnaces, casting- 
pits, timber sheds, ordnance-parks, ship-houses, &c. The famous 
frigate " Independence " was launched here in 1814, the more 
famous " Constitution " having been launched while the yard 
was still private in 1797. The first bridge over the Charles, 
to Charlestown, was opened in 1786. The bridge of chief artistic 
merit is the Cambridge Bridge (1908), which replaced the old 
West Boston Bridge, and is one feature of improvements long 
projected for the beautifying of the Charles river basin. 

Comparatively few relics of the early town have been spared by 
time and the improvements of the modern city. Three cemeteries 
remain intact — King's chapel burying ground, with the graves 
of John Winthrop and John Cotton; the Old Granary burial 
ground in the heart of the city, where Samuel Sewall, the parents 
of Franklin, John Hancock, James Otis and Samuel Adams are 
buried; and Copp's Hill burial ground, containing the tombs 
of the Mathers^ Christ church (1723) is the oldest church of the 
city; in its tower the signal lanterns were displayed for Paul 
Revere on the night of the 18th of April 1775. The Old South 
church (1730-1782), the old state house (1748, restored 1882), 
and Faneuil Hall (1762-1763, enlarged 1805, reconstructed 1898) 
are rich in memorable associations of the period preceding the 
War of Independence. The second was the seat of the royal 
government of Massachusetts during the provincial period, 
and within its walls from 1760 to 1775 the questions of colonial 
dependence or independence probably first came into evident 
conflict. The Old South church has many associations; it was, 
for instance, the meeting-place of the people after the " Boston 
Massacre " of 1770, when they demanded the removal of the 
British troops from the city; and here, too, were held the meetings 
that led up to the " Boston Tea Party " of 1773. Faneuil Hall 
(the original hall of the name was given to the city by Peter 
Faneuil, a Huguenot merchant, in 1742) is associated, like the 
Old South, with the patriotic oratory of revolutionary days and 
is called " the cradle of American liberty." Its association with 
reform movements and great public issues of later times is not 
less close and interesting. 1 The adjoining Quincy market may 
be mentioned because its construction (1826) was utilized to 
open six new streets, widen a seventh, and secure flats, docks 
and wharf rights — all without laying tax or debt upon the city. 
The original King's chapel (1688, present building 1749-17 54) 
was the first Episcopal church of Boston, which bitterly resented 
the action of the royal governor in 1687 in using the Old South 
for the services of the Church of England. The new state house, 
the oldest portion of which (designed by Charles Bulfinch) 
was erected in 1 795-1 798, was enlarged in 1853-1856, and again 
by a huge addition in 1 889-1 898 (total cost about $6,800,000 to 
1900). Architecturally, everything is subordinated to a con- 
formity with the style of the original portion; and its gilded 
dome is a conspicuous landmark. Other buildings of local 
importance are the city hall (1865); the United States govern- 
ment building (1871-1878, cost about $6,000,000); the county 
court-house (1887-1893, $2,250,000); the custom-house (1837- 
1848); and the chamber of commerce (1892). 

Copley Square, in the Back Bay, is finely distinguished by a 
group of exceptional buildings: Trinity church, the old Museum 
of Fine Arts, the public library and the new Old South church. 
Trinity (1877, cost $800,000), in yellowish granite with dark sand- 
stone trimmings, the masterpiece of H. H. Richardson, is built 
in the Romanesque style of southern France; it is a Latin cross 
surmounted by a massive central tower, with smaller towers 
and an adjacent chapel reached by open cloisters that distribute 
the balance (see Architecture, Plate XVI. fig. 137). It has 
windows by La Farge, William Morris, Burne-Jones and others. 

1 Faneuil Hall is the headquarters of the Ancient and Honourable 
Artillery Company of Boston, the oldest military organization of 
the country, organized in 1638. 



The library (1888-1895; cost $2,486,000, exclusive of the site, 
given by the state) is a dignified, finely proportioned building of 
pinkish-grey stone, built in the style of the Italian Renaissance, 
suggesting a Florentine palace. It has an imposing exterior 
(see Architecture, Plate XVI. fig. 135), a beautiful inner court, 
and notable decorative features and embellishments, including 
bronze doors by D. C. French, a statue of Sir Henry Vane by 
Macmonnies, a fine staircase in Siena marble, some characteristic 
decorative panels by Puvis de Chavannes (illustrating the 
history of science and literature), and other notable decorative 
paintings by John S. Sargent (on the history of religion), Edwin 
A. Abbey (on the quest of the Holy Grail) . The old Museum of 
Fine Arts (1876) is a red brick edifice in modern Gothic style, 
with trimmings of light stone and terra-cotta. The new Old 
South (the successor of the Old South, which is now a museum) 
is a handsome structure of Italian Gothic style, with a fine 
campanile. The dignified buildings of the Massachusetts Insti- 
tute of Technology are near. In Huntington Avenue, at its 
junction with Massachusetts Avenue, is another group of hand- 
some new buildings, including Horticultural Hall, Symphony 
Hall (1900) and the New England Conservatory of Music. 
In the Back Bay Fens, reclaimed swamps laid out by F. L. 
Olmsted, still other groups have formed — among others those 
of the marble buildings of the Harvard medical school; Fenway 
Court, a building in the style, internally, of a Venetian palace, 
that houses the art treasures of Mrs. J. L. Gardner, and Simmons 
College. Here, too, is the new building (1908) of the Museum of 
Fine Arts. Throughout the Fens excellently effective use is 
being made of monumental buildings grouped in ample grounds. 

Boston compares favourably with other American cities in 
the character of its public and private architecture. The height 
of buildings in the business section is limited to 125 ft., and in 
some places to 90 ft. 

One of the great public works of Boston is its subway for 
electric trams, about 3 m. long, in part with four tracks and in 
part with two, constructed since 1895 at a cost of about $7,500,000 
up to 1905. The branch to East Boston (i900-i904)passesbeneath 
the harbour bed and extends from Scollay Square, Boston, to 
Maverick Square, East Boston; it was the first all-cement tunnel 
(diameter, 23-6 ft.) in the world. The subway was built by the 
city, but leased and operated by a private company on such terms 
as to repay its cost in forty years. Another tunnel has been 
added to the system, under Washington Street. The narrow 
streets and the traffic congestion o.f the business district presented 
difficult problems of urban transit, but the system is of exceptional 
efficiency. There is an elevated road whose trains, like the 
surface cars, are accommodated in the centre of the city by the 
subway. All the various roads — surface, elevated (about 7 m., 
built 1896-1901), and subway — are controlled, almost wholly, 
by one company. They all connect and interchange passengers 
freely; so that the ordinary American five-cent fare enables 
a passenger to travel between almost any two points over an 
area of 100 sq. m. The two huge steam-railway stations of , the 
Boston & Maine and the Boston & Albany systems also deserve 
mention. The former (the North, or Union station, 1893) covers 
9 acres and has 23 tracks; the latter (the South Terminal, 1898), 
one of the largest stations in the world, covers 13 acres and has 
32 tracks, and is used by the Boston & Albany and by the New 
York, New Haven & Hartford railways. 

A noteworthy feature of the metropolitan public water 
service was begun in 1896 in the Wachusett lake reservoir 
at Clinton, on the Nashua river. The basin here excavated 
by ten years of labour, lying 385 ft. above high-tide level 
of Boston harbour, has an area of 6-5 sq. m., an average 
depth of 46 ft., and a capacity of 63,068,000,000 gallons of 
water. It is the largest municipal reservoir in the world, 2 yet 

2 The dam is 1250 ft. long, with a maximum height of 129 ft., 
only 750 ft. having a depth of more than 40 ft. from high water to 
rock. The entire surface of the basin was scraped to bed rock, 
sand or mineral earth, this alone costing $3,000,000. Connected 
with the reservoir is an aqueduct, of which 2 m. are tunnel and 7 m. 
covered masonry. The metropolitan system as planned in 1905 for 
the near future contemplated storage for 80,000,000,000 gallons. 



292 



BOSTON 



it is only part of a system planned for the service of the metro- 
politan area. 

The park system is quite unique among American cities. 
The Common, a park of 48 acres, in the centre of the city, has 
been a public reservation since 1634, and no city park in the 
world is cherished more affectionately for historical associations. 
Adjoining it is the Public Garden of 24 acres (1859), part of the 
made area of the city. Commonwealth Avenue, one of the Back 
Bay streets running from the foot of the Public Garden, is one of 
the finest residence streets of the country. It is 240 ft. wide, 
with four rows of trees shading the parking of its central mall, 
and is a link through the Back Bay Fens with the beautiful outer 
park system. The park system consists of two concentric 
rings, the inner being the city system proper, the outer the 
metropolitan system undertaken by the commonwealth in 
co-operation with the city. The former has been laid out since 
1875, and includes upwards of 2300 acres, with more than 100 m. 
of walks, drives and rides. Its central ornament is Franklin 
Park (527 acres). The metropolitan system, which extends 
around the city on a radius of 10 to 12 m., was begun in 1893. 
It embraces over 10,000 acres, including the Blue Hill reservation 
(about 5000 acres), the highest land in eastern Massachusetts, 
a beautiful reservation of forest, crag and pond known as 
Middlesex Fells, two large beach bath reservations on the harbour 
at Revere and Hull (Nantasket), and the boating section of the 
Charles river. At the end of 1907 more than $13,000,000 had 
been expended on the system. Including the local parks of the 
cities and towns of the metropolitan district there are over 
17,000 acres of pleasure grounds within the metropolitan park 
district. Boston was the pioneer municipality of the country in 
the establishment of open-air gymnasiums. A great improve- 
ment, planned for many years, was brought nearer by the com- 
pletion of the new Cambridge Bridge. This improvement was 
projected to include the damming of the Charles river, and the 
creation of a great freshwater basin, with drive-ways of reclaimed 
land along the shores, and other adornments, somewhat after 
the model of the Alster basins at Hamburg. 

Art and Literature. — The Museum of Fine Arts was founded 
in 1870 (though there were art exhibits collected from 1826 
onward) and its present building was erected in 1908. It has 
one of the finest collections of casts in existence, a number of 
original pieces of Greek statuary, the second-best collection in 
the world of Aretine ware, the finest collection of Japanese 
pottery, and probably the largest and finest of Japanese paintings 
in existence. Among the memorials to men of Massachusetts 
(a large part of them Bostonians) commemorated by monuments 
in the Common, the Public Garden, the grounds of the state 
house, the city hall, and other public places of the city, are 
statues of Charles Sumner, Josiah Quincy and John A. Andrew 
by Thomas Ball; of Generals Joseph Hooker and William F. 
Bartlett, and of Rufus Choate by Daniel C. French; of W. L. 
Garrison and Charles Devens by Olin L. Warner; of Samuel 
Adams by Anne Whitney; of John Winthrop and Benjamin 
Franklin by R. S. Greenough; of Edward Everett (W. W. Story), 
Colonel W. Prescott (Story), Horace Mann (E. Stebbins), Daniel 
Webster (H. Powers), W. E. Channing (H. Adams), N. P. Banks 
(H. H. Kitson), Phillips Brooks (A. St Gaudens), and J. B. 
O'Reilly (D. C. French). 

Among other important monuments are a group by J. Q. 
A. Ward commemorating the first proof of the anaesthetic 
properties of ether, made in 1846 in the Massachusetts General 
Hospital by Dr W. T. G. Morton; an emancipation group of 
Thomas Ball with a portrait statue of Lincoln; a fine equestrian 
statue, by the same sculptor, of Washington, one of the best 
works in the country (1869); an army and navy monument 
in the Common by Martin Millmore, in memory of the Civil 
War; another (1888) recording the death of those who fell in the 
Boston Massacre of 1770; statues of Admiral D. G. Farragut 
(H. H. Kitson), Leif Ericson (Anne Whitney), and Alexander 

reservoirs holding 2,200,000,000 gallons for immediate use, aqueducts 
capable of carrying 420,000,000 gallons daily, and a minimum daily 
supply of 173,000.000 gallons. 



Hamilton (W. Rimmer); and a magnificent bronze bas-relief 

(1897) by Augustus St Gaudens commemorating the departure 
from Boston of Colonel Robert G. Shaw with the first regiment 
of negro soldiers enlisted in the Civil War. There is an art 
department of the city government, under unpaid commissioners, 
appointed by the mayor from candidates named by local art and 
literary institutions; and without their approval no work of art 
can now become the property of the city. 

The public library, containing 922,348 volumes in January 
1908, is the second library of the country in size, and is the largest 
free circulating library in the world (circulation 1907, 1,529,111 
volumes) . There was a public municipal library in Boston before 
1674 — probably in 1653; but it was burned in 1747 and was 
apparently never replaced. The present library (antedated by 
several circulating, social and professional collections) may 
justly be said to have had its origin in the efforts of the Parisian, 
Alexandre Vattemare (1796-1864), from 1830 on, to foster 
international exchanges. From 1847 to 1851 he arranged gifts 
from France to American libraries aggregating 30,655 volumes, 
and a gift of 50 volumes by the city of Paris in 1843 (reciprocated 
in 1849 with more than 1000 volumes contributed by private 
citizens) was the nucleus of the Boston public library. Its legal 
foundation dates from 1848. Among the special collections are 
the George Ticknor library of Spanish and Portuguese books 
(6393 vols.), very full sets of United States and British public 
documents, the Bowditch mathematical library (7090 vols.), 
the Galatea collection on the history of women (2193 vols.), the 
Barton library, including one of the finest existing collections of 
Shakespeariana (3309 vols., beside many in the general library), 
the A. A. Brown library of music (9886 vols.) , a very full collection 
on the anthropology and ethnology of Europe, and more than 
100,000 volumes on the history, biography, geography and 
literature of the United States. The library is supported almost 
entirely by municipal appropriations, though holding also con- 
siderable trust funds ($388,742 in 1905). The other notable 
book-collections of the city include those of the Athenaeum, 
founded in 1807 (about 230,000 vols, and pamphlets), the 
Massachusetts Historical Society (founded 1791; 50,300), the 
Boston medical library (founded 1874; about 80,000), the New 
England Historic-Genealogical Society (founded 1845; 33,750 
volumes and 34,150 pamphlets), the state library (founded 
1826; 140,000), the American Academy of Arts and Sciences 
(founded 1780; 30,000), the Boston Society of Natural History 
(founded 1830; about 35,000 volumes and 27,000 pamphlets). 

The leading educational institutions are the Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, the largest purely scientific and tech- 
nical school in the country, opened to students (including 
women) in 1865, four years after the granting of a charter to 
Prof. W. B. Rogers, the first president; Boston University 
(chartered in 1869; Methodist Episcopal; co-educational); the 
New England Conservatory of Music (co-educational; private; 
1867, incorporated 1880), the largest in the United States, 
having 2400 students. in 1905-1906; the Massachusetts College 
of Pharmacy (1852); the Massachusetts Normal Art School 
(1873); the School of Drawing and Painting (1876) of the 
Museum of Fine Arts; Boston College (i860), Roman Catholic, 
under the Society of Jesus; St John's Theological Seminary 
(1880), Roman Catholic; Simmons College (1899) for women, 
and several departments of Harvard University. The Institute 
of Technology has an exceptional reputation for the wide range 
of its instruction and its high standards of scholarship. It was a 
pioneer in introducing as a feature of its original plans laboratory 
instruction in physics, mechanics and mining. The architects 
of the United States navy are sent here for instruction in their 
most advanced courses. Boston University was endowed by 
Isaac Rich (1801-1872), a Boston fish-merchant, Lee Claflin 
(1791-1871), a shoe manufacturer and a benefactor of Wesleyan 
University and of Wilbraham Seminary, and Jacob Sleeper. 
It has been co-educational from the beginning. Its faculties of 
theology — founded in 1841 at Newbury, Vt, as the Biblical 
Institute; in 184 7-1867 in Concord, N.H.; and in 1867-1871 
the Boston Theological Seminary — law, music, medicine, liberal 



BOSTON 



293 



arts and agriculture (at Amherst, in association with the Massa- 
chusetts Agricultural College), all antedate 1876. The funds for 
Simmons College were left by John Simmons in 1870, who wished 
to found a school to teach the professions and " branches of art, 
science and industry best calculated to enable the scholars to 
acquire an independent livelihood." The Lowell Institute (q.v.), 
established in 1839 (by John Lowell, Jr., who bequeathed 
$237,000 for the purpose), provides yearly courses of free public 
lectures, and its lecturers have included many of the leading 
scholars of America and Europe. During each winter, also, a 
series of public lectures on American history is delivered in the 
Old South meeting house. The public schools, particularly the 
secondary schools, enjoy a very high reputation. The new English 
High and Latin school, founded in 1635, is the oldest school of 
the country. A girls' Latin school, with the same standards as 
the boys' school, was established in 1878 (an outcome of the 
same movement that founded Radcliff e College) . There are large 
numbers of private schools, in art, music and academic studies. 

In theatrical matters Boston is now one of the chief American 
centres. The Federal Street theatre — the first regular theatre- 
was established in 1794, the old Puritan feeling having had its 
natural influence in keeping Boston behind New York and 
Philadelphia in this respect. The dramatic history of the city is 
largely associated with the Boston Museum, built in 1841 by 
Moses Kimball on Tremont Street, and rebuilt in 1846 and 
1880; here for half a century the principal theatrical perform- 
ances were given (see an interesting article in the New England 
Magazine, June 1903), in later years under the management of 
R. Montgomery Field, until in 1903 the famous Boston Museum 
was swept away, as other interesting old places of entertainment 
(the old Federal Street theatre, the Tremont theatre, &c.) had 
been, in the course of further building changes. The Boston 
theatre dates from 1854, and there were seventeen theatres 
altogether in 1900. 

As a musical centre Boston rivals New York. Among musical 
organizations may be mentioned the Handel and Haydn Society 
(181 5), the Harvard Musical Association (1837), the Philharmonic 
(1880) and the Symphony Orchestra, organized in 1881 by the 
generosity of Henry Lee Higginson. This orchestra has done 
much for music not only in Boston but in the United States 
generally. In 1908 the Boston Opera Company was incorporated, 
and an opera house has been erected on the north side of 
Huntington Avenue. 

Boston was the undisputed literary centre of America until 
the later decades of the 19th century, and still retains a con- 
siderable and important colony of writers and artists. Its ascend- 
ancy was identical with the long predominance of the New 
England literary school, who lived in Boston or in the country 
round about. Two Boston periodicals (one no longer so) that 
still hold an exceptional position in periodical literature, the 
North American Review (1815) and the Atlantic Monthly (1857), 
date from this period. The great majority of names in the long 
list of worthies of the commonwealth — writers, statesmen, 
orators, artists, philanthropists, reformers and scholars, are 
intimately connected with Boston. Among the city's daily 
newspapers the Boston Herald (1846), the Boston Globe, the 
Evening Transcript (1830), the Advertiser (1813) and the Post 
(1831) are the most important. 

Industry and Commerce. — Boston is fringed with wharves. 
Commercial interests are largely concentrated in East Boston. 
Railway connexion with Worcester, Lowell and Providence 
was opened in 1835; with Albany, N.Y., and thereby with 
various lines of interior communication, in 1841 (double track, 
1868); with Fitchburg, in 1845; and in 1851 connexion was 
completed with the Great Lakes and Canada. In 1840 Boston 
was selected as the American terminus of the Cunard Line, the 
first regular line of trans-Atlantic steamers. The following 
decade was the most active of the city's history as regards the 
ocean carrying trade. Boston ships went to all parts of the globe. 
The Cunard arrangement was the first of various measures 
that worked for a commercial rapprochement between the New 
England states and Canada, culminating in the reciprocity treaty 



of 1854, and Boston's interests are foremost to-day in demanding 
a return to relations of reciprocity. Beginning about 1855 the 
commerce of the port greatly declined. The Cunard service 
has not been continuous. In 1869 there was not one vessel steam- 
ing directly for Europe; in 1900 there were 973 for foreign 
ports. Great improvements of the harbour were undertaken 
in 1902 by the United States government, looking to the creation 
of two broad channels 35 ft. deep. Railway rates have also been 
a matter of vital importance in recent years; Boston, like 
New York, complaining of discriminations in favour of Phil- 
adelphia, Baltimore, New Orleans and Galveston. Boston also 
feels the competition of Montreal and Portland; the Canadian 
roads being untrammelled in the matter of freight differentials. 
Boston is the second import port of the United States, but its 
exports in 1907 were less than those of Philadelphia, of Galveston, 
or of New Orleans. The total tonnage in foreign trade entering 
and leaving in 1907 was 5,148,429 tons; and in the same year 
9616 coasting vessels (tonnage, 10,261,474) arrived in Boston. 
The value of imports and exports for 1907 were respectively 
$123,414,168 and $104,610,908. Fibres and vegetable grasses, 
wool, hides and skins, cotton, sugar, iron and steel and their 
manufactures, chemicals, coal, and leather and its manufactures 
are the leading imports; provisions, leather and its manufactures, 
cotton and its manufactures, breadstuffs, iron and steel and 
their manufactures are the leading exports. In the exportation 
of cattle, and of the various meat and dairy products classed as 
provisions, Boston is easily second to New York. It is the largest 
wool and the largest fish market of the United States, being 
in each second in the world to London only. 

Manufacturing is to-day the most distinctive industry, as 
was commerce in colonial times. The value of all manufactured 
products from establishments under the " factory system " 
in 1900 was $162,764,523; in 1905 it was $184,351,163. Among 
the leading and more distinctive items were printing and 
publishing ($21,023,855 in 1905); sugar and molasses refining 
($15,746,547 in 1900; figures not published in 1905 because 
of the industry being in the hands of a single owner); men's 
clothing (in 1900, -$8,609,475, in 1905, $11,246,004); women's 
clothing (in 1900, $3,258,483, in 1905, $5,705,470); boots and 
shoes (in 1900, $3,882,655, in 1905, $5,575,927); boot and shoe 
cut stock (in 1905, $5,211,445); malt liquors (in 1900, $7,518,668, 
in 1905, $6,715,215); confectionery (in 1900, $4,455,184, in 
1905, $6,210,023); tobacco products (in 1900, $3,504,603, 
in 1905, $4,592,698); pianos and organs ($3,670,771 in 1905); 
other musical instruments and materials (in 1905, $231,780); 
rubber and elastic goods (in 1900, $3,139,783, in 1905, $2,887,323); 
steam fittings and heating apparatus (in 1900, $2,876,327, in 
IOO S> $3,3S4,° 2 °); bottling, furniture, &c. Art tiles and pottery 
are manufactured in Chelsea. Shipbuilding and allied industries 
early became of great importance. The Waltham watch and 
the Singer sewing-machine had their beginning in Boston in 
1850. The making of the Chickering pianos goes back to 1823, 
and of Mason & Hamlin reed organs to 1854; these are to-day 
very important and distinctive manufactures of the city. The 
ready-made clothing industry began about 1830. 

Government. — Beyond a recognition of its existence in 1630, 
when it was renamed, Boston can show no legal incorporation 
before 1822; although the uncertain boundaries between the 
powers of colony and township prompted repeated petitions 
to the legislature for incorporation, beginning as early as 1650. 
In 1822 Boston became a city. Thus for nearly two centuries 
it preserved intact its old " town " government, disposing of 
all its affairs in the " town-meeting " of its citizens. Excellent 
political training such a government unquestionably offered; 
but it became unworkable as disparities of social condition in- 
creased, as the number of legal voters (above 7000 in 1822) 
became greater, and as the population ceased to be homogeneous 
in blood. All the citizens did not assemble; on the contrary 
ordinary business seldom drew out more than a hundred voters, 
and often a mere handful. From very early days executive 
officers known as " select-men," constables, clerks of markets, 
hog reeves, packers of meat and fish, &c, were chosen; and the 



294 



BOSTON 



select-men, particularly, gained power as the attendance of the 
freemen on meetings grew onerous. Interested cliques could 
control the business of the town-meeting in ordinary times, and 
boisterousness marred its democractic excellence in exciting 
times. Large sums were voted loosely, and expended by executive 
boards without any budgetary control. The whole system was 
full of looseness, complexity and makeshifts. But the tenacity 
with which it was clung to, proved that it was suited to the 
community; and whether helpful or harmful to, it was not 
inconsistent with, the continuance of growth and prosperity. 
Various other Massachusetts townships, as they have grown 
older, have been similarly compelled to abandon their old form 
of government. The powers of the old township were much 
more extensive than those of the present city of Boston, including 
as they did the determination of the residence of strangers, 
the allotment of land, the grant of citizenship, the fixing of 
wages and prices, of the conditions of lawsuits and even a 
voice in matters of peace and war. The city charter was revised 
in 1 8 54, and again reconstructed in important particulars by 
laws of 1 88 s separating the executive and legislative powers, 
and by subsequent acts. A complete alteration of the govern- 
ment has indeed been effected since 1885. Boston proper is only 
the centre of a large metropolitan area, closely settled, with 
interests in large part common. This metropolitan area, within 
a radius of approximately 10 m. about the state house, contained 
in 1900 about 40% of the population of the state. In the last 
two decades of the 19th century the question of giving to this 
greater city some general government, fully consolidated or of 
limited powers, was a standing question of expediency. The 
commonwealth has four times recognized a community of metro- 
politan interests in creating state commissions since 1882 for 
the union of such interests, beginning with a metropolitan health 
district in that year. The metropolitan water district (1895) 
included in 1908 Boston and seventeen cities or townships in 
its environs; the metropolitan sewerage district (1889) twenty 
four; the park service (1893) thirty-nine. Local sentiment 
was firmly against complete consolidation. The creation of 
the state commissions, independent of the- city's control, but 
able to commit the city indefinitely by undertaking expensive 
works and new debt, was resented. Independence is further 
curtailed by other state boards semi-independent of the city — 
the police commission of three members from 1885 to 1906, 
and in 1906 a single police commissioner, appointed by the 
governor, a licensing board of three members, appointed by the 
governor; the transit commission,. &c. There are, further, 
county offices (Suffolk county comprises only Boston, Chelsea, 
Revere and Winthrop), generally independent of the city, 
though the latter pays practically all the bills. 

A new charter went into effect in 1910. It provided for 
municipal elections in January; for the election of a mayor 
for four years; for his recall at the end of two years if a majority 
of the registered voters so vote in the state election in November 
in the second year of his tewn; for the summary removal for cause 
by the mayor of any department head or other of his appointees, 
for a city council of one chamber of nine members, elected at 
large each for three years; for nomination by petition; for a 
permanent finance commission appointed by the governor; for 
the confirmation of the mayor's appointments by the state civil 
service commission; for the mayor's preparation of the annual 
budget (in which items may be reduced but not increased by the 
council), and for his absolute veto of appropriations except 
for school use. The school committee (who serve gratui- 
tously) appoint the superintendent and supervisors of schools. 
The number of members of the school-board was in 1905 
reduced from twenty-four to five, elected by the city at large, 
and serving for one, two or three years; at the same time power 
was centralized in the hands of the superintendent of schools. 
Civil service reform principles cover the entire municipal 
administration. The city's work is done under an eight-hour 
law. 

An analysis of city election returns for the decade 1890-1899 
showed that the interest of the. citizens was greatest in the choice 



of a president; then, successively, in the choice of a mayor, a 
governor, the determination of liquor-license questions by 
referendum, and the settlement of other referenda. On 21 
referenda, 10 being questions of license, the ratio of actual to 
registered voters ranged on the latter from 57-00 to 75-38% 
(mean 67-15), and on other referenda from 75-63 to 33-40 (mean 
61-39), — the mean for all, 64-18. But the average of two presi- 
dential votes was 85-37%; and the maxima, minima and means 
for mayors and governors were respectively 83-86, 74-99, 78-36 
and 84-73, 61-78, 75-72. Of those who might, only some 50 to 
65% actually register. Women vote for school committee- 
men (categories as above, 95-18, 59-62, 76-49%). On a referen- 
dum in 1895 on the expediency of granting municipal suffrage 
to women only 59-08% of the women who were registered 
voted, and probably less than 10% of those entitled to be 
registered. 

Hospitals, asylums, refuges and homes, pauper, reformatory 
and penal institutions, flower missions, relief associations, and 
other charitable or philanthropic organizations, private and 
public, number several hundreds. The Associated Charities is an 
incorporated organization for systematizing the various charities 
of the city. The Massachusetts general hospital (1811-1821) — 
with a branch for mental and nervous diseases, McLean hospital 
(1816), in the township of Belmont (post-office, Waverley) about 
6 m. W.N.W. of Boston; the Perkins Institution and Massa- 
chusetts school for the blind (1832), famous for its conduct by 
Samuel G. Howe, and for association with Laura Bridgman and 
Helen Keller; the Massachusetts school for idiotic and feeble- 
minded children (1839); and the Massachusetts charitable eye 
and ear infirmary (1824), all receive financial aid from the 
commonwealth, which has representation in their management. 
The city hospital dates from 1864. A floating hospital for women 
and children in the summer months, with permanent and tran- 
sient wards, has been maintained since 1894 (incorporated 1901). 
Boston was one of the first municipalities of the country to 
make provision for the separate treatment of juvenile offenders; 
in 1906 a juvenile court was established. A People's Palace 
dedicated to the work of the Salvation Army, and containing 
baths, gymnasium, a public hall, a library, sleeping-rooms, an 
employment bureau, free medical and legal bureaus, &c, was 
opened in 1906. Simmons College and Harvard University main- 
tain the Boston school for social workers (1904). Beneficent 
social work out of the more usual type is directed by the music 
and bath departments of the city government. In the provi- 
sion of public gymnasiums and baths (1866) Boston was the 
pioneer city of the country, and remains the most advanced. 
The beach reservations of the metropolitan park system at 
Revere and Nantasket, and several smaller city beaches are 
a special feature of this service. Benjamin Franklin, who 
was born and spent his boyhood in Boston, left £1000 to 
the city in his will; it amounted in 1905 to $403,000, and 
constituted a fund to be used for the good of the labouring 
class of the city. 

Largely owing to activity in public works Boston has long been 
the most expensively governed of American cities. The average 
yearly expenditure for ten years preceding 1904 was $27,354,416, 
exclusive of payments on funded and floating debts. The running 
expenses per- capita in 1900 were $35.23; more than twice the 
average of 86 leading cities of the country (New York, $23.92; 
Chicago, $11.62). Schools, police, charities, water, streets and 
parks are the items of heaviest cost. The cost of the public schools 
for the five years from 1901-1902 to 1906-1907 was $27,883,937, 
of which $7,057,895.42 was for new buildings; the cost of the 
police department was $11,387,314.66 for the six years 1902-1907; 
and of the water department $4,941,343.37 for the six years 1902- 
1907;. of charities and social work a much larger sum. The re- 
making of the city was enormously expensive, especially the altera- 
tion of the streets after 1866, when the city received power to make 
such alterations and assess a part of the improvements upon abutting 
estates. The creation of the city water-system has also been exces- 
sively costly, and the total cost up to the 31st of January 1908 
of the works remaining to the city after the creation of the metro- 
politan board in 1898 was about $17,000,000. The metropolitan 
water board — of whose expenditures Boston bears only a share — 
expended from 1895 to 1900 $20,693,870 ; and the system was planned 
to consume finally probably 40 millions at least. The city park 



BOSTON 



295 



system proper had cost $16,627,033 up to 1899 inclusive; and the 
metropolitan parks $13,679,456 up to 1907 inclusive. There are 
no municipal lighting-plants; but the companies upon which the 
city depends for its service are (with all others) subject to the control 
of a state commission. In 1885 a state law placed a limit on the 
contractable debt and upon the taxation rate of the city. Revenues 
were not realized adequate to its lavish undertakings, and loans were 
used to meet current expenses. The limits were altered subsequently, 
but the net debt has continued to rise. In 1822 it was $100,000; in 
1850, $6,195,144; in 1886, $24,712,820; in 1904, $58,216,725; in 
1907, $70,781,969 (gross debt, $104,206,706) — this included the debt 
of Suffolk county which in 1907 was $3,517,000. The chief objects 
for which the city debt was created were in 1907, in millions of 
dollars: highways, 24-07, parks, 16-29, drainage and sewers, 15-05, 
rapid transit, 13-57 and water-works, 4-53. Boston paid in 1907 
36 % of all state taxes, and about 33, 62, 47 and 79 % respectively 
of the assessments for the metropolitan sewer, parks, boulevards and 
water services. About a third of its revenue goes for such uses or 
for Suffolk county expenditures over which it has but limited 
control. The improvement of the Back Bay and of the South 
Boston flats was in considerable measure forced upon the city by 
the commonwealth. The debt per capita is as high as the cost of 
current administration relatively to other cities. The average 
interest rate on the city obligations in 1907 was about 3-7 %. The 
city's tax valuation in 1907 was $1,313,471,556 (in 1822, $42,140,200; 
in 1850, $180,000,500), of which only $242,606,856 represented per- 
sonalty; although in the judgment of the city board of trade such 
property cannot by any possibility be inferior in value to realty. 

Population. — Up to the War of Independence the population 
was not only American, but it was in its ideas and standards 
essentially Puritan; modern liberalism, however, has introduced 
new standards of social life. In 1900 35-1 % of the inhabitants 
were foreign-born, and 72-2% wholly or in part of foreign 
parentage. Irish, English-Canadian, Russian, Italian, English 
and German are the leading races. Of the foreign-born popula- 
tion these elements constituted respectively 35-6, 24-0, 7-6, 7-0, 
6-7 and 5-3%. Large foreign colonies, like adjoining but 
unmixing nations, divide among themselves a large part of the 
city, and give to its life a cosmopolitan colour of varied speech, 
opinion, habits, traditions, social relations and religions. Most 
remarkable of all, the Roman Catholic churches, in this strong * 
hold of exiled Puritanism where Catholics were so long under the 
heavy ban of law, outnumber those of any single Protestant 
denomination; Irish Catholics dominate the poKtics of the city, 
and Protestants and Catholics have been aligned against each 
other on the question of the control of the public schools. 
Despite, however, its heavy foreign admixture the old American- 
ism of the city remains strikingly predominant. The population 
of Boston at the end of each decennial period since 1790 was as 
follows:— (1790), 18,320; (1800), 24,937; (1810), 33,787; (1820), 
43,298; (1830), 61,392; (1840), 93,383; (185°), 136,881; 
(i860), 177,840; (1870), 250,526; (1880), 362,839; (1890), 
448,477; (1900), 560,892. 

History. — John Smith visited Boston Harbour in 1614, and it 
was explored in 1621 by a party from Plymouth. There were 
various attempts to settle about its borders in the following 
years before John Endecott in 1628 landed at Salem as governor 
of the colony of Massachusetts bay, within which Boston was 
included. In June 1630 Joh*n Winthrop's company reached 
Charlestown. At that time a " bookish recluse," William 
Blaxton (Blackstone), one of the several " old planters " scattered 
about the bay, had for several years been living on Boston 
peninsula. The location seemed one suitable for commerce and 
defence, and the Winthrop party chose it for their settlement. 
The triple summit of Beacon Hill, of which no trace remains 
to-day (or possibly a reference to the three hills of the then 
peninsula, Beacon, Copp's and Fort) led to the adoption of the 
name Trimountaine for the peninsula, — a name perpetuated 
variously in present municipal nomenclature as in Tremont; 
but on the 17 th of September 1630, the date adopted for anni- 
versary celebrations, it was ordered that " Trimountaine shall 
be called Boston," after the borough of that name in Lincolnshire, 
England, of which several of the leading settlers had formerly 
been prominent citizens. 1 

1 In 1 85 1 the mayor of the English Boston sent over a copy of that 
city's seals, framed in oak from St Botolph's church, of which John 
Cotton, the famous Boston divine (he came over in 1633) had been 
vicar. The seals now hang in the city hall. In 1855 a number of 



For several years it was uncertain whether Cambridge, 
Charlestown or Boston should be the capital of the colony, but 
in 1632 the General Court agreed " by general consent, that 
Boston is the fittest place for public meetings of any place in 
the Bay." It rapidly became the wealthiest and most populous. 
Throughout the 17th century its history is so largely that of 
Massachusetts generally that they are inseparable. Theological 
systems were largely concerned. The chief features of this epoch 
— the Antinomian dissensions, the Quaker and Baptist persecu- 
tions, the witchcraft delusion (four witches were executed in 
Boston, in 1648, 1651, 1656, 1688) &c. — are referred to in the 
article Massachusetts (q.v.). In 1692 the first permanent and 
successful printing press was established; in 1704 the first 
newspaper in America, the Boston News-Letter, which was 
published weekly until 1776. Puritanism steadily mellowed 
under many influences. By the turn of the first century bigotry 
was distinctly weakened. Among the marks of the second half 
of the 17th century was growing material prosperity, and there 
were those who thought their fellows unduly willing to relax 
church tests of fellowship when good trade was in question. 
There was an unpleasant Englishman who declared in 1699 
that he found " Money Their God, and Large Possessions the only 
Heaven they Covet." Prices were low, foreign commerce was 
already large, business thriving; wealth gave social status; the 
official British class lent a lustre to society; and Boston " town " 
was drawing society from the " country." Of the two-score or so 
of families most prominent in the first century hardly one retained 
place in the similar list for the early years of the second. Boston 
was a prosperous, thrifty, English country town, one traveller 
thought. Another, Daniel Neal, in 1720, found Boston con- 
versation" as polite as in most of the cities and towns in England, 
many of their merchants having the advantage of a free con- 
versation with travellers; so that a gentleman from London 
would almost think himself at home at Boston, when he observes 
the number of people, their houses, their furniture, their tables, 
their dress and conversation, which perhaps is as splendid and 
showy as that of the most considerable tradesmen in London." 

The population, which was almost stationary through much 
of the century, was about 20,000 in the years immediately before 
the War of Independence. At this time Boston was the most 
flourishing town of North America. It built ships as cheaply 
as any place in the world, it carried goods for other colonies, 
it traded — often evading British laws — with Europe, Guinea, 
Madagascar and above all with the West Indies. The merchant 
princes and social leaders of the time are painted with elaborate 
show of luxury in the canvases of Copley. The great English 
writers of Queen Anne's reign seem to have been but little known 
in the colony, and the local literature, though changed somewhat 
in character, showed but scant improvement. About the middle 
of the century restrictions upon the press began to disappear. 
At the same time questions of trade, of local politics, finally 
of colonial autonomy, of imperial policy, had gradually, but 
already long since, replaced theology in leading interest. In 
the years 1760-1776 Boston was the most frequently recurring 
and most important name in British colonial history. Senti- 
ments of limited independence of the British government had 
been developing since the very beginning of the settlement 
(see Massachusetts), and their strength in 1689 had been 
strikingly exhibited in the local revolution of that year, when 
the royal governor, Sir Edmund Andros, and other high officials, 
were frightened into surrender and were imprisoned. This 
movement, it should be noted, was a popular rising, and not the 
work of a few leaders. 

The incidents that marked the approach of the War of Inde- 
pendence need barely be adverted to. Opposition to the measures 
of the British government for taxing and oppressing the colonies 
began in Boston. The argument of Otis on the writs of assistance 

Americans, including Charles Francis Adams and Edward Everett, 
and also various descendants of Cotton, united to restore the south- 
west chapel of St Botolph's church, and to erect in it a memorial 
tablet to Cotton's memory. The total amount raised by subscription 
for this purpose was £673. 



296 



BOSTON 



was in 1760-1761. The Stamp Act, passed in 1765, was repealed 
in 1766; it was opposed in Boston by a surprising show of 
determined and unified public sentiment. Troops were first 
quartered in the town in 1768. In 1770, on the 5th of March, 
in a street brawl, a number of citizens were killed or wounded 
by the soldiers, who fired into a crowd that were baiting a sentry. 
This incident is known as the " Boston Massacre." The Tea Act 
of 1773 was defied by the emptying into the harbour of three 
cargoes of tea on the 1 6th of December 1 7 73 , by a party of citizens 
disguised as Indians, after the people in town-meeting had ex- 
hausted every effort, through a period of weeks, to procure the 
return of the tea-ships to England. To this act Great Britain 
replied by various penal regulations and reconstructive acts of 
government. She quartered troops in Boston; she made the 
juries, sheriffs and judges of the colony dependent on the royal 
officers; she ordered capital offenders to be tried in Nova Scotia 
or England; she endeavoured completely to control or to 
abolish town-meetings; and finally, by the so-called " Boston 
Port Bill," she closed the port of Boston on the 1st of June 1774. 
Not even a ferry, a scow or other boat could move in the harbour. 
Marblehead and Salem were made ports of entry, and Salem was 
made the capital. But they would not profit by Boston's mis- 
fortune. The people covenanted not to use British goods and 
to suspend trade with Great Britain. From near neighbours 
and from distant colonies came provisions and encouragement. 
In October 1774, when General Gage refused recognition to the 
Massachusetts general court at Salem, the members adjourned to 
Concord as the first provincial congress. Finally came war, 
with Lexington and Bunker Hill, and beleaguerment by the 
colonial army; until on the 17th of March 1776 the British 
were compelled by Washington to evacuate the city. With 
them went about 1100 Tory refugees, many of them of the finest 
families of the city and province. The evacuation closed the 
heroic period of Boston's history. War did not again approach 
the city. 

The years from 1776 to the end of " town " government in 
1822 were marked by slow growth and prosperity. Commerce 
and manufactures alike took great impetus. Direct trade with 
the East Indies began about 1785, with Russia in 1787. A 
Boston vessel, the " Columbia " (Captain Robert Gray), opened 
trade with the north-west coast of America, and was the first 
American ship to circumnavigate the globe (1787-1700). In 
1805 Boston began the export of ice to Jamaica, a trade which 
was gradually extended to Cuba, to ports of the southern states, 
and finally to Rio de Janeiro and Calcutta (1833), declining 
only after the Civil War; it enabled Boston to control the 
American trade of Calcutta against New York throughout the 
entire period. But of course it was far less important than 
various other articles of trade in the aggregate values of commerce. 
It was Boston commerce that was most sorely hurt by the 
embargo and non-importation policy of President Jefferson. 
In manufactures the foundation was laid of the city's wealth. 
In politics the period is characterized by Boston's connexion 
with the fortunes of the Federalist party. The city was warmly 
in favour of the adoption of the federal constitution of 1787; 
itven Samuel Adams was rejected for Congress because he was 
backward in its support. It was the losses entailed upon her 
commerce by the commercial policy of Jefferson's administra- 
tion that embittered Boston against the Democratic-Republican 
party and put her public men in the forefront of the opposition 
to its policies that culminated in lukewarmness toward the War 
of 181 2, and in the Hartford Convention of 18 14. . 

Some mention must be made of the Unitarian movement. 
Unitarian tendencies away from the Calvinism of the old Con- 
gregational churches were plainly evident about 1750, and it 
is said by Andrew P. Peabody (1811-1893) that by 1780 nearly 
all the Congregational pulpits around Boston were filled by Uni- 
tarians. Organized Unitarianism in Boston dates from 1785. 
In 1782 King's chapel (Episcopal) became Unitarian, and in 
r8o5 one of that faith was made professor of divinity in Harvard. 
But the Unitarianism of those times, even the Unitarianism of 
Channing, was very different from that of to-day. Theodore 



Parker and Channing have been the greatest leaders. The 
American Unitarian Association, organized in 1825, has always 
retained its headquarters in Boston. The theological and 
philosophical developments of the second quarter of the 19th 
century were characterized by the transcendental movement 
(see Massachusetts). 

In the period from 1822 to the Civil War anti-slavery is the 
most striking feature of Boston's annals. Garrison established 
the Liberator in 1831; W. E. Channing became active in the 
cause of abolition in 1835, and Wendell Phillips a little later. 
In 1835 a mob, composed in part of wealthy and high-standing 
citizens, attacked a city-building, and dragged Garrison through 
the streets until the mayor secured his safety by putting him 
in gaol. But times changed. In 1850 a reception was given 
in Faneuil Hall in honour of the English anti-slavery leader, 
George Thompson, whose reported intention to address Boston- 
ians in 1835 precipitated the riot of that year. In 185 1 the Court 
House was surrounded with chains to prevent the " rescue " 
of a slave (Sims) held for rendition under the Fugitive Slave 
Law; another slave (Shadrach) was released this same year, 
and in 1854 there was a riot and intense excitement over the 
rendition of Anthony Burns. Boston had long since taken 
her place in the very front of anti-slavery ranks, and with the 
rest of Massachusetts was playing somewhat the same part as 
in the years before the War of Independence. 

Later events of importance have already been indicated in • 
essentials. On the 9th-ioth of November 1872 a terrible fire 
swept the business part of the city, destroying hundreds of build- 
ings of brick and granite, and inflicting a loss of some $75,000,000. 
Within two years the whole area, solidly rebuilt and with widened 
and straightened streets, showed no traces of the ruin except an 
appearance superior in all respects to that presented before the 
fire. The expense of this re-creation probably duplicated, at 
least, the loss from the conflagration. Since this time there has 
been no set-back to the prosperity of the city. But it is not upon 
material prosperity that Boston rests its claims for consideration. 
It prides itself on its schools, its libraries, its literary traditions, 
its splendid public works and its reputation as the chief centre 
of American culture. 

Authorities. — See the annual City Documents; also Justin 
Winsor (ed.) The Memorial History of Boston, including Suffolk 
County . . . 1630-1880 (4 vols., Boston, 1880-1881), a work that 
covers every phase of the city's growth, history and life ; S. A. Drake, 
The History and Antiquities of . . . Boston (2 vols., Boston, 1854; and 
later editions) , and Old Landmarks and Historic Personages of Boston 
(Boston, 1873, and later editions) ; Josiah Quincy, A Municipal 
History of . . . Boston . . . to . . 1830 (Boston, 1852) ; C. W. Ernst, 
Constitutional History of Boston (Boston, 1894) > H. H. Sprague, 
City Government in Boston — its Rise and Development (Boston, 
1890); E. E. Hale, Historic Boston and its Neighbourhood (New 
York, 1898), and L. Swift, Literary Landmarks of Boston (Boston, 
1903). A great mass of original historical documents have been 
published by the registry department of the city government since 
1876 (34 v. to 1905). Boston has been described in many works of 
fiction, and the reader may be referred to the novels of E. L. Bynner, 
to L. Maria Childs' The Rebels, to J. F. Cooper's Lionel Lincoln, to the 
early novels of W. D. Ho'wells (also those of Arlo Bates), to O. W. 
Holmes' Poet and Autocrat, and Hawthorne's Scarlet Letter, as 
pictures of Boston life at various periods since early colonial days. 

BOSTON, a game of cards invented during the last quarter 
of the 1 8th century. It is said to have originated in Boston, 
Massachusetts, during the siege b}' the British. It seems to have 
been invented by the officers of the French fleet which lay for a 
time off the town of Marblehead, and the name of the two small 
islands in Marblehead harbour which have, from the period of the 
American Revolution, been called Great and Little Misery, 
correspond with expressions used in the game. William Tudor, 
in his Letters on the Eastern States, published in 1821, states 
somewhat differently that " A game of cards was invented in 
Versailles and called in honour of the town, Boston; the points 
of the game are allusive, 'great independence,' ' little independ- 
ence,' ' great misery,' ' little misery,' &c. It is composed partly 
of whist and partly of quadrille, though partaking mostly of the 
former." The game enjoyed an extraordinary vogue in high 
French society, where it was the fashion at that time to admire 



BOSTONITE— BOSWELL 



297 



all things American. " The ladies . . . filled my pockets with 
bon-bons, and . . . called me He petit Bostonien.' It was indeed 
by the name of Bostonian that all Americans were known in 
France then. The war having broken out in Boston and the 
first great battle fought in its neighbourhood, gave to that name 
universal celebrity. A game invented at that time, played with 
cards, was called ' Boston,' and is to this day (1830) exceedingly 
fashionable at Paris by that appellation " (Recollections of Samuel 
Breck, Philadelphia, 1877). There was a tradition that Dr 
Franklin was fond of the game and even that he had a hand in 
its invention. At the middle of the 19th century it was still 
popular in Europe, and to a less degree in America, but its favour 
has steadily declined since then. 

The rules of Boston recognized in English-speaking countries differ 
somewhat from those in vogue in France. According to the former, 
twopacksof 52 cards are used, which rank as in whist, both for cutting 
and dealing. Four players take part, and there are usually no 
partners. Counters are used, generally of three colours andvalues, 
and each hand is settled for as soon as finished. The entire first 
pack is dealt out by fours and fives, and the second pack is cut for 
the trump, the suit of the card turned being " first preference," the 
other suit of the same colour " second preference " or " colour," 
while the two remaining suits are " plain suits." The eldest hand 
then announces that he will make a certain number of tricks pro- 
vided he may name the trump, or lose a certain number without 
trumps. The different bids are called by various names, but the 
usual ones are as follows: — To win five tricks, " Boston." _ (To win) 
" six tricks." (To win) " seven tricks." To lose twelve tricks, after 
discarding one card that is not shown, " little misere." (To win) 
" eight tricks." (To win) " nine tricks." To lose every trick, 
" grand misere." (To win) " ten tricks." (To win) " eleven tricks." 
To lose twelve tricks, after discarding one card that is not shown, 
the remaining twelve cards being exposed on the table but not liable 
to be called, " little spread." (To win) " twelve tricks." To lose 
every trick with exposed cards, " grand spread." To win thirteen 
tricks, " grand slam." If a player does not care to bid he may pass, 
and the next player bids. Succeeding players may " overcall," i.e. 
overbid, previous bidders. Players passing may thereafter bid only 
" tniseres." If a player bids seven but makes ten he is paid for the 
three extra tricks, but on a lower scale than if he had bid ten. If 
no bid should be made, a " misere partout " (general poverty) is 
often played, the trump being turned down and each player striving 
to take as few tricks as possible. Payments are made by each loser 
according to the value of the winner's bid and the overtricks he has 
scored. There are regular tables of payments. In America over- 
tricks are not usually paid for. In French Boston the knave of 
diamonds arbitrarily wins over all other cards, even trumps. The 
names of the different bids remind one of the period of the American 
Revolution, including " Independence," " Philadelphia," " Souve- 
raine," " Concordia," &c. Other variations of the game are Boston 
de Fontainebleau and Russian Boston. 

BOSTONITE, in petrology, a fine-grained, pale-coloured, grey 
or pinkish rock, which consists essentially of alkali-felspar 
(orthoclase, microperthite, &c). Some of them contain a small 
amount of interstitial quartz (quartz-bostonites) ; others have a 
small percentage of lime, which occasions the presence of a 
plagioclase felspar (maenite, gauteite, lime-bos tonite). Other 
minerals, except apatite, zircon and magnetite, are typically 
absent. They have very much the same composition as the 
trachytes; and many rocks of this series have been grouped 
with these or with the orthop ( hyres. Typically they occur as 
dikes or as thin sills, often in association with nepheline-syenite; 
and they seem to bear a complementary relationship to certain 
types of lamprophyre, such as camptonite and monchiquite. 
Though nowhere very common they have a wide distribution, 
being known from Scotland, Wales, Massachusetts, Montreal, 
Portugal, Bohemia, &c. The lindoites and quartz-lindoites of 
Norway are closely allied to the bostonites. 

BOSTROM, CHRISTOFFER JACOB (1797-1866), Swedish 
philosopher, was born at Pitea and studied at Upsala, where 
from 1840 to 1863 he was professor of practical philosophy. 
His philosophy, as he himself described it, is a thoroughgoing 
rational idealism founded on the principle that the only true 
reality is spiritual. God is Infinite Spirit in whom all existence 
is contained, and is outside the limitations of time and space. 
Thus Bostrom protests not only against empiricism but also 
against those doctrines of Christian theology which seemed to 
him to picture God as something less than Pure Spirit. In ethics 
the highest aim is the direction of actions by reason in harmony 



with the Divine; so the state, like the individual, exists solely in 
God, and in its most perfect form consists in the harmonious 
obedience of all its members to a constitutional monarch; the 
perfection of mankind as a whole is to be sought in a rational 
orderly system of such states in obedience to Universal Reason. 
This system differs from Platonism in that the " ideas " of God 
are not archetypal abstractions but concrete personalities. 

Bostrom's writings were edited by H. Edfeldt (2 vols., Upsala, 
1883). For his school see Sweden: Literature; also H. Hoffding, 
Filosofien i Sverig (German trans, in Philos. Monatsheften, 1879), and 
History of Mod. Philos. (Eng. trans., 1900), p. 284; R. Falckenberg, 
Hist, of Phil. (Eng. trans., 1895); A. Nyblaeus, Om den Bostromske 
filosofien (Lund, 1883), and Karakteristik af den Bostromska 
filosofien (Lund, 1892). 

BOSWELL, JAMES (1740-1795), Scottish man of letters, the 
biographer of Samuel Johnson, was born at Edinburgh on the 
29th of October 1740. His grandfather was in good practice at 
the Scottish bar, and his father, Alexander Boswell of Auchinleck, 
was also a noted advocate, who, on his elevation to the supreme 
court in 1754, took the name of his Ayrshire property as Lord 
Auchinleck. A Thomas Boswell (said upon doubtful evidence to 
have been a minstrel in the household of James IV.) was killed at 
Flodden, and since 1513 the family had greatly improved its 
position in the world by intermarriage with the first Scots 
nobility. In contradiction to his father, a rigid Presbyterian 
Whig, James was " a fine boy, wore a white cockade, and prayed 
for King James until his uncle Cochrane gave him a shilling to 
pray for King George, which he accordingly did " (" Whigs of all 
ages are made in the same way " was Johnson's comment). 
He met one or two English boys, and acquired a " tincture of 
polite letters " at the high school in Edinburgh. Like R. L. 
Stevenson, he early frequented society such as that of the actors 
at the Edinburgh theatre, sternly disapproved of by his father. 
At the university, where he was constrained for a season to study 
civil law, he met William Johnson Temple, his future friend and 
correspondent. The letters of Boswell to his " Atticus " were 
first published by Bentley in 1857. One winter he spent at 
Glasgow, where he sat under Adam Smith, who was then lecturing 
on moral philosophy and rhetoric. 

In 1760 he was first brought into contact with " the elegance, 
the refinement and the liberality " of London society, for which 
he had long sighed. The young earl of Eglintoun took him to 
Newmarket and introduced him into the society of " the great, 
the gay and the ingenious." He wrote a poem called " The Cub 
at Newmarket," published by Dodsley in 1762, and had visions 
of entering the Guards. Reclaimed with some difficulty by his 
father from his rakish companions in the metropolis, he contrived 
to alleviate the irksomeness of law study in Edinburgh by forcing 
his acquaintance upon the celebrities then assembled in the 
northern capital, among them Kames, Blair, Robertson, Hume 
and Sir David Dalrymple (Lord Hailes), of whose sayings on the 
Northern Circuit he kept a brief journal. Boswell had already 
realized his vocation, the exercise of which was to give a new 
word to the language. He had begun to Boswellize. He was 
already on the track of bigger game — the biggest available in the 
Britain of that day. In the spring of 1763 Boswell came to a 
composition with his father. He consented to give up his pursuit 
of a guidon in the Guards and three and sixpence a day on condi- 
tion that his father would allow him to study civil law on the 
continent. He set out in April 1763 by " the best road in Scot- 
land " with a servant, on horseback like himself, in " a cocked 
hat, a brown wig, brown coat made in the court fashion, red vest, 
corduroy small clothes and long military boots." On Monday, 
the 1 6th of May 1763, in the back shop of Tom Davies the book- 
seller, No. 8 Russell Street, Covent Garden, James Boswell first 
met " Dictionary Johnson," the great man of his dreams, and 
was severely buffeted by him. Eight days later, on Tuesday, 
the 24th of May, Boswell boldly called on Mr Johnson at his 
chambers on the first floor of No. 1 Inner Temple Lane. On 
this occasion Johnson pressed him to stay; on the 13'th of June 
he said, " Come to me as often as you can "; on the 25th of June 
Boswell gave the great man a little sketch of his own life, and 
Johnson exclaimed with warmth, " Give me your hand; I have 



29 8 



BOSWELL 



taken a liking to you." Boswell experienced a variety of 
sensations, among which exultation was predominant. Some one 
asked, " Who is this Scotch cur at Johnson's heels? " " He is 
not a cur," replied Goldsmith, " he is only a bur. Tom Davies 
flung him at Johnson in sport, and he has the faculty of 
sticking." Johnson was fifty-four at this time and Boswell 
twenty-three. After June 1763 they met on something like 270 
subsequent days. These meetings formed the memorable part 
of BoswelPs life, and they are told inimitably in his famous 
biography of his friend. 

The friendship, consecrated by the most delightful of bio- 
graphies, and one of the most gorgeous feasts in the whole 
banquet of letters, was not so ill-assorted as has been incon- 
siderately maintained. BoswelPs freshness at the table of 
conversation gave a new zest to every maxim that Johnson 
enunciated, while Boswell developed a perfect genius for inter- 
preting the kind of worldly philosophy at which Johnson was so 
unapproachable. Both men welcomed an excuse for avoiding 
the task-work of life. Johnson's favourite indulgence was to 
talk; Boswell's great idea of success to elicit memorable con- 
versation. Boswell is almost equally admirable as a reporter 
and as an interviewer, as a collector and as a researcher. He 
prepared meetings for Johnson, he prepared topics for him, he 
drew him out on questions of the day, he secured a copy of his 
famous letter to Lord Chesterfield, he obtained an almost 
verbatim report of Johnson's interview with the king, he fre- 
quented the tea-table of Miss Williams, he attended the testy old 
scholar on lengthy peregrinations in the Highlands and in the 
midlands. " Sir," said Johnson to his follower, " you appear to 
have only two subjects, yourself and me, and I am sick of both." 
Yet thorough as the scheme was from the outset, and admirable 
as was the devotedness of the biographer, Boswell was far too 
volatile a man to confine himself to any one ambition in life that 
was not consistent with a large amount of present fame and 
notoriety. He would have liked to Boswellize the popular idol 
Wilkes, or Chatham, or Voltaire, or even the great Frederick 
himself. As it was, during his continental tour he managed in 
the autumn of 1765 to get on terms with Pasquale di Paoli, the 
leader of the Corsican insurgents in their unwise struggle against 
Genoa. After a few weeks in Corsica he returned to London in 
February 1766, and was received by Johnson with the utmost 
cordiality. In accordance with the family compact referred to he 
was now admitted advocate at Edinburgh, and signalized his 
return to the law by an enthusiastic pamphlet entitled The 
Essence of the Douglas Cause (November 1767), in which he 
vigorously repelled the charge of imposture from the youthful 
claimant. In the same year he issued a little book called Dorando, 
containing a history of the Douglas cause in the guise of a Spanish 
tale, and bringing the story to a conclusion by the triumph of 
Archibald Douglas in the law courts. Editors who published 
extracts while the case was still subjudice were censured severely 
by the court of session; but though his identity was notorious 
the author himself escaped censure. In the spring of 1768 
Boswell published through the Foulis brothers of Glasgow his 
Account of Corsica, Journal of a Tour to that Island, and Memoirs 
of Pascal Paoli. The liveliness of personal impression which he 
managed to communicate to all his books gained for this one a 
deserved success, and the Tour was promptly translated into 
French, German, Italian and Dutch. Walpole and others, 
jeered, but Boswell was talked about everywhere, as Paoli 
Boswell or Paoli's Englishman, and to aid the mob in the task of 
identifying him at the Shakespeare jubilee of 1769 he took the 
trouble to insert a placard in his hat bearing the legend " Corsica 
Boswell." The amazing costume of " a Corsican chief " which he 
wore on this occasion was described at length in the magazines. 

On the 25th of November 1769, after a short tour in Ireland 
undertaken to empty his head of Corsica (Johnson's emphatic 
direction), Boswell married his cousin Margaret Montgomery at 
Lainshaw in Ayrshire. For some years henceforth his visits to 
London were brief, but on the 30th of April 1773 he was present 
at his admission to the Literary Club, for which honour he had 
been proposed by Johnson himself, and in the autumn of this 



year in the course of his tour to the Hebrides Johnson visited the 
Boswells in Ayrshire. Neither Boswell's father nor his wife 
shared his enthusiasm for the lexicographer. Lord Auchinleck 
remarked that Jamie was " gane clean gyte . . . And whose tail 
do ye think he has pinned himself to now, man? A dominie, 
an auld dominie, that keepit a schule and ca'd it an academy!" 
Housewives less prim than Mrs Boswell might have objected to 
Johnson's habitof turning lighted candles upside down when in the 
parlour to make them burn better. She called the great man a 
bear. Boswell's Journal of a Tour in the Hebrides was written for 
the most part during the journey, but was not published until 
the spring of 1 786. The diary of Pepys was not then known to the 
public, and Boswell's indiscretions as to the emotions aroused in 
him by the neat ladies' maids at Inveraray, and the extremity of 
drunkenness which he exhibited at Corrichatachin, created a 
literary sensation and sent the Tour through three editions in one 
year. In the meantime his pecuniary and other difficulties at 
home were great; he made hardly more than £100 a year by his 
profession, and his relations with his father were chronically 
strained. In 1 7 7 5 he began to keep terms at the Inner Temple and 
managed to see a good deal of Johnson, between whom and John 
Wilkes he succeeded in bringing about a meeting at the famous 
dinner at Dilly 's on the 1 5th of May 1776. On the 30th of August 
1782 his father died, leaving him an estate worth £1600 a year. 
On the 30th of June 1 784, Boswell met Johnson for the last time at 
a dinner at Sir Joshua Reynolds's. He accompanied him back in 
the eoach from Leicester Square to Bolt Court. " We bade adieu 
to each other affectionately in the carriage. When he had got 
down upon the foot pavement he called out ' Fare you well ' ; 
and without looking back, sprung away with a kind of pathetic 
briskness, if I may use that expression, which seemed to indicate 
a struggle to conceal uneasiness, and impressed me with a fore- 
boding of our long, long separation." Johnson died that year, 
and two years later the Boswells moved to London. In 1 789 Mrs 
Boswell died, leaving five children. She had been an excellent 
mother and a good wife, despite the infidelities and drunkenness 
of her husband, and from her death Boswell relapsed into worse 
excesses, grievously aggravated by hypochondria. He died of a 
complication of disorders at his house in Great Poland Street 
on the 19th of May 1795, and was buried a fortnight later at 
Auchinleck. 

Up to the eve of his last illness Boswell had been busy upon his 
magnum opus, The Life of Samuel Johnson, which was in process 
of crystallization to the last. The first edition was published in 
two quarto volumes in an edition of 1700 copies on the 16th of May 
1791. He was preparing a third edition when he died; this was 
completed by his friend Edmund Malone, who brought out a fifth 
edition in 1807. That of James Boswell junior (the editor of 
Malone's Variorum Shakespeare, 1821) appeared in 1811. 

The Life of Johnson was written on a scale practically unknown 
to biographers before Boswell. It is a full-length with all the 
blotches and pimples revealed (" I will not make my tiger a cat 
to please anybody," wrote " Bozzy "). It may be overmuch an 
exhibition of oddities, but it is also, be it remembered, a pioneer 
application of the experimental method to the determination of 
human character. Its size and lack of divisions (to divide it 
into chapters was an original device of Croker's) are a draw- 
back, and have prevented Boswell's Life from that assured 
triumph abroad which has fallen to the lot of various English 
classics such as Robinson Crusoe or Gulliver's Travels. But 
wherever English is spoken, it has become a veritable sacred 
book and has pervaded English life and thought in the same way, 
that the Bible, Shakespeare and Bunyan have done. Boswell 
has successfully (to use his own phrase) " Johnsonized " Britain, 
but has not yet Johnsonized the planet. The model originally 
proposed to himself by Boswell was Mason's Life of Gray, but 
he far surpassed that, or indeed any other, model. The fashion 
that Boswell adopted of giving the conversations not in the 
neutral tints of oratio obliqua but in full oratio recta was a stroke of 
genius. But he is far from being the mere mechanical trans- 
mitter of good things. He is a dramatic and descriptive artist of 
the first order. The extraordinary vitality of his figures postulates 



BOSWORTH— BOTANY 



299 



a certain admixture of fiction, and it is certain that Boswell 
exaggerates the sympathy expressed in word or deed by Johnson 
for some of his own tenderer foibles. But, on the whole, the 
best judges are of opinion that Boswell's accuracy is exceptional, 
as it is undoubtedly seconded by a power of observation of a 
singular retentiveness and intensity. The difficulty of dramatic 
description can only be realized, as Jowett well pointed out, by 
those who have attempted it, and it is not until we compare 
Boswell's reports with those of less skilful hearers that we can 
appreciate the skill with which the essence of a conversation 
is extracted, and the whole scene indicated by a few telling 
touches. The result is that Johnson, not, it is true, in the early 
days of his poverty, total idleness and the pride of literature, 
but in the fulness of fame and competence of fortune from 1763 
to 1784, is better known to us than any other man in history. 
The old theory to explain such a marvel (originally propounded 
by Gray when the Tour in Corsica appeared) that " any fool may 
write a valuable book by chance " is now regarded as untenable. 
If fool is a word to describe Boswell (and his folly was at times 
transcendent) he wrote his great book because and not in despite 
of the fact that he was one. There can be no doubt, in fact, that 
he was a biographical genius, and that he arranged his oppor- 
tunities just as he prepared his transitions and introduced 
those inimitable glosses by which Johnson's motives are ex- 
plained, his state of mind upon particular occasions indicated, 
and the general feeling of his company conveyed. This remark- 
able literary faculty, however, was but a fraction of the total 
make-up requisite to produce such a masterpiece as the Life. 
There is a touch of genius, too, in the naif and imperturbable 
good nature and persistency (" Sir, I will not be baited with 
' what ' and ' why.' ' Why is a cow's tail long?' ' Why is a 
fox's tail bushy?' "), and even in the abnegation of all personal 
dignity, with which Boswell pursued his hero. As he himself 
said of Goldsmith, " He had sagacity enough to cultivate 
assiduously the acquaintance of Johnson, and his faculties 
were gradually enlarged." Character, the vital principle of the 
individual, is the ignis fatuus of the mechanical biographer. 
Its attainment may be secured by a variety of means — witness 
Xenophon, Cellini, Aubrey, Lockhart and Froude — but it has 
never been attained with such complete intensity as by Boswell 
in his Life of Johnson. The more we study Boswell, the more 
we compare him with other biographers, the greater his work 
appears. 

The eleventh edition of Boswell's Johnson was brought out by 
John Wilson Croker in 183 1; in this the original text is expanded 
by numerous letters and variorum anecdotes and is already knee- 
deep in annotation. Its blunders provoked the celebrated and 
mutually corrective criticisms of Macaulay and Carlyle. Its value 
as an unrivalled granary of Johnsoniana, stored opportunely before 
the last links with a Johnsonian age had disappeared, has not been 
adequately recognized. A new edition of the original text was 
issued in 1874 by Percy Fitzgerald (who has also written a useful 
life of James Boswell in 2 vols., London, 1891) ; a six-volume edition, 
including the Tour and Johnsoniana, was published by the Rev. 
Alexander Napier in 1884; the definitive edition is that by Dr 
Birkbeck Hill in 6 vols., 1887, with copious annotations and a 
model index. A generously illustrated edition was completed in 
1907 in two large volumes by Roger Ingpen, and reprints of value 
have also been edited by R. Carruthers (with woodcuts), A. Birrell, 
Mowbray Morris (Globe edition) and Austin Dobson. A short 
biography of Boswell was written in 1896 by W. Keith Leask. 
Boswell's commonplace-book was published in 1876, under the title 
of Boswelliana, with a memoir by the Rev. C. Rogers. (T. Se.) 

BOSWORTH, JOSEPH (1789-1876), British Anglo-Saxon 
scholar, was born in Derbyshire in 1789. Educated at Repton, 
whence he proceeded to Aberdeen University, he became in 181 7 
vicar of Little Horwood, Buckinghamshire, and devoted his spare 
time to literature and particularly to the study of Anglo-Saxon. 
In 1823 appeared his Elements of Anglo-Saxon Grammar. In 
1829 Bosworth went to Holland as chaplain, first at Amsterdam 
and then at Rotterdam. He remained in Holland until 1840, 
working there on his Dictionary of the Anglo-Saxon Language 
(1838), his best-known work. In 1857 he became rector of Water 
Shelford, Buckinghamshire, and in the following year was 
appointed Rawlinson professor of Anglo-Saxon at Oxford. He 
gave to the university of Cambridge in 1867 £10,000 for the 



establishment of a professorship of Anglo-Saxon. He died on the 
27th of May 1876, leaving behind him a mass of annotations on 
the Anglo-Saxon charters. 

BOTANY (from Gr. (iorravq, plant; fioo-nav, to graze), the 
science which includes everything relating to the vegetable 
kingdom, whether in a living or in a fossil state. It embraces a 
consideration of the external forms of plants — of their anatomical 
structure, however minute — of the functions which they perform 
— of their arrangement and classification — of their distribution 
over the globe at the present and at former epochs — and of the 
uses to which they are subservient. It examines the plant in its 
earliest state of development, and follows it through all its stages 
of progress until it attains maturity. It takes a comprehensive 
view of all the plants which cover the earth, from the minutest 
organism, only visible by the aid of the microscope, to the most 
gigantic productions of the tropics. It marks the relations which 
subsist between all members of the plant world, including those 
between existing groups and those which are known only from 
their fossilized remains preserved in the rocks. We deal here 
with the history and evolution of the science. 

The plants which adorn the globe more or less in all countries 
must necessarily have attracted the attention of mankind from 
the earliest times. The science that treats of them dates back 
to the days of Solomon, who " spake of trees, from the cedar of 
Lebanon to the hyssop on the wall." The Chaldaeans, Egyptians 
and Greeks were the early cultivators of science, and botany was 
not neglected, although the study of it was mixed up with crude 
speculations as to vegetable life, and as to the change of plants 
into animals. About 300 years before Christ Theophrastus 
wrote a History of Plants, and described about 500 species used 
for the treatment of diseases. Dioscorides, a Greek writer, who 
appears to have flourished about the time of Nero, issued a work 
on Materia Medica. The elder Pliny described about a thousand 
plants, many of them famous for their medicinal virtues. Asiatic 
and Arabian writers also took up this subject. Little, however, 
was done in the science of botany, properly so called, until the 
1 6th century of the Christian era, when the revival of learning 
dispelled the darkness which had long hung over Europe. 
Otto Brunfels, a physician of Bern, has been looked upon as the 
restorer of the science in Europe. In his Herbarium, printed at 
Strassburg (1530-1536), he gave descriptions of a large number 
of plants, chiefly those of central Europe, illustrated by beautiful 
woodcuts. He was followed by other writers, — Leonhard Fuchs, 
whose Historia Stirpium (Basel, 1542) is worthy of special note 
for its excellent woodcuts; Hieronymus Bock, whose Kreutter 
Buch appeared in 1539; and William Turner, " The Father of 
English Botany," the first part of whose New Herbal, printed in 
English, was issued in 1551. The descriptions in these early 
works were encumbered with much medicinal detail, including 
speculations as to the virtues of plants. Plants which were 
strikingly alike were placed together, but there was at first little 
attempt at systematic classification. A crude system, based on 
the external appearance of plants and their uses to man, was 
gradually evolved, and is well illustrated in the Herbal, issued 
in 1597 by John Gerard (1545-1612), a barber-surgeon, who 
had a garden in Holborn, and was a keen student of British 
plants. 

One of the earliest attempts at a methodical arrangement of 
plants was made in Florence by Andreas Caesalpinus (1519- 
1603), who is called by Linnaeus primus verus systematicus. 
In his work De Plantis, published at Florence in 1583, he dis- 
tributed the 1520 plants then known into fifteen classes, the 
distinguishing characters being taken from the fruit. 

John Ray (1627-1705) did much to advance the science of 
botany,' and was also a good zoologist. He promulgated a 
system which may be considered as the dawn of the " natural 
system " of the present day (Ray, Melhodus Plantarum, 1682). 
He separated flowering from flowerless plants, and divided the 
former into Dicotyledons and Monocotyledons. His orders (or 
" classes ") were founded to some extent on a correct idea of the 
affinities of plants, and he far outstripped his contemporaries in 
his enlightened views of arrangement. 



3°° 



BOTANY 



About the year 1670 Dr Robert Morison 1 (1620-1683), the 
first professor of botany at Oxford, published a systematic 
arrangement of plants, largely on the lines previously suggested 
by Caesalpinus. He divided them into eighteen classes, dis- 
tinguishing plants according as they were woody or herbaceous, 
and taking into account the nature of the flowers and fruit. In 
1690 Rivinus 2 promulgated a classification founded chiefly on 
the forms of the flowers. J. P. de Tournefort 3 (1656-1708), who 
about the same time took up the subject of vegetable taxonomy, 
was long at the head of the French school of botany, and published 
a systematic arrangement in 1 694-1 700. He described about 
8000 species of plants, and distributed them into twenty-two 
classes, chiefly according to the form of the corolla, distinguishing 
herbs and under-shrubs on the one hand from trees and shrubs on 
the other. The system of Tournefort was for a long time adopted 
on the continent, but was ultimately displaced by that of Carl 
von Linne, or Linnaeus (q.v. ; 1 707-1 778). 

The system of Linnaeus was founded on characters derived 
from the stamens and pistils, the so-called sexual organs of the 
flower, and hence it is often called the sexual system. It is an 
artificial method, because it takes into account only a few marked 
characters in plants, and does not propose to unite them by 
natural affinities. It is an index to a department of the book of 
nature, and as such is useful to the student. It does not aspire 
to any higher character, and although it cannot be looked upon 
as a scientific and natural arrangement, still it has a certain 
facility of application which at once commended it. It does not 
of itself give the student a view of the true relations of plants, 
and by leading to the discovery of the name of a plant, it is only 
a stepping-stone to the natural system. Linnaeus himself 
claimed nothing higher for it. He says — " Methodi Naturalis 
fragmenta studiose inquirenda sunt. Primum et ultimum hoc 
in botanicis desideratum est. Natura non facit saltus. Plantae 
omnes utrinque affinitatem monstrant, uti territorium in mappa 
geographica." Accordingly, besides his artificial index, he 
also promulgated fragments of a natural method of arrange- 
ment. 

The Linnean system was strongly supported by Sir James 
Edward Smith (1759-1828), who adopted it in his English Flora, 
and who also became possessor of the Linnean collection. The 
system was for a long time the only one taught in the schools of 
Britain, even after it had been discarded by those in France and 
in other continental countries. 

The foundation of botanic gardens during the 16th and 17th 
centuries did much in the way of advancing botany. They were 
at first appropriated chiefly to the cultivation of medicinal 
plants. This was especially the case at universities, where 
medical schools existed. The first botanic garden was established 
at Padua in 1545, and was followed by that of Pisa. The garden 
at Leiden dates from 1577, that at Leipzig from 1579. Gardens 
also early existed at Florence and Bologna. The Montpellier 
garden was founded in 1592, that of Giessen in 1605, of Strass- 
burgin 1620, of Altdorf in 1625, and of Jena in 1629. The Jardin 
des Plantes at Paris was .established in 1626, and the Upsala 
garden in 1627. The botanic garden at Oxford was founded in 
1632. The garden at Edinburgh was founded by Sir Andrew 
Balfour and Sir Robert Sibbald in 1670, and, under the name of 
the Physic Garden, was placed under the superintendence of 
James Sutherland, afterwards professor of botany in the uni- 
versity. The garden at Kew dates from about 1730, when 
Frederick, prince of Wales, obtained a long lease of Kew House 
and its gardens from the Capel family. After his death in 1751 
his widow, Princess Augusta of Saxe-Gotha, showed great 
interest in their scientific development, and in 1759 engaged 
William Aiton to establish a Physic Garden. The garden of the 
Royal Dublin Society at Glasnevin was opened about 1796; 
that of Trinity College, Dublin, in 1807; and that of Glasgow 

1 Morison, Praeludia Botanica (1672) ; Plantarum Historia 
Universalis (1680). 

2 Rivinus (Augustus Quirinus) paterno nomine Bachmann, 
Introductio genezalis in Rem Herbariam (Lipsiae, 1690). 

3 Tournefort, Elemens de botanique (1694) ; Institutiones Rei 
Herbariae (1700). 



in 1818. The Madrid garden dates from 1763, and that of 
Coimbrafrom 1773. Jean Gesner (1709-1790)^ Swiss physician 
and botanist, states that at the end of the 18th century there were 
1600 botanic gardens in Europe. 

A new era dawned on botanical classification with the work of 
Antoine Laurent de Jussieu (1 748-1836). His uncle, Bernard de 
Jussieu, had adopted the principles of Linnaeus's Fragmenta in 
his arrangement of the plants in the royal garden at the Trianon. 
At an early age Antoine became botanical demonstrator in the 
Jardin des Plantes, and was thus led to devote his time to the 
science of botany. Being called upon to arrange the plants in the 
garden, he necessarily had to consider the best method of doing 
so, and, following the lines already suggested by his uncle, 
adopted a system founded in a certain degree on that of Ray, in 
which he embraced all the discoveries in organography, adopted 
the simplicity of the Linnean definitions, and displayed the 
natural affinities of plants. His Genera Plantarum, begun in 
1778, and finally published in 1789, was an important advance, 
and formed the basis of all natural classifications. One of the 
early supporters of this natural method was Augustin Pyramus 
de Candolle (1778-1841), who in 1813 published his Theorie 
elementaire de la botanique, in which he showed that the affinities 
of plants are to be sought by the comparative study of the form 
and development of organs (morphology), not of their functions 
(physiology). His Prodromus Systematis Naturalis Regni Vege- 
tabilis was intended to embrace an arrangement and description 
of all known plants. The work was continued after his death, 
by his son Alphonse de Candolle, with the aid of other eminent 
botanists, and embraces descriptions of the genera and species 
of the orders of Dicotyledonous plants. The system followed by 
de Candolle is a modification of that of Jussieu. 

In arranging plants according to a natural method, we require 
to have a thorough knowledge of structural and morphological 
botany, and hence we find that the advances made in these 
departments have materially aided the efforts of systematic 
botanists. 

Robert Brown (1773-1858) was the first British botanist to 
support and advocate the natural system of classification. The 
publication of his Prodromus Florae Novae Hollandiae (in 1810), 
according to the natural method, led the way to the adoption 
of that method in the universities and schools of Britain. In 
1827 Brown announced his important discovery of the distinction 
between Angiosperms and Gymnosperms, and the philosophical 
character of his work led A. von Humboldt to refer to him as 
" Botanicorum facile princeps." In 1830 John Lindley published 
the first edition of his Introduction to the Natural System, em- 
bodying a slight modification of de Candolle's system. From the 
year 1832 up to 1859 great advances were made in systematic 
botany, both in Britain and on the continent of Europe. The 
Enchiridion and Genera Plantarum of S. L. Endlicher (1804- 
1849), the Prodromus of de Candolle, and the Vegetable Kingdom 
(1846) of J. Lindley became the guides in systematic botany, 
according to the natural system. 

The least satisfactory part of all these systems was that con- 
cerned with the lower plants or Cryptogams as contrasted with 
the higher or flowering plants (Phanerogams) . The development 
of the compound microscope rendered possible the accurate 
study of their life-histories; and the publication in 1851 of the 
results of Wilhelm Hofmeister's researches on the comparative 
embryology of the higher Cryptogamia shed a flood of light on 
their relationships to each other and to the higher plants, and 
supplied the basis for the distinction of the great groups Thal- 
lophyta, Bryophyta, Pteridophyta and Phanerogamae, the last 
named including Gymnospermae and Angiospermae. 

A system of classification for the Phanerogams, or, as they are 
frequently now called, Spermatophyta (seed-plants), which has 
been much used in Great Britain and in America, is that of 
Bentham and Hooker, whose Genera Plantarum (1862-1883) is 
a descriptive account of all the genera of flowering plants, based 
on their careful examination. The arrangement is a modification 
of that adopted by the de Candolles. Another system differing 
somewhat in detail is that of A. W. Eichler (Berlin, 1883), a 



BOTANY 



301 



modified form of which was elaborated by Dr Adolf Engler of 
Berlin, the principal editor of Die natiirliche Pflanzenfamilien. 

The study of the anatomy and physiology of plants did not 
keep pace with the advance in classification. Nehemiah Grew 
and his contemporary Marcello Malpighi were the earliest dis- 
coverers in the department of plant anatomy. Both authors laid 
an account of the results of their study of plant structure before 
the Royal Society of London almost at the same time in 1671. 
Malpighi's complete work, Anatome Plantarum, appeared in 1675 
and Grew's Anatomy of Plants in 1682. For more than a hundred 
years the study of internal structure was neglected. In 1802 
appeared the Traite d'anatomie et de physiologie vegetale of C.F. 
B. de Mirbel (1776-1854), which was quickly followed by other 
publications by Kurt Sprengel, L. C. Treviranus (1779-1864), 
and others. In 1812 J. J. P. Moldenhawer isolated cells by 
maceration of tissues in water. The work of F. J. F. Meyen 
and H. von Mohl in the middle of the 19th century placed the 
study of plant anatomy on a more scientific basis. Reference 
must also be made to M. J. Schleiden (1 804-1881) and F. linger 
(1800-1870), while in K. W. von Nageli's investigations on 
molecular structure and the growth of the cell membrane we 
recognize the origin of modern methods of the study of cell- 
structure included under cytology (q.v.). The work of Karl 
Sanio and Th. Hartig advanced knowledge on the structure and 
development of tissues, while A. de Bary's Comparative Anatomy 
of the Phanerogams and Ferns (1877) supplied an admirable 
presentation of the facts so far known. Since then the work 
has been carried on by Ph. van Tieghem and his pupils, and 
others, who have sought to correlate the large mass of facts 
and to find some general underlying principles (see Plants: 
Anatomy of). 

The subject of fertilization was one which early excited 
attention. The idea of the existence of separate sexes in plants 
was entertained in early times, long before separate male and 
female organs had been demonstrated. The production of dates 
in Egypt, by bringing two kinds of flowers into contact, proves 
that in very remote periods some notions were entertained on 
the subject. Female date-palms only were cultivated, and wild 
ones were brought from the desert in order to fertilize them. 
Herodotus informs us that the Babylonians knew of old that 
there were male and female date-trees, and that the female 
required the concurrence of the male to become fertile. This 
fact was also known to the Egyptians, the Phoenicians and other 
nations of Asia and Africa. The Babylonians suspended male 
clusters from wild dates over the females ; but they seem to have 
supposed that the fertility thus produced depended on the 
presence of small flies among the wild flowers, which, by entering 
the female flowers, caused them to set and ripen. The process 
was called palmification. Theophrastus, who succeeded Aristotle 
in his school in the 114th Olympiad, frequently mentions the 
sexes of plants, but he does not appear to have determined the 
organs of reproduction. Pliny, who flourished under Vespasian, 
speaks particularly of a male and female palm, but his statements 
were not founded on any real knowledge of the organs. From 
Theophrastus down to Caesalplnus, who died at Rome in 1603, 
there does not appear to have been any attention paid to the 
reproductive organs of plants. Caesalpinus had his attention 
directed to the subject, and he speaks of a halitus or emanation 
from the male plants causing fertility in the female. 

Nehemiah Grew seems to have been the first to describe, in a 
paper on the Anatomy of Plants, read before the Royal Society 
in November 1676, the functions of the stamens and pistils. Up 
to this period all was vague conjecture. Grew speaks of the 
attire, or the stamens, as being the male parts, and refers to 
conversations with Sir Thomas Millington, Sedleian professor at 
Oxford, to whom the credit of the sexual theory seems really to 
belong. Grew says that " when the attire or apices break or 
open, the globules or dust falls down on the seedcase or uterus, 
and touches it with a prolific virtue." Ray adopted Grew's 
views, and states various arguments to prove their correctness 
in the preface to his work on European plants, published in 1694. 
In 1694 R. J. Camerarius, professor of botany and medicine at 



Tubingen, published a letter on the sexes of plants, in which he 
refers to the stamens and pistils as the organs of reproduction, 
and states the difficulties he had encountered in determining 
the organs of Cryptogamic plants. In 1703 Samuel Morland, 
in a paper read before the Royal Society, stated that the farina 
(pollen) is a congeries of seminal plants, one of which must be 
conveyed into every ovum or seed before it can become prolific. 
In this remarkable statement he seems to anticipate in part the 
discoveries afterwards made as to pollen tubes, and more par- 
ticularly the peculiar views promulgated by Schleiden. In 1711 
E. F. Geoffroy, in a memoir presented to the Royal Academy at 
Paris, supported the views of Grew and others as to the sexes 
of plants. He states that the germ is never to be seen in the 
seed till the apices (anthers) shed their dust; and that if the 
stamina be cut out before the apices open, the seed will either 
not ripen, or be barren if it ripens. He mentions two experiments 
made by him to prove this — one by cutting off the staminal 
flowers in Maize, and the other by rearing the female plant of 
Mercurialis apart from the male. In these instances most of the 
flowers were abortive, but a few were fertile, which he attributes 
to the dust of the apices having been wafted by the wind from 
other plants. 

Linnaeus took up the subject in the inauguration of his sexual 
system. He first published his views in 1736, and he thus 
writes — " Antheras et stigmata constituere sexum plantarum, a 
palmicolis, Millingtono, Grewio, Rayo, Camerario, Godofredo, 
Morlando, Vaillantio, Blairio, Jussievio, Bradleyo, Royeno, 
Logano, &c, detectum, descriptum, et pro infallibili assumptum; 
nee ullum, apertis oculis considerantem cujuscunque plantae 
flores, latere potest." He divided plants into sexual and asexual, 
the former being Phanerogamous or flowering, and the latter 
Cryptogamous or flowerless. In the latter division of plants he 
could not detect stamens and pistils, and he did not investigate 
the mode in which their germs were produced. He was no 
physiologist, and did not promulgate any views as to the em- 
bryogenic process. His followers were chiefly engaged in the 
arrangement and classification of plants, and while descriptive 
botany made great advances the physiological department of the 
science was neglected. His views were not, however, adopted at 
once by all, for we find Charles Alston stating arguments against 
them in his Dissertation on the Sexes of Plants. Alston's observa- 
tions were founded on what occurred in certain unisexual plants, 
such as Mercurialis, Spinach, Hemp, Hop and Bryony. The 
conclusion at which he arrives is that the pollen is not in all 
flowering plants necessary for impregnation, for fertile seeds can 
be produced without its influence. He supports parthenogenesis 
in some plants. Soon after the promulgation of Linnaeus's 
method of classification, the attention of botanists was directed 
to the study of Cryptogamic plants, and the valuable work of 
Johann Hedwig ( 1 730-1 799) on the reproductive organs of mosses 
made its appearance in 1782. He was one of the first to point 
out the existence of certain cellular bodies in these plants which 
appeared to perform the functions of reproductive organs, and 
to them the names of antheridia and pistillidia were given. This 
opened up a new field of research, and led the way in the study of 
Cryptogamic reproduction, which has since been much advanced 
by the labours of numerous botanical inquiries. The interesting 
observations of Morland, already quoted, seem to have been 
neglected, and no one attempted to follow in the path which he 
had pointed out. Botanists were for a long time content to know 
that the scattering of the pollen from the anther, and its applica- 
tion to the stigma, were necessary for the production of perfect 
seed, but the stages of the process of fertilization remained un- 
explored. The matter seemed involved in mystery, and no one 
attempted to raise the veil which hung over the subject of 
embryogeny. The general view was, that the embryo originated 
in the ovule, which was in some obscure manner fertilized by the 
pollen. 

In 181 5 L. C. Treviranus, professor of botany in Bonn, roused 
the attention of botanists to the development of the embryo, but 
although he made valuable researches, he did not add much in 
the way of new information. In 1823 G. B. Amici discovered the 



3°2 



BOTANY BAY 



existence of pollen tubes, and he was followed by A. T. Brongniart 
and R. Brown. The latter traced the tubes as far as the nucleus 
of the ovule. These important discoveries mark a new epoch in 
embryology, and may be said to be the foundation of the views 
now entertained, which were materially aided by the subsequent 
elucidation of the process of cytogenesis, or cell-development, 
by Schleiden, Schwann, Mohl and others. The whole subject of 
fertilization and development of the embryo has been more 
recently investigated with great assiduity and zeal, as regards 
both cryptogamous and phanerogamous plants, and details must 
be sought in the various special articles. The observations of 
Darwin as to the fertilization of orchids, Primula, Linum and 
Lylhrum, and other plants, and the part which insects take in 
this function, gave an explanation of the observations of Christian 
Konrad Sprengel, made at the close of the 18th century, and 
opened up a new phase in the study of botany, which has been 
followed by Hermann Miiller, Federico Delpino and others, 
and more recently by Paul Knuth. 

One of the earliest workers at plant physiology was Stephen 
Hales. In his Statical Essays (1727) he gave an account of 
numerous experiments and observations which he had made on 
the nutrition of plants and the movement of sap in them. He 
showed that the gaseous constituents of the air contribute 
largely to the nourishment of plants, and that the leaves are the 
organs which elaborate the food; the importance of leaves in 
nutrition had been previously pointed out by Malpighi in a short 
account of nutrition which forms an appendix to his anatomical 
work. The birth of modern chemistry in the work of J. Priestley 
and Lavoisier, at the close of the 18th century, made possible 
the scientific study of plant-nutrition, though Jan Ingenhousz in 
1779 discovered that plants incessantly give out carbonic acid 
gas, but that the green leaves and shoots only exhale oxygen 
in sunlight or clear daylight, thereby indicating the distinction 
between assimilation of carbonic acid gas (photosynthesis) and 
respiration. N. T. de Saussure (1767-1845) gave precision to 
the science of plant-nutrition by use of quantitative methods. 
The subjects of plant nutrition and respiration were further 
studied by R. J. H. Dutrochet towards the middle of the century, 
and Liebig's application of chemistry to agriculture and physio- 
logy put beyond question the parts played by the atmosphere 
and the soil in the nutrition of plants. 

The phenomena of movements of the organs of plants attracted 
the attention of John Ray (1693), who ascribed the movements 
of the leaf of Mimosa and others to alteration in temperature. 
Linnaeus also studied the periodical movements of flowers and 
leaves, and referred to the assumption of the night-position as the 
sleep-movement. Early in the 19th century Andrew Knight 
showed by experiment that the vertical growth of stems and 
roots is due to the influence of gravitation, and made other 
observations on the relation between the position assumed by 
plant organs and external directive forces, and later Dutrochet, 
H. von Mohl and others contributed to the advance of this phase 
of plant physiology. Darwin's experiments in reference to the 
movements of climbing and twining plants, and of leaves in 
insectivorous plants, have opened up a wide field of inquiry as 
to the relation between plants and the various external factors, 
which has attracted numerous workers. By the work of Julius 
Sachs and his pupils plant physiology was established on a 
scientific basis, and became an important part of the study of 
plants, for the development of which reference may be made 
to the article Plants: Physiology. The study of form and 
development has advanced under the name " morphology," 
with the progress of which are associated the names of K. 
Goebel, E. Strasburger, A. de Bary and others, while more 
recently, as cytology {q.v.), the intimate study of the cell and its 
contents has attracted considerable attention. 

The department of geographical botany made rapid advance 
by means of the various scientific expeditions which have been 
sent to all quarters of the globe, as well as by individual effort 
(see Plants: Distribution) since the time of A. von Humboldt. 
The question of the mode in which the floras of islands and of 
continents have been formed gave rise to important speculations 



by such eminent botanical travellers as Charles Darwin, Sir J. D. 
Hooker, A. R. Wallace and others. The connexion between 
climate and vegetation has also been studied. Quite recently 
under the name of " Ecology " or " Oecology " the study of 
plants in relation to each other and to their environment has 
become the subject of systematic investigation. 

The subject of palaeontological botany (see Palaeobotany) 
has been advanced by the researches of both botanists and 
geologists. The nature of the climate at different epochs of the 
earth's history has also been determined from the character of 
the flora. The works of A. T. Brongniart, H. R. Goeppert and 
W. P. Schimper advanced this department of science. Among 
others who contributed valuable papers on the subject may be 
noticed Oswald Heer (1809-1883), who made observations on the 
Miocene flora, especially in Arctic regions; Gaston de Saporta 
(1823-1895), who examined the Tertiary flora; Sir J. W. Dawson 
and Leo Lesquereux, and others who reported on the Canadian 
and American fossil plants. In Great Britain also W. C. William- 
son, by his study of the structure of the plants of the coal- 
measures, opened up a new line of research which has been 
followed by Bertrand Renault, D. H. Scott, A. C. Seward and 
others, and has led to important discoveries on the nature of 
extinct groups of plants and also on the phylogeny of existing 
groups. 

Botany may be divided into the following departments: — 

1. Structural, having reference to the form and structure of 
the various parts, including (a) Morphology, the study of the 
general form of the organs and their development — this will be 
treated in a series of articles dealing with the great subdivisions 
of plants (see Angiosperms, Gymnosperms, Pteridophyta, 
Bryophyta, Algae, Lichens, Fungi and Bacteriology) and 
the more important organs (see Stem, Leaf, Root, Flower, 
Fruit) ; (b) Anatomy, the study of internal structure, including 
minute anatomy or histology (see Plants: Anatomy). 

2. Cytology (q.v.), the intimate structure and behaviour of the 
cell and its contents — protoplasm, nucleus, &c. 

3. Physiology, the study of the life-functions of the entire 
plant and its organs (see Plants: Physiology). 

4. Systematic, the arrangement and classification of plants 
<(see Plants: Classification). 

5. Distribution or Geographical Botany, the consideration of 
the distribution of plants on the earth's surface (see Plants: 
Distribution) . 

6. Palaeontology, the study of the fossils found in the various 
strata of which the earth is composed (see Palaeobotany). 

7. Ecology or Oecology, the study of plants in relation to each 
other and to their environment (see Plants: Ecology). 

Besides these departments which deal with Botany as a science, 
there are various applications of botany, such as forestry (see 
Forests and Forestry), agriculture (q.v.), horticulture (q.v.), 
and materia medica (for use in medicine; see the separate articles 
on each plant). (A. B. R.) 

BOTANY BAY, an inlet on the coast of Cumberland county, 
New South Wales, Australia, 5 m. south of the city of Sydney. 
On its shore is the township of Botany, forming a suburb of 
Sydney, with which it is connected by a tramway. It was first 
visited by Captain Cook in 1770, who landed at a spot marked by 
a monument, and took possession of the territory for the crown. 
The bay received its name from Joseph Banks, the botanist of 
the expedition, on account of the variety of its flora. When, on 
the revolt of the New England colonies, the convict establish- 
ments in America were no longer available (see Deportation and 
New South Wales), the attention of the British government, 
then under the leadership of Pitt, was turned to Botany Bay; 
and in 1 787 Commodore Arthur Phillip was commissioned to form 
a penal settlement there. Finding, on his arrival, however, that 
the locality was ill suited for such a purpose, he removed north- 
wards to the site of the present city of Sydney. The name of 
Botany Bay seems to have struck the popular fancy, and con- 
tinued to be used in a general way for any convict establishment 
in Australia. The transportation of criminals to New South 
Wales was discontinued in 1840. 



BOTHA— BOTHWELL 



303 



BOTHA, LOUIS (1862- ), Boer general and statesman, was 
the son of one of the " Voortrekkers," and was born on the 27th 
of September 1862 at Grey town (Natal). He saw active service 
in savage warfare, and in 1887 served as a field-cornet. Subse- 
quently he settled in the Vryheid district, which he represented 
in the Volksraad of 1897. In the war of 1899 he served at first 
under Lucas Meyer in northern Natal, but soon rose to higher 
commands. He was in command of the Boers at the battles of 
Colenso and Spion Kop, and these victories earned him so great 
a reputation that on the death of P. J. Joubert, Botha was made 
commander-in-chief of the Transvaal Boers. His capacity was 
again demonstrated in the action of Belfast-Dalmanutha (August 
23-28, 1900), and after the fall of Pretoria he reorganized the 
Boer resistance with a view to prolonged guerrilla warfare. In 
this task, and in the subsequent operations of the war, he was 
aided by his able lieu tenants de la Rey and de Wet. The 
success of his measures was seen in the steady resistance offered 
by the Boers to the very close of the three years' war. He was 
the chief representative of his countrymen in the peace negotia- 
tions of 1902, after which, with de Wet and de la Rey, he visited 
Europe in order to raise funds to enable the Boers to resume their 
former avocations. In the period of reconstruction under British 
rule, General Botha, who was still looked upon as the leader of 
the Boer people, took a prominent part in politics, advocating 
always measures which he considered as tending to the main- 
tenance of peace and good order and the re-establishment of 
prosperity in the Transvaal. After the grant of self-government 
to the Transvaal in 1907, General Botha was called upon by Lord 
Selbome to form a government, and in the spring of the same 
year he took part in the conference of colonial premiers held in 
London. During his visit to England on this occasion General 
Botha declared the whole-hearted adhesion of the Transvaal to 
the British empire, and his intention to work for the welfare of 
the country regardless of racial differences. (See Transvaal: 
History.) 

BOTHNIA, GULF OF, the northern part of the Baltic Sea (q.v.). 
The name is preserved from the former territory of Bothnia, of 
which the western part is now included in Sweden, the eastern in 
Finland. 

BOTHWELL, JAMES HEPBURN, 4TH Earl of, duke of 
Orkney and Shetland (c. 1536-1578), husband of Mary, queen of 
Scots, son of Patrick, 3rd earl of Bothwell, and of Agnes, daughter 
of Henry, Lord Sinclair, was born about 1536. His father, 
Patrick, the 3rd earl (c. 1512-1556), was the only son of Adam, 
the 2nd earl, who was killed at Flodden, and the grandson of 
Patrick (d. c. 1508), 3rd Lord Hailes and 1st earl of Bothwell. 
It was this Patrick who laid the foundation of the family fortunes. 
Having fought against King James III. at the battle of Sauchie- 
burn in 1488, he was rewarded by the new king, James IV., with 
the earldom of Bothwell, the office of lord high admiral and other 
dignities. He also received many grants of land, including the 
lordship of Bothwell, which had been taken from John Ramsay, 
Lord Bothwell (d. 1513), the favourite of James III. 

James Hepburn succeeded in 1556 to his father's titles, lands 
and hereditary offices, including that of lord high admiral of 
Scotland. Though a Protestant, he supported the government of 
Mary of Guise, showed himself violently anti-English, and led a 
raid into England, subsequently in 1559 meeting the English 
commissioners and signing articles for peace on the border. 
The same year he seized £1000 secretly sent by Elizabeth to the 
lords of the congregation. In retaliation Arran occupied and 
stripped his castle at Crichton, whereupon Bothwell in November 
• sent Arran a challenge, which the latter declined. In December 
he was sent by the queen dowager to secure Stirling, and in 1560 
was despatched on a mission to France, visiting Denmark on 
the way, where he either married or seduced Anne, daughter of 
Christopher Thorssen, whom he afterwards deserted, and who 
came to Scotland in 1563 to obtain redress. He joined Mary at 
Paris in September, and in 1 561 was sent by her as a commissioner 
to summon the parliament; in February he arrived in Edinburgh 
and was chosen a privy councillor on the 6th of September. 
He now entered into obligations to keep the peace with his 



various rivals, but was soon implicated in riots and partisan 
disorders, and was ordered in December to leave the city. In 
March 1562, having made up his quarrel with Arran, he was 
accused of having proposed to the latter a project for seizing the 
queen, and in May he was imprisoned in Edinburgh castle, 
whence he succeeded in escaping on the 28th of August. On the 
23rd of September he submitted to the queen. Murray's influence, 
however, being now supreme, he embarked in December for 
France, but was driven by storms on to Holy Island, where h<*. 
was detained, and was subsequently, on the 18th of January 
1564, seized at Berwick and sent by Elizabeth to the Tower, 
whence he was soon liberated and proceeded to France. After 
these adventures he returned to Scotland in March 1565, but 
withdrew once more before the superior strength of his opponents 
to France. The same year, however, he was recalled by Mary to 
aid in the suppression of Murray's rebellion, successfully eluding 
the ships of Elizabeth sent to capture him. As lieutenant of the 
Marches he was employed in settling disputes on the border, but 
used his power to instigate thieving and disorders, and is de- 
scribed by Cecil's correspondents as " as naughty a man as 
liveth and much given to the most detestable vices," " as false as 
a devil," " one that the godly of this whole nation hath a cause to 
curse for ever." 1 In February 1566 Bothwell, in spite of his 
previous matrimonial engagements — and he had also been 
united by " handfasting " to Janet Betoun of Cranstouh Riddell 
— married Jane, daughter of George Gordon, 4th earl of Huntly. 
Notwithstanding his insulting language concerning Mary and the 
fact that he was the " stoutest " in refusing mass, he became 
one of her chief advisers, but his complete ascendancy over her 
mind and affections dates from the murder of Rizzio on the 
9th of March 1566. The queen required a protector, whom she 
found, not in the feeble Darnley, nor in any of the leaders of the 
factions, but in the strong, determined earl who had ever been a 
stanch supporter of the throne against the Protestant party 
and English influence. In Bothwell also, " the glorious, rasb and 
hazardous young man," romantic, handsome, charming even in his 
guilt, Mary gained what she lacked in her husband, a lover. He 
now stood forth as her champion; Mary took refuge with him at 
Dunbar, presented him, among other estates, with the castle 
there and the chief lands of the earldom of March, and made him 
the most powerful noble in the south of Scotland. Her par- 
tiality for him increased as her contempt and hatred of Darnley 
became more confirmed. On the 7 th of October he was 
dangerously wounded, and the queen showed her anxiety for his 
safety by riding 40 miles to visit him, incurring a severe illness. In 
November she visited him at Dunbar, and in December took 
place the conference at Craigmillar at which both were present, 
and at which the disposal of Darnley was arranged, Bothwell with 
some others subsequently signing the bond to accomplish his 
murder. He himself superintended all the preparations, visiting 
Darnley with Mary on the night of the crime, Sunday, 9th of 
February 1567, attending the queen on her return to Holyrood 
for the ball, and riding back to Kirk o' Field to carry out the 
crime. After the explosion he hurried back to Holyrood and 
feigned surprise at the receipt of the news half an hour later, 
ascribing the catastrophe to " the strangest accident that ever 
chancit, to wit, the fouder (lightning) came out of the luft (sky) 
and had burnt the king's house." 2 

Bothwell's power was new greater, and the queen's affection for 
him more ardent than ever. She was reported to have said that 
she cared not to lose France, England and her own country for 
him, and would go with him to the world's end in a white petti- 
coat ere she left him. 3 He was gratified with further rewards, and 
his success was clouded by no stings of conscience or remorse. 
According to Melville he had designs on the life of the young 
prince. On the demand of Lennox, Darnley's father, Bothwell 
was put upon his trial in April, but Lennox, having been for- 
bidden to enter the city with more than six attendants, refused 
to attend, and Bothwell was declared not guilty. The queen's 

1 Col. of State Papers, Scottish, i. 679. 

2 Sir James Melville's Mem. 174. 

3 Col. of State Pap., Foreign, 1566-1568, p. 212. 



3°4 



BOTHWELL— BOTOCUDOS 



intention to marry Both well, which had been kept a strict secret 
before the issue of the trial, was now made public. On the 19th of 
April he obtained the consent and support of the Protestant 
lords, who signed a bond in his favour. On the 24th he seized 
Mary's willing person near Edinburgh, and carried her to his 
castle at Dunbar. On the 3rd of May Bothwell's divorce from his 
wife was decreed by the civil court, on the ground of his adultery 
with a maidservant, and on the 7th by the Roman Catholic court 
on the ground of consanguinity. Archbishop Hamilton, how- 
ever, who now granted the decree, had himself obtained a papal 
dispensation for the marriage, 1 and in consequence it is extremely 
doubtful whether according to the Roman Catholic law Bothwell 
and Mary were ever husband and wife. On the 12th Bothwell 
was created duke of Orkney and Shetland and the marriage took 
place on the 15th according to the Protestant usage, the Roman 
Catholic rite being performed, according to some accounts, 
afterwards in addition. 2 

Bothwell's triumph, however, was shortlived. The nobles, 
both Protestant and Roman Catholic, now immediately united 
to effect his destruction. In June Mary and Bothwell fled from 
Holyrood to Borthwick Castle, whence Bothwell, on the place 
being surrounded by Morton and his followers, escaped to 
Dunbar, Mary subsequently joining him. Thence they marched 
with a strong force towards Edinburgh, meeting the lords on the 
15th of June at Carberry Hill. Bothwell invited any one of the 
nobles to single combat, but Mary forbade the acceptance of the 
challenge. Meanwhile, during the negotiations, the queen's 
troops had been deserting; a surrender became inevitable, and 
Bothwell returned to Dunbar, parting from Mary for ever. 
Subsequently Bothwell left Dunbar for the north, visited Orkney 
and Shetland, and in July placed himself at the head of a band of 
pirates, and after eluding all attempts to capture him, arrived at 
Karm Sound in Norway. Here he was confronted by his first 
wife or victim, Anne Thorssen, whose claims he satisfied by the 
gift of a ship and promises of an annuity, and on his identity 
becoming known he was sent by the authorities to Copenhagen, 
where he arrived on the 30th of September. He wrote Les 
Affaires du co;nte de Boduel, exhibiting himself as the victim of 
the malice of his enemies, and gained King Frederick II. 's good- 
will by an offer to restore the Orkneys and Shetlands to Denmark. 
In consequence the king allowed him to remain at Copenhagen, 
and refused all requests for his surrender. In January 1 568 he 
was removed to Malmoe in Sweden. He corresponded frequently 
with Mary, but there being no hopes whatever of his restoration, 
and a new suitor being found in the duke of Norfolk, Mary 
demanded a divorce, on pleas which recall those of Henry VIII. 
in the matter of Catherine of Aragon. The divorce was finally 
granted by the pope in September 1570 on the ground of her pre- 
nuptial ravishment by Bothwell, 3 and met with no opposition 
from the latter. After the downfall of Mary, Bothwell's good 
treatment came to an end, and on the 16th of June 1573 he was 
removed to the castle of Dragsholm or Adelersborg in Zealand. 
Here the close and solitary confinement, and the dreary and 
hopeless inactivity to which he was condemned, proved a terrible 
punishment for the full-blooded, energetic and masterful Both- 
well. He sank into insanity, and died on the 14th of April 1578. 
He was buried at the church of Faareveille, where a coffin, doubt- 
fully supposed to be his, was opened in 1858. A portrait was 
taken of the head of the body found therein, now in the museum 
of the Society of Antiquaries in Scotland. His so-called death- 
bed confession is not genuine. 

He left no lawful descendants; but his nephew, Francis 
Stewart Hepburn, who, through his father, John Stewart, 
prior of Coldingham, was a grandson of King James V., and was 
thus related to Mary, queen of Scots, and the regent Murray, 
was in 1581 created earl of Bothwell. He was lord high admiral 
of Scotland, and was a person of some importance at the court of 
James VI. during the time when the influence of the Protestants 
was uppermost. He was anxious that Mary Stuart's death 

1 Hist. MSS. Comm. Rep. ii. p. 177. 

2 Cat. of State Pap., Scottish, ii. 333. 

3 Cat. of State Pap., Foreign, 1569-1371, p. 372. 



should be avenged by an invasion of England, «wj in 1589 he 
suffered a short imprisonment for his share in a rising. By this 
time he had completely lost the royal favour. Again imprisoned, 
this time on a charge of witchcraft, he escaped from captivity in 
1 591, and was deprived by parliament of his lands and titles; 
as an outlaw his career was one of extraordinary lawlessness. 
In 1 591 he attempted to seize Holyrood palace, and in 1593 he 
captured the king, forcing from him a promise of pardon. But 
almost at once he reverted to his former manner of life, and, 
although James failed to apprehend him, he was forced to take 
refuge in France about 1595- He died at Naples before July 
1614. This earl had three sons, but his titles were never restored. 

Bibliography. — See the article in the Diet, of Nat. Biog. and 
authorities; Les Affaires du comte de Boduel (written January 1568, 
publ. Bannatyne Club, 1829); " Memoirs of James, Earl of Both- 
well," in G. Chalmers's Life of Mary, Queen of Scots (1818) ; Life of 
Bothwell, by F. Schiern (trans. 1880); Pieces et documents relatifs 
au comte de Bothwell, by Prince A. Lobanoff (1856); Appendix to 
the Hist, of Scotland, by G. Buchanan (1721); Sir James Melville's 
Memoirs (Bannatyne Club, 1827); A Lost Chapter in the Hist. o\ 
Mary, Queen of Scots, by J. Stuart (1874); J- H. Burton's Hist. $ 
Scotland (1873) ; A. Lang's Hist, of Scotland, ii. (1902) ; Archaeologia, 
xxxviii. 308; Col. of State Papers, Foreign, Scottish, Venetian, vii; 
Exchequer Rolls of Scotland, xix. and xx., Domestic, Border Papers', 
Hist. MSS. Comm., MSS. of Marq. of Salisbury, i. ii. See also 
Mary, Queen of Scots. (P. C. Y.) 

BOTHWELL, a town of Lanarkshire, Scotland. Pop. of town 
(1901) 3015; of parish (1901) 45,905. The town lies on the right 
bank of the Clyde, 9 m. E.S.E. of Glasgow by the North British 
and Caledonian railways. Owing to its pleasant situation it has 
become a residential quarter of Glasgow. The choir of the old 
Gothic church of 1398 (restored at the end of the 19th century) 
forms a portion of the parish church. Joanna Baillie, the poetess, 
was born in the manse, and a memorial has been erected in her 
honour. The river is crossed by a suspension bridge as well as 
the bridge near which, on the 22nd of June 1679, was fought the 
battle of Bothwell Bridge between the Royalists, under the duke 
of Monmouth, and the Covenanters, in which the latter lost 500 
men and 1000 prisoners. Adjoining this bridge, on the level 
north-eastern bank, is the castle that once belonged to James 
Hamilton of Bothwellhaugh (fl. 1 566-1 580), the assassin of the 
regent Murray; and near the present farmhouse the South 
Calder is spanned by a Roman bridge. The picturesque ruins of 
Bothwell Castle occupy a conspicuous position on the side of the 
river, which here takes the bold sweep famed in Scottish song as 
Bothwell bank. The fortress belonged to Sir Andrew Moray, 
who fell at Stirling in 1297, and passed by marriage to the 
Douglases. The lordship was bestowed in 1487 on Patrick 
Hepburn, 3rd Lord Hailes, 1st earl of Bothwell, who resigned it 
in 1491 in favour of Archibald Douglas, 5th earl of Angus. It 
thus reverted to the Douglases and now belongs to the earl of 
Home, a descendant. The castle is a fine example of Gothic, 
and mainly consists of a great oblong quadrangle, flanked on the 
south side by circular towers. At the east end are the remains of 
the chapel. A dungeon bears the nickname of " Wallace's Beef 
Barrel." The unpretending mansion near by was built by 
Archibald Douglas, 1st earl of Forfar (1653-1712). The parish 
of Bothwell contains several flourishing towns and villages, all 
owing their prosperity to the abundance of coal, iron and oil- 
shale. The principal places, most of which have stations on the 
North British or Caledonian railway or both, are Bothwell Park, 
Carfin, Chapelhall, Bellshill (pop. 8786), Holytown, Mossend, 
Newarthill,Uddingston (pop. 7463), Clydesdale, Hamilton Palace, 
Colliery Rows and Tennochside. 

BOTOCUDOS (from Port, botoque, a plug, in allusion to the 
wooden disks or plugs worn in their lips and ears), the foreign 
name for a tribe of South American Indians of eastern Brazil, 
also known as the Aimores or Aimbores. They appear to have 
no collective tribal name for themselves. Some are called Nac- 
nanuk or Nac-poruk, " sons of the soil." The name Botocudos 
cannot be traced much farther back than the writings of Prince 
Maximilian von Neuwied (Reise nach Bresilien, Frankfort-on- 
Main, 1820). When the Portuguese adventurer Vasco Fernando 
Coutinho reached the east coast of Brazil in 1535, he erected a 



BOTORI— BOTRYTIS 



305 



fort at the head of Espirito Santo Bay to defend himself against 
" the Aimores and other tribes." The original home of the tribe 
comprised most of the present province of Espirito Santo, and 
reached inland to the headwaters of Rio Grande (Belmonte) and 
Rio Doce on the eastern slopes of the Serra do Espinhacao, but 
the Botocudos are now mainly confined to the country between 
Rio Pardo and Rio Doce, and seldom roam westward beyond 
Serra dos Aimores into Minas Geraes. It was in the latter 
district that at the close of the 18th century they came into 
collision with the whites, who were attracted thither by the 
diamond fields. 

The Botocudos are nomads, wandering naked in the woods and 
living on forest products. They are below the medium height, 
but broad-shouldered and remarkable for the muscular develop- 
ment and depth of their chests. Their arms and legs are, how- 
ever, soft and fleshy, and their feet and hands small. Their 
features, which vary individually almost as much as those of 
Europeans, are broad and flat, with prominent brow, high cheek- 
bones, small bridgeless nose, wide nostrils and slight projection 
of the jaws. They are longheaded, and their hair is coarse, 
black and lank. Their colour is a light yellowish brown, some- 
times almost approaching white. The general yellow tint 
emphasizes their Mongolic appearance, which all travellers have 
noticed. The Botocudos were themselves greatly struck by the 
Chinese coolies, whom they met in Brazilian seaports, and whom 
they at once accepted as kinsmen (Henri Hollard, De I'homme et 
des races humaines, Paris, 1853). 1 Some few Botocudos have 
settled and become civilized, but the great bulk of them, number- 
ing between twelve and fourteen thousand, are still the wildest 
of savages. During the earlier frontier wars (1790-1820) every 
effort was made to extirpate them. They were regarded by the 
Portuguese as no better than wild beasts. Smallpox was de- 
liberately spread among them; poisoned food was scattered in 
the forests; by such infamous means the coast districts about 
Rios Doce and Belmonte were cleared, and one Portuguese com- 
mander boasted that he had either slain with his own hands or 
ordered to be butchered many hundreds of them. Their imple- 
ments and domestic utensils are all of wood; their only weapons 
are ree J spears and bows and arrows. Their dwellings are rough 
shelters of leaf and bast, seldom 4 ft. high. So far as the language 
of the Botocudos is known, it would appear that they have no 
means of expressing the numerals higher than one. Their only 
musical instrument is a small bamboo nose-flute. They attribute 
all the blessings of life to the " day-fire " (sun) and all evil to 
" night-fire " (moon). At the graves of the dead they keep 
fires burning for some days to scare away evil spirits, and during 
storms and eclipses arrows are shot into the sky to drive away 
demons. 

The most conspicuous feature of the Botocudos is the lem- 
beitera, or wooden plug or disk which is worn in the lower lip 
and the lobe of the ear. This disk, made of the specially light 
and carefully dried wood of the barriguda tree (Chorisia ventri- 
cosa), is called by the natives themselves embure, whence 
Augustin Saint Hilaire suggests the probable derivation of 
their name Aimbore (Voyages dans I'intirieur du Bresil 1816- 
1821, Paris, 1830). It is worn only in the under-lip, now chiefly 
by women, but formerly by men also. The operation for pre- 
paring the lip begins often as early as the eighth year, when an 
initial boring is made by a hard pointed stick, and gradually 
extended by the insertion of larger and larger disks or plugs, 
sometimes at last as much as 3 in. in diameter. Notwith- 
standing the lightness of the wood the tembeitera weighs down 
the lip, which at first sticks out horizontally and at last becomes 
a mere ring of skin around the wood. Ear-plugs are also worn, 
of such size as to distend the lobe down to the shoulders. Ear- 
ornaments of like nature are common in south and even central 
America, at least as far north as Honduras. .When Columbus 
discovered this latter country during his fourth voyage (1502) 

1 A parallel case is that of the Bashkir soldiers of Orenburg, who 
formed part of the Russian army sent to put down the Hungarian 
revolt of 1848, and who recognized their Ugrian kinsmen in the 
Zeklars and other Magyars settled in the Danube basin. 



he named part of the seaboard Costa de la Oreja, from the con- 
spicuously distended ears of the natives. Early Spanish ex- 
plorers also gave the name Orejones or " big-eared " to several 
Amazon tribes. *•;>.« 

See A. R. Wallace, Travels on the Amazon (1853-1900); H. H. 
Bancroft, Hist, of Pacific States (San Francisco, 1882), vol. i. p. 211; 
A. H. Keane, " On the Botocudos " in Journ. Anthrop. Instit. 
vol. xiii. (1884) ; J. R. Peixoto, Novos Estudios Craniologicos sobre 
os Botocuds (Rio Janeiro, 1882); Prof. C. F. Hartt, Geology and 
Physical Geography of Brazil (Boston, 1870), pp. 577-606. 

BOTORI, a Japanese game played at the naval, military and 
other schools, by two sides of equal number, usually about one 
hundred, each of which defends a pole about 8 ft. high firmly 
set in the ground, the poles being about 200 yds. distant from 
each other. The object of each party is to overthrow the 
adversaries' pole while keeping their own upright. Pulling, 
hauling and wrestling are allowed, but no striking or kicking. 
The players resort to all kinds of massed formations to arrive 
at the enemies' pole, and frequently succeed in passing over 
their heads and shoulders one or more comrades, who are thus 
enabled to reach the pole and bear it down unless pulled off in 
time by its defenders. A game similar in character is played 
by the Sophomore and Freshman classes of Amherst College 
(Massachusetts), called the " Flag-rush." It was instituted at 
the instance of the faculty to take the place of the traditional 
" Cane-rush," a general milie between the two classes for the 
ultimate possession of a stout walking-stick, which became 
so rough that students were frequently seriously injured. In 
the " Flag-rush " a small flag is set upon a padded post about 
6 ft. high, and is defended by one class while the other endeavours, 
as at Botori, to overthrow it. If the flag is not captured or torn 
down within a certain time the defending side wins. 

BOTOSHANI (Botosani), the capital of the department of 
Botoshani, Rumania; on a small tributary of the river Jijia, 
and in one of the richest agricultural and pastoral regions of the 
north Moldavian hills. Pop. (1900) 32,193. Botoshani is com- 
mercially important as the town through which goods from 
Poland and Galicia pass in transit for the south; being situated 
on a branch railway between Dorohoi and on the main line from 
Czernowitz to Galatz. It has extensive starch and flour mills; 
and Botoshani flour is highly prized in Rumania, besides being 
largely exported to Turkey and the United Kingdom. Botoshani 
owes its name to a Tatar chief, Batus or Batu Khan, grandson of 
Jenghiz Khan, who occupied the country in the 13th century. 
There are large colonies of Armenians and Jews. 

BO-TREE, or Bodhi-Tree, the name given by the Buddhists 
of India and Ceylon to the Pipul or sacred wild fig (Ficus religiosa). 
It is regarded as sacred, and one at least is planted near aach 
temple. These are traditionally supposed to be derived from 
the original one, the Bodhi-tree of Buddhist annals, beneath 
which the Buddha is traditionally supposed to have attained 
perfect knowledge. The Bo-tree at the ruined city of Anuradha- 
pura, 80 m. north of Kandy, grown from a branch of the parent- 
tree sent to Ceylon from India by King Asoka in the 3rd century 
B.C., is said to have been planted in 288 B.C., and is to this day 
worshipped by throngs of pilgrims who come long distances to 
pray before it. Usually a bo-tree is planted on the graves of the 
Kandy priests. 

BOTRYTIS, a minute fungus which appears as a brownish-grey 
mould on decaying vegetation or on damaged fruits. Under 
a hand-lens it is seen to consist of tiny, upright, brown stalks 
which are branched at the tips, each branchlet being crowned 
with a naked head of pale-coloured spores. It is a very common 
fungus, growing everywhere in the open or in greenhouses, and 
can be found at almost any season. It has also a bad record as 
a plant disease. If it once gains entrance into one of the higher 
plants, it spreads rapidly, killing the tissues and reducing them 
to a rotten condition. Seedling pines, lilies and many other 
cultivated plants are subject to attack by Botrytis. Some of 
the species exist in two other growth-forms, so different in 
appearance from the Botrytis that they have been regarded as 
distinct plants: — a sclerotium, which is a hard compact mass 
of fungal filaments, or mycelium, that can retain its vitality for a 



3 o6 



BOTTA— BOTTICELLI 



considerable time in a resting condition; and a stalked Peziza, 
or cup-fungus, which grows out of the sclerotium. The latter 
is the perfect form of fruit. The Botrytis mould is known as 
the conidial form 

BOTTA, CARLO GIUSEPPE GUGLIELMO (1766-1837), 
Italian historian, was born at San Giorgio Canavese in Piedmont. 
He studied medicine at the university of Turin, and obtained 
his doctor's degree when about twenty years of age. Having 
rendered himself obnoxious to the government during the 
political commotions that followed the French Revolution, 
he was imprisoned for over a year; and on his release in 1795 
he withdrew to France, only to return to his native country 
as a surgeon in the French army, whose progress he followed 
as far as Venice. Here he joined the expedition to Corfu, from 
which he did not return to Italy till 1798. At first he favoured 
French policy in Italy, contributed to the annexation of Piedmont 
by France in 1799, and was an admirer of Napoleon; but he 
afterwards changed his views, realizing the necessity for the 
union of all Italians and for their freedom from foreign control. 
After the separation of Piedmont from France in 1814 he retired 
into private life, but, fearing persecution at home, became a 
French citizen. In 1 8 1 7 he was appointed rector of the university 
of Rouen, but in 1822 was removed owing to clerical influence. 
Amid all the vicissitudes of his early manhood Botta had never 
allowed his pen to be long idle, and in the political quiet that 
followed 1816 he naturally devoted himself more exclusively 
to literature. In 1824 he published a history of Italy from 
1789 to 1814 (4 vols.), on which his fame principally rests; he 
himself had been an eyewitness of many of the events described. 
His continuation of Guicciardini, which he was afterwards en- 
couraged to undertake, is a careful and laborious work, but is 
not based on original authorities and is of small value. Though 
living in Paris he was in both these works the ardent exponent 
of that recoil against everything French which took place 
throughout Europe. A careful exclusion of all Gallicisms, as a 
reaction against the French influences of the day, is one of the 
marked features of his style, which is not infrequently impassioned 
and eloquent, though at the same time cumbrous, involved and 
ornate. Botta died at Paris in August 1837, in comparative 
poverty, but in the enjoyment of an extensive and well-earned 
reputation. 

His son, Paul Emile Botta (1802-1870), was a distinguished 
traveller and Assyrian archaeologist, whose excavations at 
Khorsabad (1843) were among the first efforts in the line of 
investigation afterwards pursued by Layard. 

The works of Carlo Botta are Storia naturale e medica dell' Isola 
di Corfu (1798) ; an Italian translation of Born's Joannis Physiophili 
specimen monachologiae (1801); Souvenirs d'un voyage en Dalmalie 
(1802); Storia della guerra dell' Independenza d' America (1809); 
Camilla, a poem (1815); Storia d'ltalia dal 1789 al 1814 (1824, new 
ed., Prato, 1862); Storia d'ltalia in continuazione al Guicciardini 
(1832, new ed., Milan, 1878). See C. Dionisiotti, Vita di Carlo Botta 
(Turin, 1 867) ; C. Pavesio, Carlo Botta e le sue opere storiche (Florence, 
1874); Scipione Botta, Vita privata di Carlo Botta (Florence, 1877); 
A. d'Ancona e O. Bacci, Manuela della Letteratura Italiana (Florence, 
1894), vol. v. pp. 245 eeq. 

BOTTESINI, GIOVANNI (1823-1889), Italian contrabassist 
and musical composer, was born at Crema in Lombardy on the 
24th of December 1823. He studied music at the Milan Con- 
servatoire, devoting himself especially to the double-bass, an 
instrument with which his name is principally associated. On 
leaving Milan he spent some time in America and also occupied 
the position of principal double-bass in the theatre at Havana. 
Here his first opera, Cristoforo Colombo, was produced in 1847. 
In 1849 he made his first appearance in England, playing double- 
bass solos at one of the Musical Union concerts. After this he 
made frequent visits to England, and his extraordinary command 
of his unwieldy instrument gained him great popularity in London 
and the provinces. Apart from his triumphs as an executant, 
Bottesini was a conductor of European reputation, and earned 
some success as a composer, though his work had not sufficient 
individuality to survive the changes of taste and fashion. He 
was conductor at the Theatre des Italiens in Paris from 1855 to 
1857, where his second opera, L'Assedio di Firenze, was produced 



in 1856. In 1861 and 1862 he conducted at Palermo, supervising 
the production of his opera Marion Delorme in 1862, and in 1863 
at Barcelona. During these years he diversified the toils of 
conducting by repeated concert tours through the principal 
countries of Europe. In 1871 he conducted a season of Italian 
opera at the Lyceum theatre in London, during which his opera 
Ali Baba was produced, and at the close of the year he was 
chosen by Verdi to conduct the first performance of A'ida, which 
took place at Cairo on 27th December 1871. Bottesini wrote 
three operas besides those already mentioned: II Diavolo della 
Notte (Milan, 1859); Vinciguerra (Paris, 1870); and Ero e 
Leandro (Turin, 1880), the last named to a libretto by Arrigo 
Boito, which was subsequently set by Mancinelli. He also 
wrote The Garden of Olivet, a devotional oratorio (libretto by 
Joseph Bennett), which was produced at the Norwich festival 
in 1887, a concerto for the double-bass, and numerous songs, 
and minor instrumental pieces. Bottesini died at Parma on the 
7th of July 1889. 

BOTTICELLI, SANDRO, properly Alessandro di Mariano 
dei Filipepi (1444-1510), Florentine painter, was born at 
Florence in 1444, in a house in the Via Nuova, Borg' Ognissanti. 
This was the home of his father, Mariano di Vanni dei Filipepi, 
a struggling tanner. Sandro, the youngest child but one of his 
parents, derived the name Botticelli, by which he was commonly 
known, not, as related by Vasari, from a goldsmith to whom he 
was apprenticed, but from his eldest brother Giovanni, a pros- 
perous broker, who seems to have taken charge of the boy, and 
who for some reason bore the nickname Botticello or Little 
Barrel. A return made in 1437 by his father describes Sandro 
as aged thirteen, weak in health, and still at school (if the words 
sta al legare are to be taken as a misspelling of sta al leggere, 
otherwise they might perhaps mean that he was apprenticed 
either to a jeweller or a bookbinder). One of his elder brothers, 
Antonio, who afterwards became a bookseller, was at this time 
in business as a goldsmith and gold-leaf-beater, and with him 
Sandro was very probably first put to work. Having shown 
an irrepressible bent towards painting, he was apprenticed in 
1458-1459 to Fra Filippo Lippi, in whose workshop he remained 
as an assistant apparently until 1467, when the master went to 
carry out a commission for the decoration with frescoes of the 
cathedral church of Spoleto. During his apprentice years 
Sandro was no doubt employed with other pupils upon the great 
series of frescoes in the choir of the Pieve at Prato upon which 
his master was for long intermittently engaged. The later 
among these frescoes in many respects anticipate, by charm of 
sentiment, animation of movement and rhythmic flutter of 
draperies, some of the prevailing characteristics of Sandro's own 
style. One of Sandro's earliest extant pictures, the oblong 
" Adoration of the Magi " at the National Gallery, London 
(No. 592, long ascribed in error to Filippino), shows him almost 
entirely under the influence of his first master. Left in Florence 
on Fra Filippo's departure to Spoleto, he can be traced gradually 
developing his individuality under various influences, among 
which that of the realistic school of the Pollaiuoii is for some 
time the strongest. From that school he acquired a knowledge 
of bodily structure and movement, and a searching and ex- 
pressive precision of linear draughtsmanship, which he could 
never have learnt from his first master. The Pollaiuolo influence 
dominates, with some slight admixture of that of Verrocchio, 
in the fine figure of Fortitude, now in the Uffizi, which was 
painted by Botticelli for the Mercanzia about 1470; this is one 
of a series of the seven Virtues, of which the other six, it seems, 
were executed by Piero Pollaiuolo from the designs of his brother 
Antonio. The same influence is again very manifest in the 
two brilliant little pictures at the Uffizi in which the youthful 
Botticelli has illustrated the story of Judith and Holof ernes; 
in his injured portrait of a man holding a medal of Cosimo de' 
Medici, No. 1 286 at the Uffizi; and in his life-sized " St Sebastian " 
at Berlin, which we know to have been painted for the church 
of Sta Maria Maggiore in 1473. Tradition and internal evidence 
seem also to point to Botticelli's having occasionally helped, 
in his earliest or Pollaiuolo period, to furnish designs to the 



BOTTICELLI 



307 



school of engravings in Florence which had been founded by the 
goldsmith Maso Finiguerra. 

Some authorities hold that he must have attended for a while 
the much-frequented workshop of Verrocchio. But the " Forti- 
tude " is the only authenticated early picture in which the 
Verrocchio influence is really much apparent; the various other 
pictures on which this opinion is founded, chiefly Madonnas 
dispersed among the museums of Naples, Florence, Paris and 
elsewhere, have been shown to be in all probability the work not 
of Sandro himself, but of an anonymous artist, influenced partly 
by him and partly by Verrocchio, whose individuality it has been 
endeavoured to reconstruct under the provisional name of Amico 
di Sandro. At the same time we know that the young Botticelli 
stood in friendly relations with some of the pupils in Verrocchio's 
workshop, particularly with Leonardo da Vinci. Among the 
many " Madonnas " which bear Botticelli's name in galleries 
public and private, the earliest which carries the unmistakable 
stamp of his own hand and invention is that which passed from 
the Chigi collection at Rome to that of Mrs Gardner at Boston. 
At the beginning of 1474 he entered into an agreement to work at 
Pisa, both in the Campo Santo and in the chapel of the Incoronata 
in the Duomo, but after spending some months in that city 
abandoned the task, we know not why. Next in the order of his 
preserved works comes probably the much-injured round of the 
" Adoration of the Magi " in the National Gallery (No. 1033) , long 
ascribed in error, like the earlier oblong panel of the same subject, 
to Filippino Lippi. (To about this date is assigned by some the 
well-known " Assumption of the Virgin surrounded with the 
heavenly hierarchies," formerly at Hamilton Palace and now in 
the National- Gallery [No. n 26]; but recent criticism has proved 
that the tradition is mistaken which since Vasari's time has 
ascribed this picture to Botticelli, and that it is in reality the work 
of a subordinate painter somewhat similarly named, Francesco 
Botticini.) 

A more mature and more celebrated " Adoration of the Magi " 
than either of those in the National Gallery is that now in the 
Uffizi, which Botticelli painted for Giovanni Lami, probably in 
1477, and which was originally placed over an altar against the 
front wall of the church of Sta Maria Novella to the right inside 
the main entrance. The scene is here less crowded than in some 
other of the master's representations of the subject, the concep- 
tion entirely sane and masculine, with none of those elements 
of bizarre fantasy and over-strained sentiment to which he was 
sometimes addicted and which his imitators so much exaggerated ; 
the execution vigorous and masterly. The picture has, moreover, 
special interest as containing lifelike portraits of some of the 
chief members of the Medici family. Like other leading artists of 
his time in Florence, Botticelli had already begun to profit by the 
patronage of this family. For the house of Lorenzo II Magnifico 
in the Via Larga he painted a decorative piece of Pallas with 
lance and shield (not to be confounded with the banner painted 
with a similar allegoric device of Pallas by Verrocchio, to be 
carried by Giuliano de'Medici in the famous tournament in 1475 
in which he wore the favour qf La Bella Simonetta, the wife of his 
friend Marco Vespucci). This Pallas by Botticelli is now lost, as 
are several other decorative works in fresco and panel recorded 
to have been done by him for Lorenzo II Magnifico between 1475 
andLorenzo'sdeathini492. ButSandro's more especial patron, 
for whom were executed several of his most important still extant 
works, was another Lorenzo, the son of Pierfrancesco de' Medici, 
grandson of a natural brother of Cosimo Pater Patriae, and 
inheritor of a vast share of the family estates and interests. For 
the villa of this younger Lorenzo at Castello Botticelli painted 
about 1477-1478 the famous picture of " Primavera " or Spring 
now in the Academy at Florence. The design, inspired by 
Poliziano's poem the " Giostra," with reminiscences of Lucretius 
and of Horace (perhaps also, as has lately been suggested, of the 
late Latin " Mythologikon " of Fulgentius) thrown in, is of an 
enchanting fantasy, and breathes the finest and most essential 
spirit of the early Renaissance at Florence. Venus fancifully 
draped, with Cupid hovering above her, stands in a grove of 
orange and myrtle and welcomes the approach of Spring, who 



enters heralded by Mercury, with Flora and Zephyrus gently 
urging her on. In pictures like this and in the later " Birth of 
Venus," the Florentine genius, brooding with passion on the 
little that it really yet knew of the antique, and using frankly 
and freshly the much that it was daily learning of the truths of 
bodily structure and action, creates a style wholly new, in which 
something of the strained and pining mysticism of the middle ages 
is intimately and exquisitely blended with the newly awakened 
spirit of naturalism and the revived pagan delight in bodily form 
and movement and richness of linear rhythm. In connexion with 
this and other classic and allegoric pictures by the master, much 
romantic speculation has been idly spent on the supposition that 
the chief personages were figured in the likeness of Giuliano de' 
Medici and Simonetta Vespucci. Simonetta in point of fact died 
in 1476, Giuliano was murdered in 1478; the web of romance 
which has been spun about their names in modern days is quite 
unsubstantial; and there is no reason whatever why Botticelli 
should have introduced the likenesses of these two supposed 
lovers (for it is not even certain that they were lovers at all) in 
pictures all of which were demonstrably painted after the death 
of one and most of them after the death of both. 

The tragedy of Giuliano 's assassination by the Pazzi con- 
spirators in 1478 was a public event which certainly brought 
employment to Botticelli. After the capture and execution of 
the criminals he was commissioned to paint their effigies hanging 
by the neck on the walls of the Palazzo del Podesta, above the 
entrance of what was formerly the Dogana. In the course of 
Florentine history public buildings had on several previous 
occasions received a similar grim decoration: the last had been 
when Andrea del Castagno painted in 1434 the effigies, hanging 
by the heels, of the chief citizens outlawed and expelled on the 
return of Cosimo de'Medici. Perhaps from the time of this Pazzi 
commission may be dated the evidences which are found in some 
of Botticelli's work of a closer study than heretofore of the virile 
methods and energetic types of Castagno. His frescoes of the 
hanged conspirators held their place for sixteen years only, and 
were destroyed in 1494 in consequence of another revolution in 
the city's politics. Two years later (1480) he painted in rivalry 
with Ghirlandaio a grand figure of St Augustine on the choir 
screen of the Ognissanti; now removed to another part of the 
church. About the same time we find clear evidence of his 
contributing designs to the workshops of the " fine-manner " 
engravers in the shape of a beautiful print of the triumph of 
Bacchus and Ariadne adapted from an antique sarcophagus (the 
only example known is in the British Museum), as well as in 
nineteen small cuts executed for the edition of Dante with the 
commentary of Landino printed at Florence in 1481 by Lorenzo 
della Magna. This series of prints was discontinued after 
canto xix., perhaps because of the material difficulties involved 
by the use of line engravings for the decoration of a printed page, 
perhaps because the artist was at this time called away to Rome 
to undertake the most important commission of his life. Due 
possibly to the same call is the unfinished condition of a much- 
damaged, crowded " Adoration of the Magi " by Botticelli 
preserved in the Uffizi, the design of which seems to have 
influenced Leonardo da Vinci in his own Adoration (which in 
like manner remains unfinished) of nearly the same date, also 
at the Uffizi. 

The task with which Botticelli was charged at Rome was to 
take part with other leading artists of the time (Ghirlandaio, 
Cosimo Rosselli, Perugino and Pinturicchio) in the decoration 
of Sixtus IV.'s chapel at the Vatican, the ceiling of which was 
afterwards destined to be the field of Michelangelo's noblest 
labours. Internal evidence shows that Sandro and his assistants 
bore a chief share in the series of papal portraits which decorate 
the niches between the windows. His share in the decoration 
of the walls with subjects from the Old and the New Testament 
consists of three frescoes, one illustrating the history of Moses 
(several episodes of his early life arranged in a single composition) ; 
another the destruction of Korah, Dathan and Abiram; a third 
the temptation of Christ by Satan (in this case the main theme is 
relegated to the background, while the foreground is filled with an 



30.8 



BOTTICELLI 



animated scene representing the ritual for the purification of a 
leper). On these three frescoes Botticelli laboured for about a 
year and a half at the height of his powers, and they may be taken 
as the central and most important productions of his career, 
though they are far from being the best-known, and from their 
situation on the dimmed and stained walls of the chapel are by no 
means easy of inspection. Skill in the interlinking of complicated 
groups; in the principal actors energy of dramatic action and 
expression not yet overstrained, as it came to be in the artist's 
later work; an incisive vigour of portraiture in the personages 
of the male bystanders; in the faces and figures of the women 
an equally vital grasp of the model, combined with that peculiar 
strain of haunting and melancholy grace which is this artist's 
own; the most expressive care and skill in linear draughtsman- 
ship, the richest and most inventive charm in fanciful costume 
and decorative colouring, all combine to distinguish them. 
During this time of his stay in Rome (1481-1482) Botticelli is 
recorded also to have painted another " Adoration of the Magi," 
his fifth or sixth embodiment of the same subject; this has been 
identified, no doubt rightly, with a picture now in the Hermitage 
gallery at St Petersburg. 

Returning to Florence towards the end of 1482, Botticelli 
worked there for the next ten years, until the death of Lorenzo II 
Magnifico in 1492, with but slight variations in manner and senti- 
ment, in the now formed manner of his middle life. Some of the 
recorded works of this time have perished; but a good many 
have been preserved, and except in the few cases where the dates 
of commission and payment can be established by existing 
records, their sequence can only be conjectured from internal 
evidence. A scheme of work which he was to have undertaken 
with other artists in the Sala dei Gigli in the Palazzo Pubblico 
came to nothing (1483); a set of important mythologic frescoes 
carried out by him in the vestibule of a villa of Lorenzo II 
Magnifico at Spedaletto near Volterra in 1484 has been destroyed 
by the effects first of damp and then of fire. To 1482-1483 
belongs the fine altar-piece of San Barnabo (a Madonna and Child 
with six saints and four angels), now in the academy at Florence. 
Very nearly of the same time must be the most popular and 
most often copied, though very far from the best-preserved, of 
his works, the round picture of the Madonna with singing angels 
in the Uffizi, known, from the text written in the open choir- 
book, as the " Magnificat." Somewhere near this must be placed 
the beautiful and highly finished drawing of " Abundance," 
which has passed through the Rogers, Morris Moore and Malcolm 
collections into the British Museum, as well as a small Madonna 
in the Poldi-Pezzoli collection at Milan, and the fine full-faced 
portrait of a young man, probably some pupil or apprentice in 
the studio, at the National Gallery (No. 626). For the marriage 
of Antonio Pucci to Lucrezia Dini in 1483 Botticelli designed, 
and his pupils or assistants carried out, the interesting and 
dramatic set of four panels illustrating Boccaccio's tale of 
Nastagio degl' Onesti, which were formerly in the collection of 
Mr Barker and are now dispersed. His magnificent and perfectly 
preserved altar-piece of the Madonna between the twosaints John, 
now in the Berlin gallery, was painted for the Bardi chapel in 
the church of San Spirito in i486. In the same year he helped 
to celebrate the marriage of Lorenzo Tornabuoni with Giovanna 
degli Albizzi by an exquisite pair of symbolical frescoes, the 
remains of which, after they had been brought to light from 
under a coat of whitewash on the walls of the Villa Lemmi, were 
removed in 1882 to the Louvre. Within a few years of the same ' 
date (1485-1488) should apparently be placed that second 
masterpiece of fanciful classicism done for Lorenzo di Pier- 
francesco's villa at Castello, the " Birth of Venus," now in the 
Uffizi, the design of which seems to have been chiefly inspired by 
the " Stanze " of Poliziano, perhaps also by the Pervigilium 
Veneris; together with the scarcely less admirable " Mars and 
Venus " of the National Gallery, conceived in the master's 
peculiar vein of virile sanity mingled with exquisite caprice; 
and the most beautiful and characteristic of all his Madonnas, 
the round of the " Virgin with the Pomegranate " (Uffizi). The 
fine picture of " Pallas and the Centaur," rediscovered after an 



occupation of many years in the private apartments of the Pitti 
Palace, would seem to belong to about 1488, and to celebrate 
the security of Florentine affairs and the quelling of the spirit of 
tumult in the last years of the power of the great Lorenzo (1488- 
1490). " The Annunciation " from the convent of Cestello, now 
in the Uffizi, shows a design adapted from Donatello, and ex- 
pressive, in its bending movements and vehement gestures, of 
that agitation of spirit the signs of which become increasingly 
perceptible in Botticelli's work from about this time until the 
end. The great altar-piece at San Marco with its predelle, com- 
missioned by the Arte della Seta in 1488 and finished in 1490, 
with the incomparable ring of dancing and quiring angels 
encircling the crowned Virgin in the upper sky, is the last of 
Botticelli's altar-pieces on a great scale. To nearly the same date 
probably belongs his deeply felt and beautifully preserved small 
painting of the " Last Communion of St Jerome " belonging to 
the Marchese Farinola. 

In 1490 Botticelli was called to take part with other artists in a 
consultation as to the completion of the facade of the Duomo, 
and to bear a share with Alessio Baldovinetti and others in the 
mosaic decorations of the chapel of San Zenobio in the same 
church. The death of Lorenzo II Magnifico in 1492, and the 
accession to chief power of his worthless son Piero, soon plunged 
Florence into political troubles, to which were by and by added 
the profound spiritual agitation consequent upon the preaching 
and influence of Savonarola. Lorenzo di Pierfrancesco de' 
Medici, who with his brother Giovanni was in a position of 
political rivalry against their cousin Piero, continued his patron- 
age of Botticelli; and it was for him, apparently chiefly between 
the years 1492 and 1495, that the master undertook to execute 
a set of drawings in illustration of Dante on a far more elaborate 
and ambitious plan than the little designs for the engraver 
which had been interrupted in 1481. Eighty-five of these draw- 
ings are in the famous manuscript acquired for the Berlin museum 
at the sale of the Hamilton Palace collection in 1882, and eleven 
more in the Vatican library at Rome. The series is one of the 
most interesting that has been preserved by any ancient master; 
revealing an intimate knowledge of and profound sympathy with 
the text; full of Botticelli's characteristic poetic yearning and 
vehemence of expression, his half-childish intensity of vision; 
exquisite in lightness of touch and in swaying, rhythmical grace of 
linear composition and design. These gifts were less suited on the 
whole to the illustration of the Hell than of the later parts of the 
poem, and in the fiercer episodes there is often some puerility and 
inadequacy of invention. Throughout the Hell and Purgatory 
Botticelli maintains a careful adherence to the text, illustrating 
the several progressive incidents of each canto on a single page 
in the old-fashioned way. In the Paradise he gives a freer rein 
to his invention, and his designs become less a literal illustration 
of the text than an imaginative commentary on it. Almost all 
interest is centred on the persons of Dante and Beatrice, who are 
shown us again and again in various phases of ascending progress 
and rapt contemplation, often with little more than a bare sym- 
bolical suggestion of the beatific visions presented to them. 
Most of the drawings remain in pen outline only over a light 
preliminary sketch with the lead stylus; all were probably 
intended to be finished in colour, as a few actually are. To the 
period of these drawings (1492-1497) would seem to belong the 
fine and finely preserved small round of the " Virgin and Child 
with Angels " at the Ambrosiana, Milan, and the famous 
" Calumny of Apelles " at the Uffizi, inspired no doubt by some 
contemporary translation of the text by Lucian, and equally 
remarkable by a certain feverish energy in its sentiment and 
composition, and by its exquisite finish and richness of execution 
and detail. Probably the small " St Augustine " in the Uffizi, 
the injured " Judith with the head of Holofernes " in the Kauf- 
mann collection at Berlin, and the " Virgin and Child with St 
John," belonging to Mr Heseltine in London, are works of the 
same period. 

Simone di Mariano, a brother of Botticelli long resident at 
Naples, returned to Florence in 1493 an< i shared Sandro's 
home in the Via Nuova. He soon became a devoted follower of 



BOTTIGER— BOTTLE 



309 



Savonarola, and has left a manuscript chronicle which is one of 
the best sources for the history of the friar and of his movement. 
Sandro himself seems to have remained aloof from the movement 
almost until the date of the execution of Savonarola and his two 
followers in 1498. At least there is clear evidence of his being 
in the confidence and employ of Lorenzo di Pierfrancesco so 
late as 1496 and 1497, which he could not possibly have been 
■ had he then been an avowed member of the party of the Piagnoni. 
It was probably the enforced departure of Lorenzo from Florence 
in 1497 that brought to a premature end the master's great 
undertaking on the illustration of Dante. After Lorenzo's 
return, following on the overthrow and death of Savonarola 
in 1498, we find no trace of any further relations between him 
and Botticelli, who by that time would seem to have become 
a declared devotee of the friar's memory and an adherent, 
like his brother, of the defeated side. During these years of 
swift political and spiritual revolution in Florence, documents 
give some glimpses of him: in 1497 as painting in the monastery 
of Monticelli a fresco of St Francis which has perished; in the 
winter of the same year as bound over to keep the peace with, a 
neighbour living next to the small suburban villa which Sandro 
held jointly with his brother Simone in the parish of San Sepolcro; 
in 1499 as paying belated matriculation fees to the gild of doctors 
and druggists (of which the painters were a branch); and again 
in 1499 as carrying out some decorative paintings for a member 
of the Vespucci family. It has been suggested, probably with 
reason, that portions of these decorations are to be recognized in 
two panels of dramatic scenes from Roman history, one illustrat- 
ing the story of Virginia, which has passed with the collection 
of Senatore Morelli into the gallery at Bergamo, the other a 
history of Lucretia formerly belonging to Lord Ashburnham, 
which passed into Mrs Gardner's collection at Boston. These 
and the few works still remaining to be mentioned are all strongly 
marked by the strained vehemence of design and feeling char- 
acteristic of the master's later years, when he dramatizes his 
own high-strung emotions in figures flung forward and swaying 
out of all balance in the vehemence of action, with looks cast 
agonizingly earthward or heavenward, and gestures of wild 
yearning or appeal. These characters prevail still more in a small 
Pieta at the Poldi-Pezzoli gallery, probably a contemporary 
copy of one which the master is recorded to have painted for the 
Panciatichi chapel in the church of Sta Maria Maggiore; they 
are present to a degree even of caricature in the larger and 
coarser painting of the same subject which bears the master's 
name in the Munich gallery, but is probably only a work of his 
school. The mystic vein of religious and political speculation 
into which Botticelli had by this time fallen has its finest illustra- 
tion in the beautiful symbolic " Nativity " which passed in 
succession from the Aldobrandini, the Ottley, and the Fuller 
Maitland collections into the National Gallery in 1882, with 
the apocalyptic inscription in Greek which the master has added 
to make his meaning clear (No. 1034). In a kindred vein is 
a much-injured symbolic " Magdalene at the foot of the Cross " 
in private possession at Lyons. Among extant pictures those 
which from internal evidence we must put latest in the master's 
career are three panels illustrating the story of St Zenobius, 
of which one is at Dresden and the other two in the collection 
of Dr Mond in London. The documentary notices of him after 
1500 are few. In 1502 he is mentioned in the correspondence 
of Isabella d'Este, marchioness of Gonzaga, and in a poem by 
Ugolino Verino. In 1 503-1 504 he served on the committee of 
artists appointed to decide where the colossal David of Michel- 
angelo should be placed. In these and the following years we 
find him paying fees to the company of St Luke, and the next 
thing recorded of him is his death, followed by his burial in the 
Ortaccio or garden burial-ground of the Ognissanti, in May 

1510- 

The strong vein of poetical fantasy and mystical imagination 
in Botticelli, to which many of his paintings testify, and the 
capacity for religious conviction and emotional conversion 
which made of him an ardent, if belated, disciple of Savonarola, 
coexisted in him, according to all records, with a strong vein 



of the laughing humour and love of rough practical and verbal 
jesting which belonged to the Florentine character in his age. 
His studio in the Via Nuova is said to have been the resort, 
not only of pupils and assistants, of whom a number seem to 
have been at all times working for him, but of a company of 
more or less idle gossips with brains full of rumour and tongues 
always wagging. Vasari's account of the straits into which 
he was led by his absorption in the study of Dante and his ad- 
hesion to the sect of Savonarola are evidently much exaggerated, 
since there is proof that he lived and died, not rich indeed, but 
possessed of property enough to keep him from any real pinch 
of distress. The story of his work and life, after having been 
the subject in recent years of much half-informed study and 
speculation, has at length been fully elucidated in the work 
of Mr H. P. Home cited below, — a masterpiece of documentary 
research and critical exposition. 

Bibliography. — Vasari, Le Opere (ed. Milanesi), vol. iii. ; Crowe- 
Cavalcaselle, Hist, of Painting in Italy, vol. ii. ; Fr. Lippmann, 
Botticellis Zeichnungen zu Dantes Gbttlicher Kombdie; Dr Karl 
Woermann, " Sandro Botticelli " (in Dohme, Kunst u. Kiinstler) ; Dr 
Hermann Ulmann, Sandro Botticelli; Dr E. Steinmann, Sandro 
Botticelli (in Knackfuss series, valuable for the author's elucidation 
of the Sixtine frescoes) ; I. B. Supino, Sandro Botticelli; Bernhard 
Berenson, The Drawings of Florentine Painters; The Florentine 
Painters of the Renaissance (2nd ed.) ; The Study and Criticism of 
Italian Art; papers in the Burlington Magazine, the Gazette des 
Beaux-Arts (to this critic is due the first systematic attempt to dis- 
criminate between the original work of Botticelli and that of his 
various pupils); J. Mesnil, Miscellanea d'Arte and papers in the 
Rivista d'Arte, &c. ; W. Warburg, Sandro Botticelli's " Geburt der 
Venus " and " Friihling " ; Julia Cartwright (Mrs Ady), The Life 
and Art of Sandro Botticelli (1904); F. Wickhoff in the Jahrbuch 
der k. Preussischen Kunstsammlungen (1906); Herbert P. Home, 
Alessandro Filipepi commonly called Sandro Botticelli (1908); this 
last authority practically supersedes all others. (S. C.) 

BOTTIGER, KARL AUGUST (1760-1835), German archaeo- 
logist, was born at Reichenbach on the 8th of June 1760. He 
was educated at the school of Pforta, and the university of 
Leipzig. After holding minor educational posts, he obtained 
in 1791, through the influence of Herder, the appointment of 
rector of the gymnasium at Weimar, where he entered into a circle 
of literary men, including Wieland, Schiller, and Goethe. He 
published in 1803 a learned work, Sabina, oder Morgenszenen 
im Putzzimmer einer reichen Romerin, a description of a wealthy 
Roman lady's toilette, and a work on ancient art, Griechische 
Vasengemdlde. At the same time he assisted in editing the 
Journal des Luxus und der Moden, the Deutsche Merkur, and the 
London and Paris. In 1804 he was called to Dresden as super- 
intendent of the studies of the court pages, and received the rank 
of privy councillor. In 18 14 he was made director of studies 
at the court academy, and inspector of the Museum of Antiquities. 
He died at Dresden on the 17th of November 1835. His chief 
works are: — Ideen zur Archdologie der Malerei, i. (1811) (no more 
published); Kunstmythologie (1811); Vorlesungen und Aufsalze 
zur Alterthumskunde (1817); Amalthed (1821-1825); Ideen zur 
Kunstmythologie (1826-1836). The Opuscula et Carmina Latina 
were published separately in 1837; "with a collection of his 
smaller pieces, Kleine Schriften (1837-1838), including a complete 
list of his works (56 pages). His biography was written by his 
son Karl Wilhelm Bottiger (1790-1862), for some time professor 
of history at Erlangen, and author of several valuable histories 
(History of Germany, History of Saxony, History of Bavaria, 
Universal History of Biographies). 

BOTTLE (Fr. bouteille, from a diminutive of the Lat. butta, 
a flask; cf. Eng. " butt "), a vessel for containing liquids, gener- 
ally as opposed to one for drinking from (though this probably is 
not excluded), and with a narrow neck to facilitate closing and 
pouring. The first bottles were probably made of the skins of 
animals. In the Iliad (iii. 247) the attendants are represented 
as bearing wine for use in a bottle made of goat's skin. The 
ancient Egyptians used skins for this purpose, and from the 
language employed by Herodotus (ii. 1 2 1 ) , it appears that a bottle 
was formed by sewing up the skin and leaving the projection 
of the leg and foot to serve as a vent, which was hence termed 
irode&v. The aperture was closed with a plug or a string Skin 



3io 



BOTTLE-BRUSH PLANTS— BOTTOMRY 




Roman Skin Bottles, from specimens 
at Pompeii and Herculaneum. 



bottles of various forms occur on Egyptian monuments. The 
Greeks and Romans also were accustomed to use bottles made of 
skins; and in the southern parts Europe they are still used 
for the transport of wine. The first of explicit reference to bottles 
of skin in Scripture occurs in Joshua (ix. 4), where it is said that 

the Gibeonites took " old 
sacks upon their asses, 
and wine-bottles old and 
rent and bound up." The 
objection to putting " new 
wine into old bottles " 
(Matt. ix. 17) is that the 
skin, already stretched 
and weakened by use, is 
liable to burst under the 
pressure of the gas from 
new wine. Skins are still 
most extensively used 
throughout western Asia 
for the conveyance and 
storage of water. It is 
an error to represent the bottles of the ancient Hebrews as 
being made exclusively of skins. In Jer. xix. 1 the prophet 
speaks of " a potter's earthen vessel." The Egyptians (see 
Egypt: Art and Archaeology) possessed vases and bottles 
of hard stone, alabaster, glass, ivory, bone, porcelain, bronze, 
silver and gold, and also of glazed pottery or common 
earthenware. In modern times bottles are usually made of glass 
(q.v.), or occasionally of earthenware. The glass bottle industry 
has attained enormous dimensions, whether for wine, beer, 
&c, or mineral waters; and labour-saving machinery for filling 
the bottles has been introduced, as well as for corking or stopper- 
ing, for labelling and for washing them. 

BOTTLE-BRUSH PLANTS, a genus of Australian plants, 
known botanically as Callistemon, and belongiug to the myrtle 
family (Myrtaceae) . They take their name from the resemblance 
of the head of flowers to a bottle-brush. They are well known in 
cultivation as greenhouse shrubs; the flower owes its beauty to 
the numerous long thread-like stamens which far exceed the 
small petals. Callistemon salignus is a valuable hard wood. 

BOTTLENOSE WHALE (Hyperoodon rostratus), a member of 
the sperm-whale family, which is an inhabitant of the North 
Atlantic, passing the summer in the Spitzbergen seas and going 
farther south in winter. It resembles the sperm-whale in 
possessing a large store of oil in the upper part of the head, 
which yields spermaceti when refined; on this account, and also 
for the sake of the blubber, which supplies an oil almost in- 
distinguishable from sperm-oil, this whale became the object of a 
regular chase in the latter half of the 19th century. In length 
these whales vary between 20 ft. and 30 ft. ; and in colour from 
black on the upper surface in the young to light brown in old 
animals, the under-parts being greyish white. There is no notch 
between the flukes, as in other whales, but the hinder part of the 
tail is rounded. Bottlenoses feed on cuttle-fishes and squills, 
and are practically toothless; the only teeth which exist in the 
adult being a small pair at the front of the lower jaw, concealed 
beneath the gum during life. Examples have frequently been 
recorded on the British coasts. In November 1904 a female, 
24 ft. long, and a calf 1 5 ft. long were driven ashore at Whitstable. 
(See Cetacea.) 

BOTTOMRY, a maritime contract by which a ship (or bottom) 
is hypothecated in security for money borrowed for expenses 
incurred in the course of her voyage, under the condition that if 
she arrive at her destination the ship shall be liable for repayment 
of the loan, together with such premium thereon as may have 
been agreed for; but that if the ship be lost, the lender shall have 
no claim against the borrower either for the sum advanced or for 
the premium. The freight may be pledged as well as the ship, 
and, if necessary, the cargo also. In some cases the personal 
obligation of the shipmaster is also included. When money is 
borrowed on the security of the cargo alone, it is said to be taken 
up at respondentia; but it is now only in rare and exceptional 



cases that it could be competent to the shipmaster to pledge the 
cargo, except under a general bottomry obligation, along with 
the ship and freight. In consideration of the risks assumed by 
the lender, the bottomry premium (sometimes termed maritime 
interest) is usually high, varying of course with the nature of the 
risk and the difficulty of procuring funds. 

A bottomry contract may be written out in any form which 
sufficiently shows the conditions agreed on between the parties; 
but it is usually drawn up in the form of a bond which confers a 
maritime lien (q.v.). The document must show, either by express 
terms or from its general tenor, that the risk of loss is assumed 
by the lender, — this being the consideration for which the high 
premium is conceded. The lender may transfer the bond by 
indorsation, in the same manner as a bill of exchange or bill of 
lading, and the right to recover its value becomes vested in the 
indorsees. (See Bond.) 

According to the law of England, a bottomry contract remains 
in force so long as the ship exists in the form of a ship, whatever 
amount of damage she may have sustained. Consequently, the 
" constructive total loss " which is recognized in marine insurance, 
when the ship is damaged to such an extent that she is not worth 
repairing, is not recognized in reference to bottomry, and will not 
absolve the borrower from his obligation. But if the ship go to 
pieces, the borrower is freed from all liability under the bottomry 
contract; and the lender is not entitled to receive any share of 
the proceeds of such of the ship's stores or materials as may have 
been saved from the wreck. Money advanced on bottomry is not 
liable in England for general average losses. If the ship should 
deviate from the voyage for which the funds were advanced, her 
subsequent loss will not discharge the obligation of the borrower 
under the bottomry contract. If she should not proceed at all 
on her intended voyage, the lender is not entitled to recover 
the bottomry premium in addition to his advance, but only 
the ordinary rate of interest for the temporary loan. As the 
bottomry premium is presumed, in every case, to cover the 
risks incurred by the lender, he is not entitled to charge the 
borrower with the premium which he may pay for insurance 
of the sum advanced, in addition to that stipulated in the 
bond. 

The contract of bottomry seems to have arisen from the 
custom of permitting the master of a ship, when in a foreign 
country, to pledge the ship in order to raise money for repairs, 
or other extraordinary expenditures rendered necessary in the 
course of the voyage. Circumstances often arise, in which, 
without the exercise of this power on the part of the master, it 
would be impossible to provide means for accomplishing the 
voyage; and it is better that the master should have authority 
to burden the ship, and, if necessary, the freight and cargo also, 
in security for the money which has become requisite, than that 
the adventure should be defeated by inability to proceed. But 
the right of the master to pledge the ship or goods must always 
be created by necessity; if exercised without necessity the 
contract will be void. Accordingly, the master of a British ship 
has no power to grant a bottomry bond at a British port, or at 
any foreign port where he might raise funds on the personal 
credit of the shipowners. Neither has he any power to pledge 
the ship or goods for private debts of his own, but only for such 
supplies as are indispensable for the purposes of the voyage. 
And in all cases he ought, if possible, to communicate with the 
owners of the ship, and with the proprietor of the cargo before 
pledging their property (" The Bonaparte," 1853, 8 Moo. P.C. 
473; "The Staffordshire," 1872, L.R. 4 P.C. 194). Increased 
facility of communication, by telegraph and otherwise, has given 
additional stringency to this rule, and caused a decline in the 
practice of giving bottomry bonds. 

The bottomry lender must use reasonable diligence to ascertain 
that a real necessity exists for the loan; but he is not bound to 
see to the application of the money advanced. If the lender has 
originally advanced the funds on the personal credit of the owner 
he is not entitled to require a bottomry obligation. A bond 
procured from the shipmaster by improper compulsion would be 
void. 



BOTZARIS— BOUCHER, F. 



3 



ii 



The power of the master to pledge the cargo depends upon 
there being some reasonable prospect of benefit to it by his so 
doing. He has no such power except in virtue of circumstances 
which may oblige him to assume the character of agent for the 
cargo, in the absence of any other party authorized to act on its 
behalf. Under ordinary circumstances he is not at liberty to 
pledge the cargo for repairs to the ship. If indeed the goods be 
of a perishable nature, and if it be impossible to get the ship 
repaired in sufficient time to obviate serious loss on them by 
delay, without including them under the bottomry contract, he 
has power to do so, because it may fairly be assumed, in the case 
supposed, that the cargo will be benefited by this procedure. 
The general principle is, that the master must act for the cargo, 
with a reasonable view to the interests of its proprietors, under 
the whole circumstances of the case. When he does this his 
proceedings will be sustained; but should he manifestly pre- 
judice the interests of the cargo by including it under bottomry 
for the mere purpose of relieving the ship, or of earning the 
freight, the owners of the cargo will not be bound by the bottomry 
contract. Any bottomry or respondentia bond may be good in 
part or bad in part, according as the master may have acted 
within or beyond the scope of his legitimate authority in granting 
it. If two or more bottomry bonds have been granted at different 
stages of the voyage, and the value of the property be insufficient 
to discharge them all, the last-dated bond has the priority of 
payment, as having furnished the means of preserving the ship, 
and thereby preventing the total loss of the security for the 
previous bonds. 

When the sum due under a bottomry bond over ship, freight 
and cargo is not paid at the stipulated time, proceedings may be 
taken by the bondholder for recovery of the freight and for the 
sale of the ship; and should the proceeds of these be insufficient 
to discharge the claim, a judicial sale of the cargo may be re- 
sorted to. As a general rule the value of the ship and freight 
must be exhausted before recourse can be taken against the 
cargo. A bottomry bond gives no remedy to the lenders against 
the. owners of the ship or cargo personally. The whole liability 
under it may be met by the surrender of the property pledged, 
whether the value so surrendered covers the amount of the bond 
or not. But the owners of the ship, though not liable to the 
bondholder for more than the value of the ship and freight, may 
be further liable to the proprietors of the cargo for any sum in 
excess of the cargo's proper share of the expenses, taken by the 
bondholder out of the proceeds of the cargo to satisfy the bond 
after the ship and freight have been exhausted. 

The bottomry premium must be ultimately paid by the parties 
for whose benefit the advances were obtained, as ascertained on 
the final adjustment of the average expenditures at the port of 
destination. 

The practice of pledging property subject to maritime risks was 
common among the ancient Greeks, being known as indoins or bavtiov 
(see Demosthenes' speeches Pro Phormione, Contra Lacritum and 
In Dionysodorum) ; it passed into Roman law as foenus nauticum 
or usura maritima. 

See also LlteN: Maritime; and generally Abbott on Shipping 
(14th ed., 1901). 

BOTZARIS [Bozzaris], MARCO (c. 1788-1823), leader in the 
War of Greek Independence, born at Suli in Albania, was the 
second son of Kitzo Botzaris, murdered at Arta in 1809 by 
order of Ali of Iannina. In 1803, after the capture of Suli by 
AH Pasha, Marco, with the remnant of the Suliots, crossed over 
to the Ionian Islands, where he ultimately took service in an 
Albanian regiment in French pay. In 1814 he joined the Greek 
patriotic society known as the Hetairia Philike, and in 1820, 
with other Suliots, made common cause with Ali of Iannina 
against the Ottomans. On the outbreak of the Greek revolt, he 
distinguished himself by his courage, tenacity and skill as a 
partisan leader in the fighting in western Hellas, and was con- 
spicuous in the defence of Missolonghi during the first siege 
(1822-1823). On the night of the 21st of August 1823 he led the 
celebrated attack at Karpenisi of 3 50 Suliots on 4000 Albanians 
who formed the vanguard of the army with which Mustai Pasha 
was advancing to reinforce the besiegers. The rout of the Turks 



was complete; but Botzaris himself fell. His memory is still 
celebrated in popular ballads in Greece. Marco Botzaris's 
brother Kosta (Constantine), who fought at Karpenisi and 
completed the victory, lived to become a general and senator in 
the Greek kingdom. He died at Athens on the 13th of November 
1853. Marco's son, Dimitri Botzaris, born in 1813, was three 
times minister of war under the kings Otho and George. He 
died at Athens on the 17th of August 1870. 

BOTZEN, or Bozen (Ital. Bolzano), a town in the Austrian 
province of Tirol, situated at the confluence of the Talfer with 
the Eisak, and a short way above the junction of the latter with 
the Adige or Etsch. It is built at a height of 869 ft., and is a 
station on the Brenner railway, being 58 m. S. of that pass 
and 35 m. N. of Trent. In 1900 it had a population of 13,632, 
Romanist and mainly German-speaking, though the Italian ele- 
ment is said to be increasing. Botzen is a Teutonic town amid 
Italian surroundings. It is well built, and boasts of a fine old 
Gothic parish church, dating from the 14th and 15th centuries, 
opposite which a statue was erected in 1889 to the memory of 
the famous Minnesanger, Walther von der Vogelweide, who, 
according to some accounts, was born (c. n 70) at a farm above 
Waidbruck, to the north of Botzen. Botzen is the busiest 
commercial town in the German-speaking portion of Tirol, 
being admirably situated at the junction of the Brenner route 
from Germany to Italy with that from Switzerland down the 
Upper Adige valley or the Vintschgau. Hence the transit trade has 
always been very considerable (it has four large fairs annually), 
while the local wine is mentioned as early as the 7th century. 
Lately its prosperity has been increased by the rise into favour 
as a winter resort of the village of Gries, on the other bank of the 
Talfer, and now practically a suburb of Botzen. 

The pons Drusi (probably over the Adige, just below Botzen) 
is mentioned in the 4th century by the Pcutinger Table. In the 
7th to 8th centuries Botzen was held by a dynasty of Bavarian 
counts. But in 1027, with the rest of the diocese of Trent, it 
was given by the emperor Conrad II. to the bishop of Trent. 
From 1028 onwards it was ruled by local counts, the vassals of the 
bishops, but after Tirol fell into the hands of the Habsburgers 
(1363) their power grew at the expense of that of the bishops. 
In 1381 Leopold granted to the citizens the privilege of having a 
town council, while in 1462 the bishops resigned all rights of 
jurisdiction over the town to the Habsburgers, so that its later 
history is merged in that of Tirol. (W. A. B. C.) 

BOUCHARDON, EDME (1698-1762), French sculptor, was 
esteemed in his day the greatest sculptor of his time. Born at 
Chaumont, he became the pupil of Guillaume Coustou and gained 
the prix de Rome in 1722. Resisting the tendency of the day 
he was classic in his taste, pure and chaste, always correct, 
charming and distinguished, a great stickler for all the finish 
that sand-paper could give. During the ten years he remained 
at Rome, Bouchardon made a striking bust of Pope Benedict 
XIII. (1730). In 1746 he produced his first acclaimed master- 
piece, " Cupid fashioning a Bow out of the Club of Hercules," 
perfect in it's grace, but cold in the purity of its classic design. 
His two other leading chefs-d'oeuvre are the fountain in the rue 
de Grenelle, Paris, the first portions of which had been finished 
and exhibited in 1740, and the equestrian statue of Louis XV., 
a commission from the city of Paris. This superb work, which, 
when the model was produced, was declared the finest work of 
its' kind ever produced in France, Bouchardon did not live to 
finish, but left its completion to Pigalie. It was destroyed during 
the Revolution. 

Among the chief books on the sculptor and his art are Vie d'Edme 
Bouchardon, by le comte de Caylus (Paris, 1762); Notice sur 
Edme Bouchardon, sculpteur, by E. Jolibois (Versailles, 1837); 
Notice historique sur Edme Bouchardon, by J. Carnandet (Paris, 
1855); and French Architects and Sculptors of the 18th Century, 
by Lady Dilke (London, 1900). 

BOUCHER, FRANCOIS (1703-1770), French painter, was born 
in Paris, and at first was employed by Jean Francois Cars (1670- 
1739), the engraver, father of the engraver Laurent Cars (1699- 
1771), to make designs and illustrations for books. In 1727, 



BOUCHER, J.— BOUCHES-DU-RHONE 



312 

however, he went to Italy, and at Rome became well known as 
a painter. He returned to Paris in 1731 and soon became a 
favourite in society. His picture " Rinaldo and Armida " (1734) 
is now in the Louvre. He was made inspector of the Gobelins 
factory in 1755 and court painter in 1765, and was employed by 
Madame de Pompadour both to paint her portrait and to execute 
various decorative works. He died in 1770. His Watteau-like 
style and graceful voluptuousness gave him the title of the 
Anacreon of painting, but his repute declined until recent years. 
The Wallace collection, at Hertford House, has some of his 
finest pictures, outside the Louvre. His etchings were also 
numerous and masterly. 

See Antoine Bret's notice in the Necrologe des hommes celebres for 
1 77 1, and the monographs by the brothers de Goncourt and Paul 
Mantz. 

BOUCHER, JONATHAN (1 738-1804), English divine and 
philologist, was born in the hamlet of Blencogo, near Wigton, 
Cumberland, on the 12th of March 1738. He was educated at 
the Wigton grammar school, and about 1754 went to Virginia, 
where he became a private tutor in the families of Virginia 
planters. Among his charges was John Parke Custis, the step-son 
of George Washington, with whom he began a long and intimate 
friendship. Returning to England, he was ordained by the bishop 
of London in March 1762, and at once sailed again for America, 
where he remained until 1775 as rector of various Virginia and 
Maryland parishes, including Hanover, King George's county, 
Virginia, and St Anne's at Annapolis, Maryland. He was widely 
known as an eloquent preacher, and his scholarly attainments 
won for him the friendship and esteem of some of the ablest 
scholars in the colonies. During his residence in Maryland he 
vigorously opposed the " vestry act," by which the powers and 
emoluments of the Maryland pastors were greatly diminished. 
When the struggle between the colonies and the mother country 
began, although he felt much sympathy for the former, his 
opposition to any form of obstruction to the Stamp Act and other 
measures, and his denunciation of a resort to force created a 
breach between him and his parish, and in a fiery farewell 
discourse preached after the opening of hostilities he declared 
that no power on earth should prevent him from praying and 
shouting " God save the King." In the succeeding autumn he 
returned to England, where his loyalism was rewarded by a 
government pension. In 1784 he became vicar of Epsom in 
Surrey, where he continued until his death on the 27th of April 
1804, becoming known as one of the most eloquent preachers of 
his day. He was an accomplished writer and scholar, contributed 
largely to William Hutchinson's History of the County of Cumber- 
land (2 vols., 1704 seq.), and published A View of the Causes 
and Consequences of the American Revolution (1797), dedicated 
to George Washington, and consisting of thirteen discourses 
delivered in America between 1763 and 1775. His philological 
studies, to which the last fourteen years of his life were devoted, 
resulted in the compilation of " A Glossary of Provincial and 
Archaic Words," intended as a supplement to Dr Johnson's 
Dictionary, but never published except in part, which finally in 
1831 passed into the hands of the English compilers of Webster's' 
Dictionary, by whom it was utilized. 

His son, Barton Boucher (1794-1865), rector of Fonthill 
Bishops, Wiltshire, in 1856, was well known as the author of 
religious tracts, hymns and novels. 

BOUCHER DE CREVEOEUR DE PERTHES, JACQUES 
(1788-1868), French geologist and antiquary, was born on the 
10th of September 1788 at Rethel, Ardennes, France. He was 
the eldest son of Jules Armand Guillaume Boucher de Crevecceur, 
botanist and customs officer, and of Etienne- Jeanne-Marie de 
Perthes (whose surname he was authorized by royal decree in 
1818 to assume in addition to his father's). In 1802 he entered 
government employ as an officer of customs. His duties kept him 
for six years in Italy, whence returning (in 181 1) he found rapid 
promotion at home, and finally was appointed (March 1825) 
to succeed his father as director of the douane at Abbeville, 
where he remained for the rest of his life, being superannuated 
in January 1853, and dying on the 5th of August 1868. His 



leisure was chiefly devoted to the study of what was afterwards 
called the Stone Age, " antediluvian man," as he expressed it. 
About the year 1830 he had found, in the gravels of the Somme 
valley, flints which in his opinion bore evidence of human 
handiwork; but not until many years afterwards did he make 
public the important discovery of a worked flint implement 
with remains of elephant, rhinoceros, &c, in the gravels of 
Menchecourt. This was in 1846. A few years later he com- 
menced the issue of his monumental work, Anliquites celtiques 
et an fdiluviennes (1847, 1857, 1864; 3 vols.), a work in which 
he was the first to establish the existence of man in the Pleistocene 
or early Quaternary period. His views met with little approval, 
partly because he had previously propounded theories regarding 
the antiquity of man without facts to support them, partly 
because the figures in his book were badly executed and they 
included drawings of flints which showed no clear sign of work- 
manship. In 1855 Dr Jean Paul Rigollot (1810-1873), of Amiens, 
strongly advocated the authenticity of the flint implements; but 
it was not until 1858 that Hugh Falconer (q.v.) saw the collection 
at Abbeville and induced Prestwich (q.v.) in the following year 
to visit the locality. Prestwich then definitely agreed that the 
flint implements were the work of man, and that they occurred 
in undisturbed ground in association with remains of extinct 
mammalia. In 1863 his discovery of a human jaw, together 
with worked flints, in a gravel-pit at Moulin- Quignon near 
Abbeville seemed to "vindicate Boucher de Perthes entirely; 
but doubt was thrown on the antiquity of the human remains 
(owing to the possibility of interment), though not on the good 
faith of the discoverer, who was the same year made an officer 
of the Legion of Honour together with Quatrefages his 
champion. Boucher de Perthes displayed activity in many 
other directions. For more than thirty years he filled the 
presidential chair of the Societe d'Emulation at Abbeville, 
to the publications of which he contributed articles on a wide 
range of subjects. He was the author of several tragedies, 
two books of fiction, several works of travel, and a number of 
books on economic and philanthropic questions. To his scientific 
books may be added De I'homme antidiluvien et de ses ceuvres 
(Paris, i860). 

See Alcius Ledien, Boucher de Perthes; sa vie, ses ceuvres, sa 
correspondance (Abbeville, 1885); Lady Prestwich, "Recollections 
of M. Boucher de Perthes " (with portrait) in Essays Descriptive and 
Biographical (1901). 

BOUCHES-DU-RHONE, a maritime department of south- 
eastern France situated at the mouth of the Rhone. Area, 2026 
sq. m. Pop. (1906) 765,918. Formed in 1790 from western 
Provence, it is bounded N. by Vaucluse, from which it is separated 
by the Durance, E. by Var, W. by Gard, and S. by the Medi- 
terranean, along which its seaboard stretches for about 120 m. 
The western portion consists of the Camargue (q.v.), a low and 
marshy plain enclosed between the Rhone and the Petit-Rhone, 
and comprising the Rhone delta. A large portion of its surface is 
covered by lagoons and pools (itangs), the largest of which is the 
Etang de Vaccares; to the east of the Camargue is situated the 
remarkable stretch of country called the Crau, which is strewn 
with pebbles like the sea-beach; and farther east and north 
there are various ranges of mountains of moderate elevation be- 
longing to the Alpine system. The Etang de Berre, a lagoon 
covering an area of nearly 60 sq. m., is situated near the sea 
to the south-east of the Crau. A few small tributaries of the 
Rhone and the Durance, a number of streams, such as the Arc 
and the Touloubre, which flow into the Etang de Berre, and the 
Huveaune, which finds its way directly to the sea, are the only 
rivers that properly belong to the department. 

Bouches-du-Rh6ne enjoys the beautiful climate of the Medi- 
terranean coast, the chief drawback being the mistral, the icy 
north-west wind blowing from the central plateau of France. 
The proportion of arable land is small, though the quantity has 
been considerably increased by artificial irrigation and by the 
draining of marshland. Cereals, of which wheat and oats are 
the commonest, are grown in the Camargue and the plain of 
Aries, but they are of less importance than the olive-tree, which 



BOUCHOR— BOUCICAUT 



3*3 



is grown largely in the east of the department and supplies the 
oil-works of Marseilles. The vine is also cultivated, the method 
of submersion being used as a safeguard against phylloxera. 
In the cantons of the north-west large quantities of early vege- 
tables are produced. Of live-stock, sheep alone are raised to 
any extent. Almonds, figs, capers, mulberry trees and silk- 
worms are sources of considerable profit. Iron is worked, but 
the most important mines are those of lignite, in which between 
2000 and 3000 workmen are employed ; the department also pro- 
duces bauxite, building-stone, lime, cement, gypsum, clay, sand 
and gravel and marble. The salt marshes employ many workmen, 
and the amount of sea-salt obtained exceeds in quantity the pro- 
duce of any other department in France. Marseilles, the capital, 
is by far the most important industrial town. In its oil-works, 
soap-works, metallurgical works, shipbuilding works, distilleries, 
flour-mills, chemical works, tanneries, engineering and machinery 
works, brick and tile works, manufactories of preserved foods 
and biscuits, and other industrial establishments, is concentrated 
most of the manufacturing activity of the department. To these 
must be added the potteries of the industrial town of Aubagne, 
the silk-works in the north-west cantons, and various paper and 
cardboard manufactories, while several of the industries of 
Marseilles, such as the distilling of oil, metal-founding, ship- 
building and soap-making, are common to the whole of Bouches- 
du-Rhone. Fishing is also an important industry. Cereals, flour, 
silk, woollen and cotton goods, wine,, brandy, oils, soap, sugar 
and coffee are chief exports; cereals, oil-seeds, wine and brandy, 
raw sugar, cattle, timber, silk, wool, cotton, coal, &c, are im- 
ported. The foreign commerce of the department, which is 
principally carried on in the Mediterranean basin, is for the most 
part concentrated in the capital; the minor ports are Martigues, 
Cassis and La Ciotat. Internal trade is facilitated by the canal 
from Aries to Port-de-Bouc and two smaller canals, in all about 
35 m. in length. The Rhone and the Petit-Rhone are both 
navigable within the department. 

Bouches-du-Rh6ne is divided into the three arrondissements 
of Marseilles, Aix and Aries (33 cantons, in communes). It 
belongs to the archiepiscopal province of Aix, to the region of 
the XV. army corps, the headquarters of which are at Marseilles, 
and to the acadSmie (educational division) of Aix. Its court of 
appeal is at Aix. Marseilles, Aix, Aries, La Ciotat, Martigues, 
Salon, Les Saintes-Maries, St Remy, Les Baux and Tarascon, 
the principal places, are separately noticed. Objects of interest 
elsewhere may be mentioned. Near Saint-Chamas there is a 
remarkable Roman bridge over the Touloubre, which probably 
dates from the 1st century B.C. and is thus the oldest in 
France. It is supported on one semicircular span and has 
triumphal arches at either end. At Vernegues there are re- 
mains of a Roman temple known as the " Maison-Basse." The 
famous abbey of Montmajour, of which the oldest parts are 
the Romanesque church and cloister, is 2§ m. from Aries. At 
Orgon there are the ruins of a chateau of the 1 5th century, and 
near La Roque d'Antheron the church and other buildings of 
the Cistercian abbey of Silvacane, founded in the 12 th century. 

BOUCHOR, MAURICE (1855- ), French poet, was born on 
the 15th of December 1855 in Paris. He published in succession 
Chansons joyeuses (1874), Poemes de I'amour et de la mer (1875), 
Le Faust modeme (1878) in prose and verse, and Les Conies 
parisiens (1880) in verse. His Aurore (1883) showed a tendency 
to religious mysticism, which reached its fullest expression in 
Les Symboles (1888; new series, 1895), the most interesting of his 
works. Bouchor (whose brother, Joseph Felix Bouchor, b. 1853, 
became well known as an artist) was a sculptor as well as a poet, 
and he designed and worked the figures used in his charming 
pieces as marionettes, the words being recited or chanted by 
himself or his friends behind the scenes. These miniature dramas 
on religious subjects, Tobie (1889), Noel (1890) and Sainte 
Cecile (1892), were produced in Paris at the Theatre des Marion- 
nettes. A one-act verse drama by Bouchor, Conte de Noel, was 
played at the Theatre Francais in 1895, but Dieu le veut 
(1888) was not produced. In conjunction with the musician 
Julien Tiersot (b. 1857), he made efforts for the preservation of 



the French folk-songs, and published Chants populaires pour les 
icoles (1897). 

BOUCHOTTE, JEAN BAPTISTE NOEL (1754-1840), French 
minister, was born at Metz on the 25th of December 1754. At 
the outbreak of the Revolution he was a captain of cavalry, and 
his zeal led to his being made colonel and given the command at 
Cambrai. When Dumouriez delivered up to the Austrians the 
minister of war, the marquis de Beurnonville, in April 1793, 
Bouchotte, who had bravely defended Cambrai, was called by 
the Convention to be minister of war, where he remained until the 
31st of March 1794. The predominant r&le of the Committee of 
Public Safety during that period did not leave much scope for the 
new minister, yet he rendered some services in the organization 
of the republican armies, and chose his officers with insight, 
among them Kleber, Massena, Moreau and Bonaparte. During 
the Thermidorian reaction, in spite of his incontestable honesty, 
he was accused by the anti-revolutionists. He was tried by the 
tribunal of the Eure-et-Loire and acquitted. Then he withdrew 
from politics, and lived in retirement until his death on the 8th 
of June 1840. 

BOUCICAULT, DION (1822-1890), Irish actor and playwright, 
was born in Dublin on the 26th of December 1822, the son of a 
French refugee and an Irish mother. Before he was twenty he was 
fortunate enough to make an immediate success as a dramatist 
with London Assurance, produced at Covent Garden on the 
4th of March 1841, with a cast that included Charles Matthews, 
William Farren, Mrs Nesbitt and Madame Vestris. He rapidly 
followed this with a number of other plays, among the most 
successful of the early ones being Old Heads and Young Hearts, 
Louis XL, and The Corsican Brothers. In June 1852 he made his 
first appearance as an actor in a melodrama of his own entitled 
The Vampire at the Princess's theatre. From 1853 to 1869 he 
was in the United States, where he was always a popular favourite. 
On his return to England he produced at the Adelphi a dramatic 
adaptation of Gerald Griffin's novel, The Collegians, entitled The 
Colleen Bawn. This play, one of the most successful of modern 
times, was performed in almost every city of the United Kingdom 
and the United States, and made its author a handsome fortune, 
which he lost in the management of various London theatres. It 
was followed by The Octoroon (1861), the popularity of which was 
almost as great. Boucicault's next marked success was at the 
Princess's theatre in 1865 with Arrah-na-Pogue, in which he 
played the part of a Wicklow carman. This, and his admirable 
creation of Con in his play The Shaughraun (first produced at 
Drury Lane in 1875), won him the reputation of being the best 
stage Irishman of his time. In 1875 he returned to New York 
City and finally made his home there, but he paid occasional 
visits to London, where his last appearance was made in his play, 
The Jilt, in 1 886. The Streets of London and After Dark were two 
of his late successes as a dramatist. He died in New York on the 
18th of September 1890. Boucicault was twice married, his first 
wife being Agnes Robertson, the adopted daughter of Charles 
Kean, and herself an actress of unusual ability. Three children, 
Dion (b. 1859), Aubrey (b. 1868) and Nina, also became dis- 
tinguished in the profession. 

BOUCICAUT, JEAN [Jean le Meingre, called Boucicaut] 
{c. 1366-1421), marshal of France, was the son of another Jean 
ie Meingre, also known as Boucicaut, marshal of France, who 
died on the 15th of March 1368 (N.S.). At a very early age he 
became a soldier; he fought in Normandy, in Flanders and in 
Prussia, distinguishing himself at the battle of Roosebeke in 
1382; and then after a campaign in Spain he journeyed to the 
Holy Land. Boucicaut's great desire appears to have been to 
fight the Turk, and in 1396 he was one of the French soldiers 
who marched to the defence of Hungary and shared in the 
Christian defeat at Nicopolis, where he narrowly escaped death. 
After remaining for some months a captive in the hands of the 
sultan, he obtained his ransom and returned to France; then 
in 1399 he was sent at the head of an army to aid the Eastern 
emperor, Manuel II. , who was harassed by the Turks. Boucicaut 
drove the enemy from his position before Constantinople and 
returned to France for fresh troops, but instead of proceeding 



3 J 4 



BOUDIN— BOUDINOT 



again to eastern Europe, he was despatched in 1401 to Genoa, 
who in 1396 had placed herself under the dominion of France. 
Here he was successful in restoring order and in making the 
French occupation effective, and he was soon able to turn his 
attention to the defence of the Genoese possessions in the Medi- 
terranean. The energy which he showed in this direction involved 
him not only in a quarrel with Janus, king of Cyprus, but led 
also to a short war with Venice, whose fleet he encountered off 
Modon in the Archipelago in October 1403. This battle has been 
claimed by both sides as a victory. Peace was soon made with 
the republic, and then in 1409, while the marshal was absent on 
a campaign in northern Italy, Genoa threw off the French yoke, 
and Boucicaut, unable to reduce her again to submission, retired 
to Languedoc. He fought at Agincourt, where he was taken 
prisoner, and died in England. Boucicaut, who was very skilful 
in the tournament, founded the order of the Dame blanche a 
I'ecu vert, a society the object of which was to defend the wives 
and daughters of absent knights. 

There is in existence an anonymous account of Boucicaut's life 
and adventures, entitled Livre des faits du bon messire Jean le 
Meingre dit Boucicaut, which was published in Paris by T. Godefroy 
in 1620. See J. Delaville le Roulx, La France en Orient: expeditions 
du marechal Boucicaut (Paris, 1 



BOUDIN, EUGENE (1824-1898), French painter of the paysage 
de mer, was the son of a pilot. Born at Honfleur he was cabin- 
boy for a while on board the rickety steamer that plied between 
Havre and Honfleur across the estuary of the Seine. But before 
old age came on him, Boudin's father abandoned seafaring, 
and the son gave it up too, having of course no real vocation 
for it, though he preserved to his last days much of a sailor's 
character, — frankness, accessibility, open-heartedness. Boudin 
the elder now established himself as stationer and frame-maker; 
this time in the greater seaport town of Havre; and Eugene 
helped in the little business, and, in stolen hours, produced 
certain drawings. That was a time at which the romantic out- 
lines of the Norman coast engaged Isabey, and the green wide 
valleys of the inland country engaged Troyon; and Troyon and 
Isabey, and Millet too, came to the shop at Havre. Young Boudin 
found his desire to be a painter stimulated by their influence; 
his work made a certain progress, and the interest taken in the 
young man resulted in his being granted for a short term of 
years by the town of his adoption a pension, that he might study 
painting. He studied partly in Paris; but whatever individuality 
he possessed in those years was hidden and covered, rather than 
disclosed. An instance of tiresome, elaborate labour — good 
enough, no doubt, as groundwork, and not out of keeping with 
what at least was the popular taste of that day — is his " Pardon 
of Sainte Anne de la Palud," a Breton scene, of 1858, in which 
he introduced the young Breton woman who was immediately 
to become his wife. This conscientious and unmoving picture 
hangs in the museum of Havre, along with a hundred later, 
fresher, thoroughly individual studies and sketches, the gift 
of Boudin's brother, Louis Boudin, after the painter's death. 
Re-established at Honfleur, Boudin was married and poor. 
But his work gained character and added, to merely academic 
correctness, character and charm. He was beginning to be 
himself by 1864 or 1865 — that was the first of such periods 
of his as may be accounted good — and, though not at that time 
so fully a master of transient effects of weather as he became 
later, he began then to paint with a success genuinely artistic 
the scenes of the harbour and the estuary, which no longer 
lost vivacity by deliberate and too obvious completeness. 
The war of 1870-71 found Boudin impecunious but great, for 
then there had well begun the series of freshly and vigorously 
conceived canvases and panels, which record the impressions 
of a precursor of the Impressionists in presence of the Channel 
waters, and of those autumn skies, or skies of summer, now 
radiant, now uncertain, which hung over the small ports and 
the rocky or chalk-cliff coasts, over the watering-places, Trouville, 
Dieppe, and over those larger harbours, with port and avant-port 
and bassin, of Dunkirk, of Havre. In the war time, Boudin 
was in Brittany and then in the Low Countries. About 1875- 



1876 he was at Rotterdam and Bordeaux. That great bird's r 
eye vision of Bordeaux which is in the Luxembourg dates from 
these years, and in these years he was at Rotterdam, the com- 
panion of Jongkind, with whom he had so much in common, 
but whose work, like his, free and fearless and unconventional, 
can never be said with accuracy to have seriously influenced 
his own. Doing excellent things continually through all the 
'seventies, when he was in late middle age — gaining scope in 
colour, having now so many notes — faithful no longer wholly 
to his amazing range of subtle greys, now blithe and silvery, 
now nobly deep — sending to the Salon great canvases, and to 
the few enlightened people who would buy them of him the 
toile or panel of most moderate size on which he best of all ex- 
pressed himself — Boudin was yet not acceptable to the public 
or to the fashionable dealer. The late 'eighties had to come 
and Boudin to be elderly before there was a sale for his work 
at any prices that were in the least substantial. Broadly speaking 
his work in those very 'eighties was not so good as the labour, 
essentially delicate and fresh and just, of some years earlier, 
nor had it always the attractiveness of the impulsive deliverances 
of some years later, when the inspired sketch was the thing 
that he generally stopped at. Old age found him strong and 
receptive. Only in the very last year of his life was there per- 
ceptible a positive deterioration. Not very long before it, 
Boudin, in a visit to Venice, had produced impressions of Venice 
for which much more was to be said than that they were not 
Ziem's. And the deep colouring of the South, on days when the 
sunshine blazes least, had been caught by him and presented nobly 
at Antibes and Villefranche. At last, resorting to the south again 
as a refuge from ill-health, and recognizing soon that the relief 
it could give him was almost spent, he resolved that it should 
not be for him, in the words of Maurice Barres, a " tombefleurie," 
and he returned, hastily, weak and sinking, to his home at 
Deauville, that he might at least die within sight of Channel 
waters and under Channel skies. As a " marine painter " — 
more properly as a painter of subjects in which water must have 
some part, and as curiously expert in the rendering of all that 
goes upon the sea, and as the painter too of the green banks 
of tidal rivers and of the long-stretched beach, with crinolined 
Parisienne noted as ably as the sailor-folk — Boudin stands alone. 
Beside him others are apt to seem rather theatrical — or if they 
do not romance they appear, perhaps, to chronicle dully. The 
pastels of Boudin — summary and economic even in the 'sixties, 
at a time when his painted work was less free — obtained the 
splendid eulogy of Baudelaire, and it was no other than Corot 
who, before his pictures, said to him: " You are the master 
of the sky." 

See also Gustave Cahen, Eugene Boudin (Paris, 1899) ; Arsene 
Alexandre, Essais; Frederick Wedmore, Whistler and Others (1906). 

(F. We.) 

BOUDINOT, ELIAS (1740-1821), American revolutionary 
leader, was bom at Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, of Huguenot 
descent, on the 2nd of May 1740. He studied law at Princeton, 
New Jersey, in the office of Richard Stockton, whose sister 
Hannah he married in 1762, and in November 1760 he was 
licensed as a counsellor and attorney-at-law, afterwards practising 
at Elizabethtown, New Jersey. On the approach of the War of 
Independence he allied himself with the conservative Whigs. 
He was a deputy to the provincial congress of New Jersey from 
May to August 1775, and from May 1777 until July 1778 was the 
commissary-general of prisoners, with the rank of colonel, in 
the continental army. He was one of the New Jersey members 
of the continental congress in 1778 and again from 1781 until 
1783, and from November 1782 until October 1783 was president 
of that body, acting also for a short time, after the resignation 
of Robert R. Livingston, as secretary for foreign affairs. From 
1789 to 1795 he sat as a member of the national House of Repre- 
sentatives, and from 1795 until 1805 he was the director of the 
United States mint at Philadelphia. He took an active part 
in the founding of the American Bible Society in 1816, of which 
he became the first president. He was a trustee and a benefactor 
of the college of New Jersey (afterwards Princeton University). 



BOUE— BOUGAINVILLE 



3*5' 



In reply to Thomas Paine's Age of Reason, he published the 
Age of Revelation (1790); he also published a volume entitled 
A Star in the West, or a Humble Attempt to Discover the Long Lost 
Ten Tribes of Israel (18 16), in which he endeavours to prove 
that the American Indians may be the ten lost tribes. Boudinot 
died at Burlington, New Jersey, on the 24th of October 1821. 

See The Life, Public Services, Addresses and Letters of Elias 
Boudinot, edited by J. J. Boudinot (Boston and New York, 1896). 

BOUE, AMI (1794-1881), Austrian geologist, was born at 
Hamburg on the 16th of March 1794, and received his early 
education there and in Geneva and Paris. Proceeding to Edin- 
burgh to study medicine at the university, he came under 
Ihe influence of Robert Jameson, whose teachings in geology 
and mineralogy inspired his future career. Boue was thus led 
to make geological expeditions to various parts of Scotland and 
the Hebrides, and after taking his degree of M.D. in 1817 he 
settled for some years in Paris. In 1820 he issued his Essai 
giologique sur I'Ecosse, in which the eruptive rocks in particular 
were carefully described. He travelled much in Germany, 
Austria and southern Europe, studying various geological forma- 
tions, and becoming one of the pioneers in geological research; 
he was one of the founders of the Societe Geologique de France 
in 1830, and was its president in 1835. In 1841 he settled in 
Vienna, and became naturalized as an Austrian. He died on the 
21st of November 1881. To the Imperial Academy of Sciences 
at Vienna he communicated important papers on the geology 
of the Balkan States (1859-1870), and he also published Memoires 
g6ologiques et paleontologiques (Paris, 1832) and La Turquie 
d'Europe; observations sur la giographie, la giologie, I'histoire 
naturelle, &V. (Paris, 1840). 

BOUFFLERS, LOUIS FRANCOIS, Due de, comte de Cagny 
(1644-1711), marshal of France, was born on the 10th of January 
1644. He entered the army and saw service in 1663 at the siege 
of Marsal, becoming in 1 669 colonel of dragoons. In the conquest 
of Lorraine (1670) he served under Marshal de Crequi. In Hol- 
land he served under Turenne, frequently distinguishing himself 
by his skill and bravery; and when Turenne was killed by a 
cannon-shot in 1675 he commanded the rear-guard during the 
retreat of the French army. He was already a brigadier, and 
in 1677 he became marichal de camp. He served throughout the 
campaigns of the time with increasing distinction, and in 1681 
became lieutenant-general. He commanded the French army 
on the Moselle, which opened the War of the League of Augsburg 
with a series of victories; then he led a corps to the Sambre, 
and reinforced Luxemburg on the eve of the battle of Fleurus. 
In 1 69 1 he acted as lieutenant-general under the king in person; 
and during the investment of Mons he was wounded in an attack 
on the town. He was present with the king at the siege of 
Namur in 1692, and took part in the victory of Steinkirk. For 
his services he was raised in 1692 to the rank of marshal of 
France, and in 1694 was made a duke. In 1694 he was appointed 
governor of French Flanders and of the town of Lille. By a 
skilful manoeuvre he threw himself into Namur in 1695, and 
only surrendered to his besiegers after he had lost 8000 of his 
13,000 men. In the conferences which terminated in the peace 
of Ryswick he had a principal share. During the following war, 
when Lille was threatened with a siege by Marlborough and 
Eugene, BoufHers was appointed to the command, and made a 
most gallant resistance of three months. He was rewarded and 
honoured by the king for his defence of Lille, as if he had been 
victorious. It was indeed a species of triumph; his enemy, 
appreciating his merits, allowed him to dictate his own terms of 
capitulation. In 1708 he was made a peer of France. In 1709, 
when the affairs of France were threatened with the most urgent 
danger, Boufflers offered to serve under his junior, Villars, and 
was with him at the battle of Malplaquet. Here he displayed 
the highest skill, and after Villars was wounded he conducted 
the retreat of the French army without losing either cannon or 
prisoners. He died at Fontainebleau on the 22nd of August 
1711. 

See F. . . ., Vie du Mai. de Boufflers' (Lille, 1852), and Pere 
Delarue's and Pere Poisson's Oraisons funibres du Mai. B. (1712). 



BOUFFLERS, STANISLAS JEAN, Chevalier de (1737- 
181 5), French statesman and man of letters, was born near Nancy 
on the 31st of May 1738. He was the son of Louis Francois, 
marquis de Boufflers. His mother, Marie Catherine de Beauveau 
Craon, was the mistress of Stanislas Leszczynski, and the boy 
was brought up at the court of Luneville. He spent six months 
in study for the priesthood at Saint Sulpice, Paris, and during his 
residence there he put in circulation a story which became ex- 
tremely popular, Aline, reine de Golconde. Boufflers did not, 
however, take the vows, as his ambitions were military. He 
entered the order of the Knights of Malta, so that he might be 
able to follow the career of arms without sacrificing the revenues 
of a benefice he had received in Lorraine from King Stanislas. 
After serving in various campaigns he reached the grade of 
marichal de camp in 1784, and in the next year was sent to West 
Africa as governor of Senegal. He proved an excellent ad- 
ministrator, and did what he could to mitigate the horrors of 
the slave trade; and he interested himself in opening up the 
material resources of the colony, so that his departure in 1787 
was regarded as a real calamity by both colonists and negroes. 
The Mimoires secrets of Bachaumont give the current opinion 
that Boufflers was sent to Senegal because he was in disgrace at 
court; but the real reason appears to have been a desire to pay 
his debts before his marriage with Mme de Sabran, which took 
place soon after his return to France. Boufflers was admitted 
to the Academy in 1788, and subsequently became a member of 
the states-general. During the Revolution he found an asylum 
with Prince Henry of Prussia at Rheinsberg. At the Restoration 
he was made joint-librarian of the Bibliotheque Mazarine. His 
wit and his skill in light verse had won him a great reputation, 
and he was one of the idols of the Parisian salons. His paradoxical 
character was described in an epigram attributed to Antoine 
de Rivarol, " abbi libertin, militaire philosophe, diplomate chan- 
sonnier, emigre palriole, republicain courtisan." He died in Paris 
on the 18th of January 181 5. 

His CEuvres completes were published under his own supervision 
in 1803. A selection of his stories in prose and verse was edited by 
Eugene Asse in 1878; his Poesies by O. Uzanne in 1886; and the 
Correspondance inedite de la comtesse de Sabran et du chevalier de 
Boufflers (1 778-1 788), by E. de Magnieu and Henri Prat in 1875. 

BOUGAINVILLE, LOUIS ANTOINE DE (1729-1811), French 
navigator, was born at Paris on the nth of November 1729. 
He was the son of a notary, and in early life studied law, but 
soon abandoned the profession, and in 1753 entered the army 
in the corps of musketeers. At the age of twenty-five he pub- 
lished a treatise on the integral calculus, as a supplement to 
De l'Hopital's treatise, . Des infiniment pelits. In 1 7 5 5 he was sent 
to London as secretary to the French embassy, and was made 
a member of the Royal Society. In 1756 he went to Canada as 
captain of dragoons and aide-de-camp to the marquis de Mont- 
calm; and having distinguished himself in the war against 
England, was rewarded with the rank of colonel and the cross 
of St Louis. He afterwards served in the Seven Years' War 
from 1761 to 1763. After the peace, when the French govern- 
ment conceived the project of colonizing the Falkland Islands, 
Bougainville undertook the task at his own expense. But the 
settlement having excited the jealousy of the Spaniards, the 
French government gave it up to them, on condition of their 
indemnifying Bougainville. He was then appointed to the 
command of the frigate " La Boudeuse " and the transport 
" L'fitoile," and set sail in December 1766 on a voyage of 
discovery round the world. Having executed his commission 
of delivering up the Falkland Islands to the Spanish, Bougainville 
proceeded on his expedition, and touched at Buenos Aires. 
Passing through the Straits of Magellan, he visited the Tuamotu 
archipelago, and Tahiti, where the English navigator Wallis 
had touched eight months before. He proceeded across the 
Pacific Ocean by way of the Samoan group, which he named 
the Navigators Islands, the New Hebrides and the Solomon 
Islands. His men now suffering from scurvy, and his vessels 
requiring refitting, he anchored at Bum, one of the Moluccas, 
where the governor of the Dutch settlement supplied his wants. 
It was the beginning of September, and the expedition took 



3K 



BOUGHTON— BOUGUEREAU 



advantage of the easterly monsoon, which carried them to 
Batavia. In March 1 769 the expedition arrived at St Malo, with 
the loss of only seven out of upwards of 200 men. Bougainville's 
account of the voyage (Paris, 1771) is written with simplicity 
and some humour. After an interval of several years, he again 
accepted a naval command and saw much active service between 
1779 and 1782. In the memorable engagement of the 1 2 th of April 
1782, in which Rodney defeated the comte de Grasse, near Mar- 
tinique, Bougainville, who commanded the " Auguste," succeeded 
in rallying eight ships of his own division, and bringing them 
safely into St Eustace. He was created chef d'escadre, and on re- 
entering the army, was given the rank of marechal de camp. 
After the peace he returned to Paris, and obtained the place of 
associate of the Academy. He projected a voyage of discovery 
towards the north pole, but this did not meet with support from 
the French government. Bougainville obtained the rank of 
vice-admiral in 1791; and in 1792, having escaped almost 
miraculously from the massacres of Paris, he retired to his estate 
in Normandy. He was chosen a member of the Institute at its 
formation, and returning to Paris became a member of the Board 
of Longitude. In his old age Napoleon I. made him a senator, 
count of the empire, and member of the Legion of Honour. He 
died at Paris on the 31st of August 1811. He was married and 
had three sons, who served in the French army. 

Bougainville's name is given to the largest member of the 
Solomon Islands, which belongs to Germany; and to the strait 
which divides it from the British island of Choiseul. It is also 
applied to the strait between Mallicollo and Espiritu Santo 
Islands of the New Hebrides group, and the South American 
climbing plant Bougainvillea, often cultivated in greenhouses, 
is named after him. 

BOUGHTON, GEORGE HENRY (1834-1905), Anglo-American 
painter, was born in England, but his parents went to the 
United States in 1839, and he was brought up at Albany, 
N.Y. He studied art in Paris in 1861-62, and subsequently 
lived mainly in London; he was much influenced by Frederick 
Walker, and the delicacy and grace of his pictures soon made 
his reputation. He was elected an A.R.A. in 1879, and R.A. 
in 1896, and a member of the National Academy of Design in 
New York in 1871. His pictures of Dutch life and scenery were 
especially characteristic; and his subject-pictures, such as the 
" Return of the Mayflower " and " The Scarlet Letter," were 
very popular in America. 

BOUGIE, a seaport of Algeria, chief town of an arrondissement 
in the department of Constantine, 120 m. E. of Algiers. The 
town, which is defended by a wall built since the French occupa- 
tion, and by detached forts, is beautifully situated on the slope 
of Mount Guraya. Behind it are the heights of Mounts Babor 
and Tababort, rising some 6400 ft. and crowned with forests of 
pinsapo fir and cedar. The most interesting buildings in the 
town are the ancient forts, Borj-el-Ahmer and Abd-el-Kader, 
and the kasbah or citadel, rectangular in form, flanked by 
bastions and towers, and bearing inscriptions stating that it was 
built by the Spaniards in 1545. Parts of the Roman wall exist, 
and considerable portions of that built by the Hammadites in 
the nth century. The streets are very steep, and many are 
ascended by stairs. The harbour, sheltered from the east by a 
breakwater, was enlarged in 1897-1902. It covers 63 acres and 
has a depth of water of 23 to 30 ft. Bougie is the natural port 
of Kabylia, and under the French rule its commerce — chiefly 
in oils, wools, hides and minerals — has greatly developed; a 
branch railway runs to Beni Mansur on the main line from 
Constantine to Oran. Pop. (1906) of the town, 10,419; of the 
commune, 17,540; of the arrondissement, which includes eight 
communes, 37,711. 

Bougie, if it be correctly identified with the Saldae of the 
Romans, is a town of great antiquity, and probably owes its 
origin to the Carthaginians. Early in the 5th century Genseric 
the Vandal surrounded it with walls and for some time made it 
his capital. En-Nasr (1062-1088), the most powerful of the 
Berber dynasty of Hammad, made Bougie the seat of his govern- 
ment, and it became the greatest commercial centre of the North 



African coast, attaining a high degree of civilization. From an 
old MS. it appears that as early as 1068 the heliograph was in 
common use, special towers, with mirrors properly arranged, 
being built for the purpose of signalling. The Italian merchants 
of the 12th and 13th centuries owned numerous buildings in the 
city, such as warehouses, baths and churches. At the end of 
the 13th century Bougie passed under the dominion of the 
Hafsides, and in the 15th century it became one of the strong- 
holds of the Barbary pirates. It enjoyed partial independence 
under amirs of Hafside origin, but in January 15 10 was captured 
by the Spaniards under Pedro Navarro. The Spaniards strongly 
fortified the place and held it against two attacks by the corsairs 
Barbarossa. In 1555, however, Bougie was taken by Salah 
Rais, the pasha of Algiers. Leo Africanus, in his Africae 
descriptio, speaks of the " magnificence " of the temples, palaces 
and other buildings of the city in his day (c. 1525), but it appears 
to have fallen into decay not long afterwards. When the French 
took the town from the Algerians in 1833 it consisted of little 
more than a few fortifications and ruins. It is said that the 
French word for a candle is derived from the name of the town, 
candles being first made of wax imported from Bougie. 

BOUGUER, PIERRE (1698-1758), French mathematician, 
was born on the 16th of February 1698. His father, John 
Bouguer, one of the best hydrographers of his time, was regius 
professor of hydrography at Croisic in lower Brittany, and 
author of a treatise on navigation. In 17 13 he was appointed 
to succeed his father as professor of hydrography. In 1727 he 
gained the prize given by the Academie des Sciences for his 
paper " On the best manner of forming and distributing the 
masts of ships "; and two other prizes, one for his dissertation 
" On the best method of observing the altitude of stars at sea," 
the other for his paper " On the best method of observing the 
variation of the compass at sea." These were published in the 
Prix de I' Academie des Sciences. In 1729 he published Essai 
d' optique sur la gradation de la lumiere, the object of which is to 
define the quantity of light lost by passing through a given 
extent of the atmosphere. He found the light of the sun to be 
300 times more intense than that of the moon, and thus made 
some of the earliest measurements in photometry. In 1730 he 
was made professor of hydrography at Havre, and succeeded 
P. L. M. de Maupertuis as associate geometer of the Academie 
des Sciences. He also invented a heliometer, afterwards 
perfected by Fraunhofer. He was afterwards promoted in the 
Academy to the place of Maupertuis, and went to reside in Paris. 
In 1735 Bouguer sailed with C. M. de la Condamine for Peru, in 
order to measure a degree of the meridian near the equator. 
Ten years were spent in this operation, a full account of which 
was published by Bouguer in 1749, Figure de la terre dtterminie. 
His later writings were nearly all upon the theory of navigation. 
He died on the 15th of August 1758. 

The following is a list of his principal works: — Traite a" optique 
sur la gradation de la lumiere (1729 and 1760) ; Entretiens sur la cause 
d'inclinaison des orbites des planetes (1734); Traite de navire, &c. 
(1746, 4to); La Figure de la terre dkerminee, &c. (1749), 4to; 
Nouveau traite de navigation, contenant la theorie et la pratique du 
pilotage (1753); Solution des principaux problemes sur la manoeuvre 
des vaisseaux (1757); Operations faites pour la verification du degre 
du meridien entre Paris et Amiens, par Mess. Bouguer, Camus, 
Cassini et Pingre (1757). 

See J. E. Montucla, Histoire des mathematiques (1802). 

BOUGUEREAU, ADOLPHE WILLIAM (1825-1905), French 
painter, was born at La Rochelle on the 30th of November 1825. 
From 1843 till 1850 he went through the course of training at 
the Ecole des Beaux-Arts, and in 1850 divided the Grand Prix 
de Rome scholarship with Baudry, the subject set being ' ' Zenobia 
on the banks of the Araxes." On his return from Rome in 1855 
he was employed in decorating several aristocratic residences, 
deriving inspiration from the frescoes which he. had seen at 
Pompeii and Herculaneum, and which had already suggested his 
" Idyll " (1853). He also began in 1847 to exhibit regularly at 
the Salon. " The Martyr's Triumph," the body of St Cecilia 
borne to the catacombs, was placed in the Luxembourg after 
being exhibited at the Paris Exhibition of 1855; and in the same 



BOUHOURS— BOUILLON 



3 J 7 



year he exhibited " Fraternal Love," a " Portrait " and a 
" Study." The state subsequently commissioned him to paint 
the emperor's visit to the sufferers by the inundations at 
Tarascon. In 1857 Bouguereau received a first prize medal. 
Nine of his panels executed in wax-painting for the mansion of 
M. Bartholomy were much discussed — " Love," " Friendship," 
"Fortune," " Spring," " Summer," " Dancing," " Arion on a 
Sea-horse," a " Bacchante " and the " Four Divisions of the 
Day." He also exhibited at the Salon " The Return of Tobit " 
(now in the Dijon gallery) . While in antique subjects he showed 
much grace of design, in his " Napoleon," a work of evident 
labour, he betrayed a lack of ease in the treatment of modern 
costume. Bouguereau subsequently exhibited " Love Wounded " 
(1859), "The Day of the Dead" (at Bordeaux), "The First 
Discord " (1861, in the Club at Limoges), " The Return from the 
Fields " (a picture in which Theophile Gautier recognized " a 
pure feeling for the antique "), " A Fawn and Bacchante " and 
"Peace"; in 1863 a "Holy Family," "Remorse," "A Bac- 
chante teasing a Goat " (in the Bordeaux gallery); in 1864 " A 
Bather" (at Ghent), and "Sleep"; in 1865 "An Indigent 
Family," and a portrait of Mme Bartholomy; in 1866 "A 
First Cause," and " Covetousness," with " Philomela and 
Procne "; and some decorative work for M. Montlun at La 
Rochelle, for M. Emile Pereire in Paris, and for the churches of 
St Clotilde and St Augustin; and in 1866 the large painting of 
" Apollo and the Muses on Olympus," in the Great Theatre at 
Bordeaux. Among other works by this artist may be mentioned 
" Between Love and Riches " (1869), " A Girl Bathing " (1870), 
"In Harvest Time" (1872), "Nymphs and Satyrs" (1873), 
" Charity " and " Homer and his Guide " (1874), " Virgin and 
Child," " Jesus and John the Baptist," " Return of Spring " 
(which was purchased by an American collector, and was de- 
stroyed by a fanatic who objected to the nudity), a " Pieta " 
(1876), " A Girl defending herself from Love " (1880), " Night " 
(1883), "The Youth of Bacchus" (1884), " Biblis " (1885), 
"Love Disarmed" (1886), "Love Victorious" (1887), "The 
Holy Women at the Sepulchre " and " The Little Beggar Girls" 
(1890), " Love in a Shower " and " First Jewels " (1891). To 
the Exhibition of 1900 were contributed some of Bouguereau's 
best-known pictures. Most of his works, especially "The Triumph 
of Venus " (1856) and " Charity," are popularly known through 
engravings. " Prayer," " The Invocation " and " Sappho " 
have been engraved by M. Thirion, " The Golden Age " by M. 
Annetombe. Bouguereau's pictures, highly appreciated by the 
general public, have been severely criticized by the partisans of 
a freer and fresher style of art, who have reproached him with 
being too content to revive the formulas and subjects of the 
antique. At the Paris Exhibition of 1867 Bouguereau took a 
third-class medal, in 1878 a medal of honour, and the same again 
in the Salon of 1885. He was chosen by the Society of French 
Artists to be their vice-president, a post he filled with much 
energy. He was made a member of the Legion of Honour in 1 8 56 , 
an officer of the Order 26th of July 1876, and commander 12th of 
July 1885. He succeeded Isidore Pils as member of the Institute, 
8th of January 1876. He died on the 20th of August 1905. 

See Ch. Vendryes, Catalogue illustre des ceuvres de Bouguereau 
(Paris, 1885); Jules Claretie, Peintres et sculpteurs contemporains 
(Paris, 1874); P. G. Hamerton, French Painters; Artistes modernes: 
dictionnaire illustre des beaux-arts (1885); " W. Bouguereau," Port- 
folio (1875); fimile Bayard, "William Bouguereau," Monde 
moderne (1897). 

BOUHOURS, DOMINIQUE (1628-1702), French critic, was 
born in Paris in 1628. He entered the Society of Jesus at the 
age of sixteen, and was appointed to read lectures on literature 
in the college of Clermont at Paris, and on rhetoric at Tours. 
He afterwards became private tutor to the two sons of the duke 
of Longueville. He was sent to Dunkirk to the Romanist 
refugees from England, and in the midst of his missionary 
occupations published several books. In 1665 or 1666 he 
returned to Paris, and published in 167 1 Les Entreticns d'Ariste 
et d'Eugene, a critical work on the French language, printed 
five times at Paris, twice at Grenoble, and afterwards at Lyons, 
Brussels, Amsterdam, Leiden, &c. The chief of his other works 



are La Maniere de Men penser sur les ouvrages d'esprit (1687), 
Doutessurlalanguefrancaise(l6']4.), ViedeSaint Ignacede Loyola 
(1679), Vie de Saint Francois Xavier (1682), and a translation of 
the New Testament into French (1697). His practice of publish- 
ing secular books and works of devotion alternately led to the 
mot, " qu'il servait le monde et le ciel par semestre." Bouhours 
died at Paris on the 27th of May 1702. 

See Georges Doucieux, Un Jesuits homme de lettres au dix-septieme 
Steele: Le pere Bouhours (1886). For a list of Bouhours' works ses 
Backer and Sommervogel, Bibliotheque de la Compagnie de Jesus, i. 
pp. 1886 et seq. 

BOUILHET, LOUIS HYACINTHE (1822-1869), French poet 
and dramatist, was born at Cany, Seine Inferieure, on the 27th 
of May 1822. He was a schoolfellow of Gustave Flaubert, to 
whom he dedicated his first work, Meloenis (1851), a narrative 
poem in five cantos, dealing with Roman manners under the 
emperor Commodus. His volume of poems entitled Fossiles 
attracted considerable attention, on account of the attempt 
therein to use science as a subject for poetry. These poems were 
included also in Festons et astragales (1859). As a dramatist 
he secured a success with his first play, Madame de Montarcy 
(1856), which ran for seventy-eight nights at the Odeon; and 
H&lene Feyron (1858) and L'Oncle Million (i860) were also 
favourably received. But of his other plays, some of them 
of real merit, only the Conjuration d'Amboise (1866) met with 
any great success. Bouilhet died on the 18th of July 1869, at 
Rouen. Flaubert published his posthumous poems with a notice 
of the author, in 1872. 

See also Maxime du Camp, Souvenirs litteraires ("1882); and 
H. de la Ville de Mirmont, Le Poke Louis Bouilhet (1888). 

BOUILLE\ FRANQOIS CLAUDE AMOUR, Marquis de (1739- 
1800), French general. He served in the Seven Years' War, 
and as governor in the Antilles conducted operations against 
the English in the War of American Independence. On his 
return to France he was named governor of the Three Bishoprics, 
of Alsace and of Franche-Comte. Hostile to the Revolution, 
he had continual quarrels with the municipality of Metz, and 
brutally suppressed the military insurrections at Metz and Nancy, 
which had been provoked by the harsh conduct of certain noble 
officers. Then he proposed to Louis XVI. to take refuge in a 
frontier town where an appeal could be made to other nations 
against the revolutionists. When this project failed as a result 
of Louis XVI. 's arrest at Varennes, Bouille went to Russia to 
induce Catherine II. to intervene in favour of the king, and then 
to England, where he died in 1800, after serving in various 
royalist attempts on France. He left Memoires sur la Revolu- 
tion Jranqaise depuis son origine jusqu'd la retraite du due de 
Brunswick (Paris, 1801). 

BOUILLON, formerly the seat of a dukedom in the Ardennes, 
now a small town in the Belgian province of Luxemburg. Pop. 
(1904) 2721. It is most picturesquely situated in the valley 
under the rocky ridge on which are still the very well preserved 
remains of the castle of Godfrey of Bouillon (q.v.), the leader 
of the first crusade. The town, 690 ft. above the sea, but lying 
in a basin, skirts both banks of the river Semois which is crossed 
by two bridges. The stream forms a loop round and almost 
encircles the castle, from which there are beautiful views of the 
sinuous valley and the opposite well-wooded heights. The 
whole effect of the grim castle, the silvery stream and the verdant 
woods makes one of the most striking scenes in Belgium. In 
the 8th and 9th centuries Bouillon was one of the castles of the 
counts of Ardenne and Bouillon. In the 10th and nth centuries 
the family took the higher titles of dukes of Lower Lorraine 
and Bouillon. These dukes all bore the name of Godfrey (Gode- 
froy) and the fifth of them was the great crusader. He was the 
son of Eustace, count of Boulogne, which has led many com- 
mentators into the error of saying that Godfrey of Bouillon was 
born at the French port, whereas he was really born in the castle 
of Baisy near Genappe and Waterloo. His mother was Ida 
d'Ardenne, sister of the fourth Godfrey (" the Hunchback "), 
and the successful defence of the castle when a mere youth 
of seventeen on her behalf was the first feat of arms of the future 
conqueror of Jerusalem. This medieval fortress, strong by 



3 1 



8 



BOUILLOTTE— BOULANGER 



art as well as position before the invention of modern artillery, 
has since undergone numerous sieges. In order to undertake 
the crusade Godfrey sold the castle of Bouillon to the prince 
bishop of Liege, and the title of duke of Bouillon remained the 
appendage of the bishopric till 1678, or for 580 years. The 
bishops appointed " chatelains," one of whom was the celebrated 
" Wild Boar of the Ardennes," William de la Marck. His 
descendants made themselves quasi-independent and called 
themselves princes of Sedan and dukes of Bouillon, and they 
were even recognized by the king of France. The possession 
of Bouillon thenceforward became a constant cause of strife 
until in 1678 Louis XIV. garrisoned it under the treaty of 
Nijmwegen. From 1594 to 1641 the duchy remained vested 
in the French family of La Tour d'Auvergne, one of whom 
(Henry, viscount of Turenne and marshal of France) had 
married in 1591 Charlotte de la Marck, the last of her race. 
In 1676 the duke of Crequy seized it in the name of Louis XIV., 
who in 1678 gave it to Godefroy Marie de La Tour d'Auvergne, 
whose descendants continued in possession till 1705. Bouillon 
remained French till 1814, and Vauban called it " the key 
of the Ardennes." In 1760 the elder Rousseau established 
here the famous press of the Encyclopaedists. In 1814-1815, 
before the decrees of the Vienna Congress were known, an extra- 
ordinary attempt was made by Philippe d'Auvergne of the 
British navy, the cousin and adopted son of the last duke, to 
revive the ancient duchy of Bouillon. The people of Bouillon 
freely recognized him, and Louis XVIII. was well pleased with 
the arrangement, but the congress assigned Bouillon to the 
Netherlands. Napoleon III. on his way to Germany after Sedan 
slept one night in the little town, which is a convenient centre 
for visiting that battlefield. 

BOUILLOTTE, a French game of cards, very popular during 
the Revolution, and again for some years from 1830. Five, four 
or three persons may play; a piquet pack is used, from which, 
in case five play, the sevens, when four the knaves, and when 
three the queens also, are omitted. Counters or chips, as in 
poker, are used. Before the deal each player " antes " one 
counter, after which each, the " age " passing, may " raise " 
the pot; those not " seeing the raise " being obliged to drop 
out. Three cards are dealt to each player, and a thirteenth, 
called the retourne, when -four play, turned up. Each player 
must then bet, call, raise or drop out. When a call is made 
the hands are shown and the best hand wins. The hands rank 
as follows: brelan carre, four of a kind, one being the retourne; 
simple brelan, three of a kind, ace being high; brilan favori, 
three of a kind, one being the retourne. When no player holds 
a brelan the hand holding the greatest number of pips wins, 
ace counting 11, and court cards 10. 

BOUILLY, JEAN NICOLAS (1763-1842), French author, 
was born near Tours on the 24th of January 1763. At the 
outbreak of the Revolution he held office under the new govern- 
ment, and had a considerable share in the organization of 
primary education. In 1799 he retired from public life to devote 
himself, to literature. His numerous works include the musical 
comedy, Pierre le Grand (1790), for Gretry's music, and the 
opera, Les Deux Journe'es (1800), music by Cherubini; also 
L' 'Abbe de I'epSe (1800), and some other plays; and Causeries 
d'un vieillard (1807), Contes a mafdle (1809), and Les Adieux du 
vieux conieur (1835). His Leonore (1798) formed the basis of 
the libretto of the Fidelio of Beethoven. Bouilly died in Paris 
on the 14th of April 1842. 

See Bouilly, Mes recapitulations (3 vols., 1836-1837); E. LegouvS, 
Soixante ans de souvenir (1 » re partie, 1886). 

BOULAINVILLIERS, HENRI, Comte de (1658-1722), French 
political writer, was born at St Saire in Normandy in 1658. He 
was educated at the college of Juilly, and served in the army 
until 1697. He wrote a number of historical works (published 
after his death), of which the most important were the following: 
Histoire de I'ancien gouvernemcnt de la France (La Haye, 1727); 
Etat de la France, avec des memoires sur I'ancien gouvernement 
(London, 1727); Histoire de la pairie de France (London, 1753); 
Histoire des Arabes (1731). His writings are characterized by 



an extravagant admiration of the feudal system. He was an 
aristocrat of the most pronounced type, attacking absolute 
monarchy on the one hand and popular government on the 
other. He was at great pains to prove the pretensions of his 
own family to ancient nobility, and maintained that the govern- 
ment should be entrusted solely to men of his class. He died 
in Paris on the 23rd of January 1722. 

BOULANGER, the name of several French artists: — Jean 
( 1 606-1 660), a pupil of Guido Reni at Bologna, who had an 
academy at Modena; his cousin Jean (1 607-1 680), a celebrated 
line-engraver; the latter's son Matthieu, another engraver; 
Louis (1806-1867), a subject-painter, the friend of Victor Hugo, 
and director of the imperial school of art at Dijon; the best- 
known, Gustave Rodolphe Clarence (1824-1888), a pupil 
of Paul Delaroche, a notable painter of Oriental and Greek and 
Roman subjects, and a member of the Institute (1882); and 
Clement (1805-1842), a pupil of Ingres. 

BOULANGER, GEORGE ERNEST JEAN MARIE (1837-1891), 
French. general, was born at Rennes on the 29th of April 1837. 
He entered the army in 1856, and served in Algeria, Italy, 
Cochin-China and the Franco- German War, earning the reputa- 
tion of being a smart soldier. He was made a brigadier-general 
in 1880, on the recommendation of the due d'Aumale, then 
commanding the VII. army corps, and Boulanger's expressions 
of gratitude and devotion on this occasion were remembered 
against him afterwards when, as war minister in M. Freycinet's 
cabinet, he erased the name of the due d'Aumale from the army 
list, as part of the republican campaign against the Orleanist 
and Bonapartist princes. In 1882 his appointment as director of 
infantry at the war office enabled him to make himself con- 
spicuous as a military reformer; and in 1884 he was appointed 
to command the army occupying Tunis, but was recalled owing 
to his differences of opinion with M. Cambon, the political 
resident. He returned to Paris, and began to take part in 
politics under the aegis of M. C16menceau and the Radical party; 
and in January 1886, when M. Freycinet was brought into power 
by the support of the Radical leader, Boulanger was given the 
post of war minister. 

By introducing genuine reforms for the benefit of officers and 
common soldiers alike, and by laying himself out for popularity 
in the most pronounced fashion — notably by his fire-eating 
attitude towards Germany in April 1887 in connexion with the 
Schnaebele frontier incident — Boulanger came to be accepted by 
the mob as the man destined to give France her revenge for the 
disasters of 1870, and to be used simultaneously as a tool by all 
the anti-Republican intriguers. His action with regard to the 
royal princes has already been referred to, but it should be added 
that Boulanger was taunted in the Senate with his ingratitude to 
the due d'Aumale, and denied that he had ever used the words 
alleged. His letters containing them were, however, published, 
and the charge was proved. Boulanger fought a bloodless duel 
with the baron de Lareinty over this affair, but it had no effect at 
the moment in dimming his popularity, and on M. Freycinet's 
defeat in December 1886 he was retained by M. Goblet at the 
war office. M. Clemenceau, however, had by this time abandoned 
his patronage of Boulanger, who was becoming so inconveniently 
prominent that, in May 1887, M. Goblet was not sorry to get rid 
of him by resigning. The mob clamoured for their " brav' 
general," but M. Rouvier, who next formed a cabinet, declined 
to take him as a colleague, and Boulanger was sent to Clermont- 
Ferrand to command an army corps. A Boulangist " movement " 
was now in full swing. The Bonapartists had attached them- 
selves to the general, and even the comte de Paris encouraged 
his foUowers to support him, to the dismay of those old-fashioned 
Royalists who resented Boulanger's treatment of the due 
d'Aumale. His name was the theme of the popular song of the 
moment — " C'est Boulanger qu'il nous faut "; the general and 
his black horse became the idol of the Parisian populace; and 
he was urged to play the part of a plebiscitary candidate for the 
presidency. 

The general's vanity lent itself to what was asked of it; after 
various symptoms of insubordination had shown themselves, he 



BOULAY DE LA MEURTHE— BOULDER CLAY 



319 



was deprived of his command in 1888 for twice coming to Paris 
without leave, and finally on the recommendation of a council of 
inquiry composed of five generals, his name was removed from 
the army list. He was, however, almost at once elected to the 
chamber for the Nord, his political programme being a demand 
for a revision of the constitution. In the chamber he was in a 
minority, since genuine Republicans of all varieties began to see 
what his success would mean, and his actions were accordingly 
directed to keeping the public gaze upon himself. A popular 
hero survives many deficiencies, and neither his failure as an 
orator nor the humiliation of a discomfiture in a duel with 
M. Floquet, then an elderly civilian, sufficed to check the 
enthusiasm of his following. During 1888 his personality was 
the dominating feature of French politics, and, when he resigned 
his seat as a protest against the reception given by the chamber 
to his revisionist proposals, constituencies vied with one another 
in selecting him as their representative. At last, in January 
1889, he was returned for Paris by an overwhelming majority. 
He had now become an open menace to the parliamentary 
Republic. Had Boulanger immediately placed himself at the 
head of a revolt he might at this moment have effected the 
coup aV ttat which the intriguers had worked for, and might 
not improbably have made himself master of France; but 
the favourable opportunity passed. The government, with M. 
Constans as minister of the interior, had been quietly taking its 
measures for bringing a prosecution against him, and within two 
months a warrant was signed for his arrest. To the astonish- 
ment of his friends, on the 1st of April he fled from Paris before it 
could be executed, going first to Brussels and then to London. 
It was the end of the political danger, though Boulangist echoes 
continued for a little while to reverberate at the polls during 
1889 and 1890. Boulanger himself, having been tried and con- 
demned in absentia for treason, in October 1889 went to live 
in Jersey, but nobody now paid much attention to his doings. 
The world was startled, however, on the 30th of September 
1891 by hearing that he had committed suicide in a cemetery at 
Brussels by blowing out his brains on the grave of his mistress, 
Madame de Bonnemains (nee Marguerite Crouzet), who had died 
in the preceding July. 

See also the article France: History; and Verly, Le General 
Boulanger et la conspiration monarchique (Paris, 1893). (H. Ch.) 

BOULAY DE LA MEURTHE, ANTOINE JACQUES CLAUDE 
JOSEPH, Comte (1761-1840), French politician and magistrate, 
son of an agricultural labourer, was born at Chamousey (Vosges) 
on the 19th of February 1761. Called to the bar at Nancy in 
1783, he presently went 'to Paris, where he rapidly acquired a 
reputation as a lawyer and a speaker. He supported the revo- 
lutionary cause in Lorraine, and fought at Valmy (1792) and 
Wissembourg (1793) in the republican army. But his moderate 
principles brought suspicion on him, and during the Terror he 
had to go into hiding. He represented La Meurthe in the Council 
of Five Hundred, of which he was twice president, but his views 
developed steadily in the conservative direction. Fearing a 
possible renewal of the Terror, he became an active member of 
the plot for the overthrow of the Directory in November 1799. 
He was rewarded by the presidency of the legislative commission 
formed by Napoleon to draw up the new constitution; and as 
president of the legislative section of the council of state he 
examined and revised the draft of the civil code. In eight years 
of hard work as director of a special land commission he settled 
the titles of land acquired by the French nation at the Revolution, 
and placed on an unassailable basis the rights of the proprietors 
who had bought this land from the government. He received 
the grand cross of the Legion of Honour and the title of count, 
was a member of Napoleon's privy council, but was never in high 
favour at court. After Waterloo he tried to obtain the recog- 
nition of Napoleon II. He was placed under surveillance at 
Nancy, and later at Halberstadt and Frankfort-on-Main. He 
was allowed to return to France in 1819, but took no further 
active part in politics, although he presented himself unsuccess- 
fully for parliamentary election in 1824 and 1827. He died in 
Paris on the 4th of February 1840. He published two books on 



English history — Essai sur les causes qui, en 1649, amenerent en 
Angleterre I ' Uablissement de la r&publique (Paris, 1799), and 
Tableau politique des regnes de Charles II et Jacques II, derniers 
rois de la maison de Stuart (The Hague, 1818)— which contained 
much indirect criticism of the Directory and the Restoration 
governments. He devoted the last years of his life to writing 
his memoirs, which, with the exception of a fragment on the 
Theorie constitutionnelle de Sieyes (1836), remained unpublished. 

His elder son, Comte Henri Georges Botjlay de la Meurthe 
(1797-1858), was a constant Bonapartist, and after the election of 
Louis Napoleon to the presidency, was named (January 1849) 
vice-president of the republic. He zealously promoted popular 
education, and became in 1842 president of the society for 
elementary instruction. 

BOULDER, a city and the county-seat of Boulder county, 
Colorado, U.S.A., about 30 m. N.W. of Denver. Pop. (1890) 
3330; (1900) 6150 (693 foreign-born); (1910)9539. It is served 
by the Union Pacific, the Colorado & Southern, and the Denver, 
Boulder & Western railways ; the last connects with the neighbour- 
ing mining camps, and affords fine views of mountain scenery. 
Boulder lies about 5300 ft. above the sea on Middle Boulder 
Creek, a branch of the St Vrain river about 30 m. from its 
confluence with the Platte, and has a beautiful situation in the 
valley at the foot of the mountains. The state university of Colo- 
rado, established at Boulder by an act of 1861, was opened in 
1877; it includes a college of liberal arts, school of medicine 
(1883), school of law (1892), college of engineering (1893), 
graduate school, college of commerce (1906), college of education 
(1908), and a summer school (1904), and has a library of about 
42,000 volumes. There are a fine park of 2840 acres, the property 
of the city, and three beautiful canons near Boulder. At the 
southern limits, in a beautiful situation 400 ft. above the city, 
are the grounds of an annual summer school, the Colorado 
Chautauqua. The climate is beneficial for those afflicted with 
bronchial and pulmonary troubles; the average mean annual 
temperature for eleven years ending with 1907 was 51 F. 
There are medicinal springs in the vicinity. The water-works 
are owned and operated by the city, the water being obtained 
from lakes at the foot of the Arapahoe Peak glacier in the Snowy 
Range, 20 m. from the city. The surrounding country is irri- 
gated, and successfully combines agriculture and mining. There 
are ore sampling works and brick-making establishments. Oil 
and natural gas abound in the vicinity; there are oil refineries 
in the city; and in Boulder county, especially at Nederland, 
18 m. south-west, and at Eldora, about 22 m. south-west of the 
city, has been obtained since 1900 most of the tungsten mined 
in the United States; the output in 1907 was valued at about 
$520,000. The first settlement near the site of Boulder was made 
in the autumn of 1858. Placer gold was discovered on an 
affluent of Boulder Creek in January 1859. The town was laid 
out and organized in February 1859, and a city charter was 
secured in 1871 and another in 1882. 

BOULDER (short for " boulder-stone," of uncertain origin; 
cf. Swed. bullersten, a large stone which causes a noise of 
rippling water in a stream, from bullra, to make a loud noise), 
a large stone, weathered or water-worn; especially a geological 
term for a large mass of rock transported to a distance from the 
formation to which it belongs. Similarly, in mining, a mass of 
ore found at a distance from the lode. 

BOULDER CLAY, in geology, a deposit of clay, often full of 
boulders, which is formed in and beneath glaciers and ice-sheets 
wherever they are found, but is in a special sense the typical 
deposit of the Glacial Period in northern Europe and America. 
Boulder clay is variously known as " till " or " ground moraine " 
(Ger. Blocklehme, Geschiebsmergel or Grundmorane; Fr. argile d. 
blocaux, moraine profonde; Swed. Krosstenslera). It is usually a 
stiff, tough clay devoid of stratification; though some varieties 
are distinctly laminated. Occasionally, within the boulder clay, 
there are irregular lenticular masses of more or less stratified 
sand, gravel or loam. As the boulder clay is the result of the 
abrasion (direct or indirect) of the older rocks over which the 
ice has travelled, it takes its colour from them; thus, in Britain, 



320 



BOULE 



over Triassic and Old Red Sandstone areas the clay is red, over 
Carboniferous rocks it is often black, over Silurian rock it may 
be buff or grey, and where the ice has passed over chalk the clay 
may be quite white and chalky (chalky boulder clay). Much 
boulder clay is of a bluish-grey colour where unexposed, but it 
becomes brown upon being weathered. 

The boulders are held within the clay in an irregular manner, 
and they vary in size from mere pellets up to masses many tons 
in weight. Usually they are somewhat oblong, and often they 
possess a flat side or " sole "; they may be angular, sub-angular, 
or well rounded, and, if they are hard rocks, they frequently 
bear grooves and scratches caused by contact with other rocks 
while held firmly in the moving ice. Like the clay in which they 
are borne, the boulders belong to districts over which the ice 
has travelled; in some regions they are mainly limestones or 
sandstones; in others they are granite, basalts, gneisses, &c. ; 
indeed, they may consist of any hard rock. By the nature of the 
contained boulders it is often possible to trace the path along 
which a vanished ice-sheet moved; thus in the Glacial drift of 
the east coast of England many Scandinavian rocks can be 
recognized. 

With the exception of foraminifera which have been found in 
the boulder clay of widely separated regions, fossils are practi- 
cally unknown; but in some maritime districts marine shells 
have been incorporated with the clay. See Glacial Period; 
and Glacier. 

BOULE (Gr. fiovXii,, literally "will," "advice"; hence a 
" council "), the general term in ancient Greece for an advisory 
council. In the loose Homeric state, as in all primitive societies, 
there was a council of this kind, probably composed of the heads 
of families, i.e. of the leading princes or nobles, who met usually 
on the summons of the king for the purpose of consultation. 
Sometimes, however, it met on its own initiative, and laid sugges- 
tions before the king. It formed a means of communication 
between the king and the freemen assembled in the Agora. In 
Dorian states this aristocratic form of government was retained 
(for the Spartan Council of Elders see Gerousia). In Athens 
the ancient council was called the Boule until the institution of 
a democratic council, or committee of the Ecclesia, when, for 
purposes of distinction, it was described as " the Boule on the 
Areopagus," or, more shortly, " the Areopagus " {q.v.). It must 
be clearly understood that the second, or Solonian Boule, was 
entirely different from the Areopagus which represented the 
Homeric Council of the King throughout Athenian history, even 
after the " mutilation " carried out by Ephialtes. Further, it 
is, as will appear below, a profound mistake to call the second 
Boule a " senate." There is no real analogy between the Roman 
senate and the Athenian council of Five Hundred. 

Before describing the Athenian Boule, the only one of its kind 
of which we have even fairly detailed information, it is necessary 
to mention that councils existed in other Greek states also, both 
oligarchic and democratic. A Boule was in the first place a 
necessary part of a Greek oligarchy; the transition from 
monarchy to oligarchy was nominally begun by the gradual 
transference of the powers of the monarch to the Boule of nobles. 
Further, in the Greek democracy, the larger democratic Boule 
was equally essential. The general assembly of the people was 
utterly unsuited to the proper management of state affairs in all 
their minutiae. We therefore find councils of both kinds in 
almost all the states of Greece, (i) At Corinth we learn that 
there was an oligarchic council of unknown numbers presided 
over by eight leaders (Nicol. Damasc. Frag. 60). It was probably 
like the old Homeric council, except that its constitution did not 
depend on a birth qualification, but on a high census. This was 
natural in Corinth where, according to Herodotus (ii. 167), 
mercantile pursuits bore no stigma. (2) From an inscription we 
learn that the Athenians, in imposing a constitution on Erythrae 
(about 450 B.C.), included a council analogous to their own. 
(3) In Elis (Thuc. v. 47) there was an aristocratic council of 
ninety, which was superseded by a popular council of six hundred 
(471). (4) Similarly in Argos there were an aristocratic council 
of eighty and later a popular council of much larger size (Thuc. 



v. 47). Councils are also found at (5) Rhodes, (6) Megalopolis 
(democratic), (7) Corcyra (democratic), (Thuc. iii. 70). Of these 
seven the most instructive is that of Erythrae, which proves 
that in the 5 th century the Council of Five Hundred was so 
efficient in Athens that a similar body was imposed at Erythrae 
(and probably in the other tributary cities). 

The Boule at Athens. History. — The origin of the second 
Boule, or Council of Four Hundred, at Athens is involved in 
obscurity. In the Aristotelian Constitution of Athens (c. 4), 
it is stated that Draco established a council of 401, and that he 
transferred to it some of the functions of the Council 01 Areopagus 
(q.v.). It is, however, generally held (see Draco) that this 
statement is untrue, and that it was Solon who first established 
the council as a part of the constitution. Thirdly, it has been 
held that the council was not invented either by Draco or by 
Solon, but was of older and unknown origin. Fourthly, it has 
also been maintained by some recent writers that no BoulS 
existed before Cleisthenes. The principal evidence for this view 
is the omission of any reference to the Boule in one of the earliest 
Athenian inscriptions, that relating to Salamis (Hicks and Hill, 
No. 4), where in place of the customary formula of a later age, 
e5o^€ rfj (5ov\§ Kal toj 5-qnV, we have the formula 't&oxaev tco 
5i7;iiCjj. This argument is far from conclusive, and it is clear 
from the Constitution (c. 20) that the resistance of the Boule to 
Cleomenes and Isagoras was anterior to the legislation of Clei- 
sthenes (i.e. that the Boule in question was the Solonian and not 
the Cleisthenian). On the whole it is reasonable to conclude 
that it was Solon who invented the Boule to act as a semi-demo- 
cratic check upon the democracy, whose power he was increasing 
at the expense of the oligarchs by giving new powers to the 
people in the Ecclesia and the Dicasteries. Practically nothing 
is known of the operations of this council until the struggle 
between Isagoras and Cleisthenes (Herod, v. 72). Solon's 
council had been based on the four Ionic tribes. When Clei- 
sthenes created the new ten tribes in order to destroy the local 
influence of dominant families and to give the country demes 
a share in government, he changed the Solonian council into a 
body of 500 members, 50 from each tribe. This new body (see 
below) was the keystone of the Cleisthenean democracy, and 
may be said in a sense to have embodied the principle of local 
representation. After Cleisthenes, the council remained un- 
altered till 306 B.C., when, on the addition of two new tribes 
named after Antigonus and his son, Demetrius Poliorcetes, its 
numbers were increased to 600. In a.d. 126-127 the old number 
of 500 was restored. A council of 750 members is mentioned 
in an inscription of the early 3rd century a.d., and about a.d. 400 
the number of councillors had fallen to 300. 

Constitution and Functions. — (a) Under Solon the council 
consisted of 400 members, 100 from each of the four Ionic tribes. 
It is certain that all classes were eligible except the 
Thetes, but the method of appointment is not known. 
Three suggestions have been made, (1) that each tribe 
chose its representatives, (2) that they were chosen by lot 
from qualified citizens in rotation, (3) that the combined method 
of selection by lot from a larger number of elected candidates 
was employed. According to the passage in Plutarch's Solon 
the functions of this body were from the first probouleutic (i.e. 
it prepared the business for the Ecclesia). Others hold that 
this function was not assigned to it until the Cleisthenean 
reforms. When we consider, however, the double danger of 
leaving the Ecclesia in full power, and yet under the presidency 
of the aristocratic archons, it seems probable that the pro- 
bouleutic functions were devised by Solon as a method of main- 
taining the balance. On this hypothesis the Solonian Boule was 
from the first what it certainly was later, a committee of the 
Ecclesia, i.e. not a " senate." It may be regarded as certain 
that the system of Prytaneis was the invention of 
Cleisthenes, not of Solon, (b) Under Cleisthenes the cle '~ , 
council reached its full development as a democratic council. 
representative body. Its actual organization is still 
uncertain, but it may be inferred that it became gradually a 
more strictly self -existent body than the Solonian council. Every 



Solon's 
council. 



BOULEVARD— BOULLE 



321 



full citizen of thirty years of age was eligible, and, unlike other 
civil offices, it was permissible to serve twice, but not more than 
twice (Ath. Pol. c. 62). It may be regarded as certain, although 
our evidence is derived from inscriptions which date from the 
3rd century B.C., that from the first the Bouleutae were appointed 
by the demes, in numbers proportionate to the size of the deme, 
and that from the first also the method of sortition was employed. 
For each councillor chosen by lot, a substitute was chosen in 
case of death or disgrace. After nomination each had to pass 
before the old council an examination in which the whole of his 
private life was scrutinized. After this, the councillors had to 
take an oath that they (1) would act according to the laws, (2) 
would give the best advice in their power, and (3) would carry 
out the examination of their successors in an impartial spirit. 
As symbols of office they wore wreaths; they received payment 
originally at the rate of one drachma a day, 1 at the end of the 
4th century of five obols a day. At the end of the year of office 
each councillor had to render an account of his work, and if the 
council had done well the people voted crowns of honour. Within 
its own sphere the council exercised disciplinary control over 
its members by the device known as Ecphyllophoria; it could 
provisionally suspend a member, pending a formal trial before 
the whole council assembled ad hoc. The council had further a 
complete system of scribes or secretaries (grammateis) , private 
treasury officials, and a paid herald who summoned the Boule 
and the Ecclesia. The meetings took place generally in the 
council hall (Bouleuterion) , but on special occasions in the 
theatre, the stadium, the dockyards, the Acropolis or the 
Theseum. They were normally public, the audience being 
separated by a barrier, but on occasions of peculiar importance 
the public was excluded. 

The Ecclesia, owing to its size and constitution, was unable 
to meet more than three or four times a month; the council, on 
Prytaneis. t ^ e other hand, was in continuous session, except on 
feast days. It was impossible that the Five Hundred 
should all sit every day, and, therefore, to facilitate the despatch 
of business, the system of Prytaneis was introduced, probably 
by Cleisthenes. By this system the year was divided into ten 
equal periods. During each of these periods the council was 
represented by the fifty councillors of one of the ten tribes, who 
acted as a committee for carrying on business for a tenth of the 
year. Each of these committees was led by a president (Epi- 
states), who acted as chairman of the Boule and the Ecclesia also, 
and a third of its numbers lived permanently during their period 
of office in the Tholos (Dome) or Skias, a round building where 
they (with certain other officials and honoured citizens) dined 
at the public expense. In 378-377 B.C. (or perhaps in the 
archonship of Eucleides, 403) the presidency of the Ecclesia was 
transferred to the Epistates of the Proedri, the Proedri being a 
body of nine chosen by lot by the Epistates of the Prytaneis 
from the remaining nine tribes. It was the duty of the Boule 
{i.e. the Prytany which was for the time in session) to prepare 
all business for the consideration of the Ecclesia. Their recom- 
mendation (,Trpoj3ov\ev fia) was presented to the popular assembly 
(for procedure, see Ecclesia), which either passed it as it stood 
or made amendments subject to certain conditions. It must 
be clearly understood that the recommendation of the council 
had no intrinsic force until by the votes of the Ecclesia it passed 
into law as a psephism. But in addition to this function, the 
Council of the Five Hundred had large administrative and 
judicial control. (1) It was before the council that the Poletae 
arranged the farming of public revenues, the receipt of tenders 
for public works and the sale of confiscated property; further, 
it dealt with defaulting collectors (enXoyas), exacted the debts 
of private persons to the state, and probably drew up annual 
estimates. (2) It supervised the treasury payments of the 
Apodectae (" Receivers ") and the " Treasurers of the God." 
(3) From Demosthenes (In Androt.) it is clear that it had to 
arrange for the provision of so many triremes per annum and 

1 The institution of pay for the councillors may safely be ascribed 
to Pericles although we have no direct evidence of it before 41 1 B. c. 
(Thuc. viii. 69; see Pericles). 

IV. II 



the award of the trierarchic crown. (4) It arranged for the 
maintenance of the cavalry and the special levies from the 
demes. (5) It heard certain cases of eisangelia (impeachment) 
and had the right to fine up to 500 drachmas, or hand the case 
over to the Heliaea. The cases which it tried were mainly 
prosecutions for crimes against the state {e.g. treason, conspiracy, 
bribery). In later times it acted mainly as a court of first 
instance. Subsequently (Ath. Pol. c. 45) its powers were limited 
and an appeal was allowed to the popular courts. (6) The 
council presided over the dokimasia (consideration of fitness) 
of the magistrates ; this examination, which was originally 
concerned with a candidate's moral and physical fitness, de- 
generated into a mere inquiry into his politics. (7) In foreign 
affairs the council as the only body in permanent session naturally 
received foreign envoys and introduced them to the Ecclesia. 
Further, the Boule, with the Strategi (" Generals "), took treaty 
oaths, after the Ecclesia had decided on the terms. The Xeno- 
phontic Politeia states that the council of the 5th century was 
" concerned with war," but in the 4th century it chiefly super- 
vised the docks and the fleet. On two occasions at least the 
council was specially endowed with full powers; Demosthenes 
{De Fals. Leg. p. 389) states that the people gave it full powers 
to send ambassadors to Philip, and Andocides (De Myst. 14 foil.) 
states that it had full power to investigate the affair of the mutila- 
tion of the Hermae on the night before the sailing of the Sicilian 
Expedition. 

It will be seen that this democratic council was absolutely 
essential to the working of the Athenian state. Without having 
any final legislative authority, it was a necessary part of the 
legislative machinery, and it may be regarded as certain that a 
large proportion of its recommendations were passed without 
alteration or even discussion by the Ecclesia. The Boule was, 
therefore, in the strict sense a committee of the Ecclesia, and 
was immediately connected with a system of sub-committees 
which exercised executive functions. 

Bibliography. — With thisarticle compare Ecclesia, Strategus, 
Archon, Draco, Solon, Cleisthenes, where collateral information 
is given. Besides the chief histories of Greece (Grote, ed. 1907, Meyer 
&c), see Gilbert, Constitutional Antiquities (Eng. trans, by E. J. 
Brooks and T. Nicklin, 189s; J. B. Bury, History of Greece (1900); 
A. H. J. Greenidge Handbook of Greek Constitutional History (1896) ; 
J. E. Sandys' edition of the Constitution of Athens; Boeckh, Die 
Staatshaushaltung der Athener* (1886); Schomann, Griechische 
Altertumer (1897-1902); Busolt, Die griechischen Staats- und 
Rechtsaltertumer (1902). See also H. Swoboda, Die griechischen 
Volksbeschliisse (1890); Szanto, Das griechische Bilrgerrecht (1892); 
Perrot, Essai sur le droit public d'Athenes (1869). It should be 
observed that all works published before 1891 are so far useless 
that they are without the information contained in the Constitution 
of Athens (a. v.). See also Greek Law. (J. M. M.) 

BOULEVARD (a Fr. word, earlier boulevart, from Dutch or 
Ger. Bollwerk, cf. Eng. " bulwark "), originally, in fortification, 
an earthwork with a broad platform for artillery. It came into 
use owing to the width of the gangways in medieval walls being 
insufficient for the mounting of artillery thereon. The boulevard 
or bulwark was usually an earthen outwork mounting artillery, 
and so placed in advance as to prevent the guns of a besieger 
from battering the foot of the main walls. It was as a rule 
circular. Semicircular demi-boulevards were often constructed 
round the bases of the old masonry towers with the same object. 
In modern times the word is most frequently used to denote a 
promenade laid out on the site of a former fortification, and, by 
analogy, a broad avenue in a town planted with rows of trees. 

BOULLE, ANDRE CHARLES (1642-1732), French cabinet- 
maker, who gave his name to a fashion of inlaying known as 
Boulle or Buhl work. The son of Jean Boulle, a member of a 
family of ebenistes who had already achieved distinction — Pierre 
Boulle, who died c. 1636, was for many years tourneur et menuisier 
du roy des cabinets d'ebene, — he became the most famous of his 
name and was, indeed, the second cabinet-maker — the first was 
Jean Mace — who has acquired individual renown. That must 
have begun at a comparatively early age, for at thirty he had 
already been granted one of those lodgings in the galleries of the 
Louvre which had been set apart by Henry IV. for the use of the 

11 



322 



BOULLE 



most talented of the artists employed by the crown. To be 
admitted to these galleries was not only to receive a signal mark 
of royal favour, but to enjoy the important privilege of freedom 
from the trammels of the trade gilds. Boulle was given the 
deceased Jean Mace's own lodging in 1672 by Louis XIV. upon 
the recommendation of Colbert, who described him as " le plus 
habile iUniste de Paris," but in the patent conferring this privilege 
he is described also as " chaser, gilder and maker of marqueterie." 
Boulle appears to have been originally a painter, since the first 
payment to him by the crown of which there is any record (1669) 
specifies " outrages de peinture." He was employed for many years 
at Versailles, where the mirrored walls, the floors of " wood 
mosaic,'-' the inlaid panelling and the pieces in marqueterie in 
the Cabinet du Dauphin were regarded as his most remarkable 
work. These rooms were long since dismantled and tneir 
contents dispersed, but Boulle's drawings for the work are in the 
Musee des Arts D6coratifs. His royal commissions were, indeed, 
innumerable, as we leam both from the Comptes des bdtiments 
and from the correspondence of Louvois. Not only the most 
magnificent of French monarchs, but foreign princes and the 
great nobles and financiers of his own country crowded him with 
commissions, and the mot of the abbe de Marolles, " Boulle y 
lourne en ovale," has become a stock quotation in the literature of 
French cabinet-making. Yet despite his distinction, the facility 
with which he worked, the high prices he obtained, and his 
workshops full of clever craftsmen, Boulle appears to have been 
constantly short of money. He did not always pay his workmen, 
clients who had made considerable advances failed to obtain the 
fine things they had ordered, more than one application was 
made for permission to arrest him for debt under orders of the 
courts within the asylum of the Louvre, and in 1 704 we find the 
king giving him six months' protection from his creditors on 
condition that he used the time to regulate his affairs or " ce sera 
la derniere grace que sa majeste lui fera la-dessus." Twenty 
years later one of his sons was arrested at Fontainebleau and 
kept in prison for debt until the king had him released. In 1720 
his finances were still further embarrassed by a fire which, 
beginning in another atelier, extended to his twenty workshops 
and destroyed most of the seasoned materials, appliances, 
models and finished work of which they were full. The salvage 
was sold and a petition for pecuniary help was sent to the regent, 
the result of which does not appeir. It would seem that Boulle 
was never a good man of business, but, according to his friend 
Mariette, many of his pecuniary difficulties were caused by his 
passion for collecting pictures, engravings and other objects of 
art — the inventory of his losses in the fire, which exceeded 
£40,000 in amount, enumerates many old masters, including 
forty-eight drawings by Raphael and the manuscript journal 
kept by Rubens in Italy. He attended every sale of drawings 
and engravings, borrowed at high interest to pay for his pur- 
chases, and when the next sale took place, fresh expedients were 
devised for obtaining more money. Collecting was to Boulle a 
mania of which, says his friend, it was impossible to cure him. 
Thus he died in 1732, full of fame, years and debts. He left four 
sons who followed in his footsteps in more senses than one — 
Jean Philippe (born before 1690, dead before 1745), Pierre 
Benoit (d. 1741), Charles Andre (1685-1749) and Charles Joseph 
(1688-1754). Their affairs were embarrassed throughout their 
lives, and the three last are known to have died in debt. 

AH greatness is the product of its opportunities, and.the elder 
Boulle was made by the happy circumstances of his time. He 
was born into a France which was just entering upon the most 
brilliant period of sumptuary magnificence which any nation has 
known in modern times. Louis XIV., so avid of the delights of 
the eye, by the reckless extravagance of his example turned the 
thoughts of his courtiers to domestic splendours which had 
hitherto been rare. The spacious palaces which arose in his 
time needed rich embellishment, and Boulle, who had not only 
inherited the rather flamboyant Italian traditions of the late 
Renaissance, but had ibenisterie in his blood, arose, as some such 
man invariably does arise, to gratify tastes in which personal 
pride and love of art were not unequally intermingled. He was 



by no means the first Frenchman to practise the delightful art 
of marqueterie, nor was he quite the inventor of the peculiar 
type of inlay which is chiefly associated with his name; but no 
artist, before or since, has used these motives with such astonish- 
ing skill, courage and surety. He produced pieces of monumental 
solidity blazing with harmonious colour, or gleaming with the 
sober and dignified reticence of ebony, ivory and white metal. 
The Renaissance artists chiefly employed wood in making 
furniture, ornamenting it with gilding and painting, and inlaying 
it with agate, cornelian, lapis-lazuli, marble of various tints, 
ivory, tortoise-shell, mother-of-pearl and various woods. 
Boulle improved upon this by inlaying brass devices into wood 
or tortoise-shell, which last he greatly used according to the 
design he had immediately in view, whether flowers, scenes, 
scrolls, &c; to these he sometimes added enamelled metal. 
Indeed the use of tortoise-shell became so characteristic that any 
furniture, however cheap and common, which has a reddish fond 
that might by the ignorant be mistaken for inlay, is now described 
as " Buhl " — the name is the invention of the British auctioneer 
and furniture-maker. In this process the brass is thin, and, like 
the ornamental wood or tortoise-shell, forms a veneer. In the 
first instance the production of his work was costly, owing to the 
quantity of valuable material that was cut away and wasted, 
and, in addition, the labour lost in separately cutting for each 
article or copy of a pattern. By a subsequent improvement 
Boulle effected an economy by gluing together various sheets of 
material and sawing through the whole, so that an equal number 
of figures and matrices were produced at one operation. Boulle 
adopted from time to time various plans for the improvement of 
his designs. He placed gold-leaf or other suitable material under 
the tortoise-shell to produce such effect as he required; he chased 
the brass-work with a graver for a like purpose, and, when the 
metal required to be fastened down with brass pins or nails, 
these were hammered flat and disguised by ornamental chasing. 
He also adopted, in relief or in the round, brass feet, brackets, 
edgings, and other ornaments of appropriate design, partly to 
protect the corners and edges of his work, and partly for decora- 
tion. He subsequently used other brass mountings, such as 
claw-feet to pedestals, or figures in high or low relief, according 
to the effect he desired to produce. These mounts in the pieces 
that undoubtedly come from Boulle's atelier are nearly always 
of the greatest excellence. They were cast in the rough — the 
tools of the chaser gave them their sharpness, their minute 
finish, their jewel-like smoothness. 

Unhappily it is by no means easy, even for the expert, to 
declare the authenticity of a commode, a bureau, or a table in 
the manner of Boulle and to all appearance from his workshops. 
His sons unquestionably carried on the traditions for some years 
after his death, and his imitators were many and capable. A 
few of the more magnificent pedigree-pieces are among the world's 
mobiliary treasures. There are, for instance, the two famous 
armoires, which fetched £12,075 at the Hamilton Palace sale; 
the marqueterie commodes, enriched with bronze mounts, in the 
Bibliotheque Mazarine; various cabinets and commodes and 
tables in the Louvre, the Musee Cluny and the Mobilier National; 
the marriage coffers of the dauphin which were in the San Donato 
collection. There are several fine authenticated pieces in the 
Wallace collection at Hertford House, together with others 
consummately imitated, probably in the Louis Seize period. 
On the rare occasions when a pedigree example comes into the 
auction-room, it invariably commands a high price; but there 
can be little doubt that the most splendid and sumptuous 
specimens of Boulle are diminishing in number, while the 
second and third classes of his work are perhaps becoming more 
numerous. The truth is that this wonderful work, with its 
engraved or inlaid designs of Berainj its myriads of tiny pieces 
of ivory and copper, ebony and tortoise-shell, all kept together 
with glue and tiny chased nails, and applied very often to a 
rather soft, white wood, is not meet to withstand the ravages 
of time and the variations of the atmosphere. Alternate heat 
and humidity are even greater enemies of inlaid furniture than 
time and wear— such delicate things are rarely much used, and 



BOULOGNE— BOULOGNE-SUR-MER 



323 



are protected from ordinary chances of deterioration. There is 
consequently reason to rejoice when a piece of real artistry in 
furniture finds its final home in a museum, where a degree of 
warmth is maintained which, however distressing it may be to 
the visitor, at least preserves the contents from one of the worst 
enemies of the collector. (J. P.-B.) 

BOULOGNE, or Boullongne, the name of a family of French 
painters. Louis (1609-1674), who was one of the original 
members of the Academy of Painting and Sculpture (1648), 
became celebrated under Louis XIV. His traditions were con- 
tinued by his children: Genevieve (1645-1708), who married 
the sculptor Jacques Clerion; Madeleine (1646-1710), whose 
work survives in the Trophies d'armes at Versailles; Bon (1649- 
171 7), a successful teacher and decorative artist; and Louis the 
younger (1654-1733), who copied Raphael's cartoons for the 
Gobelins tapestry, and besides taking a high place as a painter 
was also a designer of medals. 

BOULOGNE-SUR-MER, a fortified seaport of northern France 
and chief town of an arrondissement in Pas-de-Calais, situated 
on the shore of the English Channel at the mouth of the river 
Liane, 157 m. N.N.W. of Paris on the Northern railway, and 
28 m. by sea S.E. of Folkestone, Kent. Pop. (1906) 49,636. 
Boulogne occupies the summit and slopes of a ridge of hills 
skirting the right bank of the Liane; the industrial quarter of 
Capecure extends along the opposite bank, and is reached by two 
bridges, while the river is also crossed by a double railway 
viaduct. The town consists of two parts, the Haute Ville and 
the Basse Ville. The former, situated on the top of the hill, is 
of comparatively small extent, and forms almost a parallelogram, 
surrounded by ramparts of the 13th century, and, outside them, 
by boulevards, and entered by ancient gateways. In this part 
are the law court, the chateau and the hotel de ville (built in the 
18th century), and a belfry tower of the 13th and 17th centuries 
is in the immediate neighbourhood. In the chateau (13 th cen- 
tury) now used as barracks, the emperor Napoleon III. was 
confined after the abortive insurrection of 1840. At some dis- 
tance north-west stands the church of Notre-Dame, a well-known 
place of pilgrimage, erected (1827-1866) on the site of an old 
building destroyed in the Revolution, of which the extensive 
crypt still remains. The modern town stretches from the foot 
of the hill to the harbour, along which it extends, terminating 
in an expanse of sandy beach frequented by bathers, and pro- 
vided with a bathing establishment and casino. It contains 
several good streets, some of which are, however, very steep. 
A main street, named successively rue de la Lampe, St Nicolas 
and Grande rue, extends from the bridge across the Liane to the 
promenade by the side of the ramparts. This is intersected first 
by the Quai Gambetta, and farther back by the rue Victor Hugo 
and the rue Nationale, which contain the principal shops. The 
public buildings include several modern churches, two hospitals 
and a museum with collections of antiquities, natural history, 
porcelain, &c. Connected with the museum is a public library 
with 75,000 volumes and a number of valuable manuscripts, 
many of them richly illuminated. There are English churches in 
the town, and numerous boarding-schools intended for English 
pupils. Boulogne is the seat of a sub-prefect, and has tribunals 
of first instance and of commerce, a board of trade-arbitrators, 
a chamber of commerce and a branch of the Bank of France. 
There are also communal colleges, a national school of music, 
and schools of hydrography, commerce and industry. Boulogne 
has for a long time been one of the most anglicized of French 
cities; and in the tourist season a continuous stream of English 
travellers reach the continent at this point. 

The harbour is formed by the mouth of the Liane. Two jetties 
enclose a channel leading into the river, which forms a tidal 
basin with a depth at neap-tides of 24 ft. Alongside this is an 
extensive dock, and behind it an inner port. There is also a 
tidal basin opening off the entrance channel. The depth of 
water in the river-harbour is 33 ft. at spring-tide and 24 ft. at 
neap-tide; in the sluice of the dock the numbers are 29J and 23! 
respectively. The commerce of Boulogne consists chiefly in the 
importation of jute, wool, woven goods of silk and' wool, skins, 



threads, coal, timber, and iron and steel, and the exportation of 
wine, woven goods, table fruit, potatoes and other vegetables, 
skins, motor-cars, forage and cement. The average annual value 
of the exports in the five years 1901-1905 was £10,953,000 
(£u,7°4,ooo in the years 1896-1900), and of the imports 
£6,064,000 (£7,003,000 in the years 1896-1900). From 1901 to 
1905 the annual average of vessels entered, exclusive of fishing- 
smacks, was 2735, tonnage 1,747,699; and cleared 2750, tonnage 
1,748,297. The total number of passengers between Folkestone 
and Boulogne in 1906 was 295,000 or 49% above the average 
for the years 1901-1905. These travelled by the steamers of the 
South-Eastern & Chatham railway company. The liners of 
the Dutch-American, Hamburg-American and other companies 
also call at the port. In the extent and value of its fisheries 
Boulogne is exceeded by no seaport in France. The most 
important branch is the herring-fishery; next in value is the 
mackerel. Large quantities of fresh fish are transmitted to 
Paris by railway, but an abundant supply is reserved to the town 
itself. The fishermen live for the most part in a separate quarter 
called La Beurriere, situated in the upper part of the town. 
In 1905 the fisheries of Boulogne and the neighbouring village 
of Staples employed over 400 boats and 4500 men, the value 
of the fish taken being estimated at £1,025,000. Among the 
numerous industrial establishments in Boulogne and its environs 
may be mentioned foundries, cement-factories, important steel- 
pen manufactories, oil-works, dye-works, fish-curing works, 
flax-mills, saw-mills, and manufactories of cloth, fireproof ware, 
chocolate, boots and shoes, and soap. Shipbuilding is also 
carried on. 

Among the objects of interest in the neighbourhood the 
most remarkable is the Colonne de la Grande Armee, erected 
on the high ground above the town, in honour of Napoleon I., 
on occasion of the projected invasion of England, for which 
he here made great preparations. The pillar, which is 
of the Doric order, 166 ft. high, is surmounted by a statue 
of the emperor by A. S. Bosio. Though begun in 1804, the 
monument was not completed till 1841. On the edge of the 
cliff to the east of the port are some rude brick remains of an 
old building called Tour d'Ordre, said to be the ruins of a 
tower built by Caligula at the time of his intended invasion of 
Britain. 

Boulogne is identified with the Gessoriacum of the Romans, 
under whom it was an important harbour. It is suggested that 
it was the Partus Itius where Julius Caesar assembled his fleet 
(see Itius Portus). At an early period it began to be known as 
Bononia, a name which has been gradually modified into the 
present form. The town was destroyed by the Normans in 
882, but restored about 912. During the Carolingian period 
Boulogne was the chief town of a countship that was for long the 
subject of dispute between Flanders and Ponthieu. From the 
year 965 it belonged to the house of Ponthieu, of which Godfrey 
of Bouillon, the first king of Jerusalem, was a scion. Stephen of 
Blois, who became king of England in 1 13 5, had married Mahaut, 
daughter and heiress of Eustace, count of Boulogne. Their 
daughter Mary married Matthew of Alsace (d. n 73), and her 
daughter Ida (d. 1216) married Renaud of Dammartin. Of this 
last marriage was issue Mahaut, countess of Boulogne, wife of 
Philip Hurepel (d. 1 234) , a son of King Philip Augustus. To her 
succeeded the house of Brabant, issue of Mahaut of Boulogne, 
sister of Ida, and wife of Henry I. of Brabant; and then the 
house of Auvergne, issue of Alice, daughter of Henry I. .of 
Brabant, inherited the Boulonnais. It remained in the posses- 
sion of descendants of these families until Philip the Good, duke 
of Burgundy, seized uponit in 1419. In 1477 Louis XI. of France 
reconquered it, and reunited it to the French crown, giving 
Lauraguais as compensation to Bertrand IV. de la Tour, count of 
Auvergne, heir of the house of Auvergne. To avoid doing homage 
to Mary of Burgundy, suzerain of the Boulonnais and countess 
of Artois, Louis XL declared the countship of Boulogne to be 
held in fee of Our Lady of Boulogne. In 1544 Henry VIII. — 
more successful in this than Henry III. had been in 1347 — took 
the town by siege; but it was restored to France in 1550. 



324 



BOULOGNE-SUR-SEINE— BOURBAKI 



From 1566 to the end of the 18th century it was the seat 
of a bishopric. 

BOULOGNE-SUR-SEINE, a town of northern France, in the 
department of Seine, on the right bank of the Seine, S.W. of 
Paris and immediately outside the fortifications. Pop. (1906) 
49,412. The town has a Gothic church of the 14th and 15th 
centuries (restored in 1863) founded in honour of Notre-Dame of 
Boulogne-sur-Mer. To this fact is due the name of the place, 
which was previously called Menus-les-St Cloud. Laundrying is 
extensively carried on as well as the manufacture of metal boxes, 
soap, oil and furniture, and there are numerous handsome 
residences. For the neighbouring Bois de Boulogne see Paris. 

BOULTON, MATTHEW (1728-1809), English manufacturer 
and engineer, was born on the 3rd of September 1728, at Bir- 
mingham, where his father, Matthew Boulton the elder, was 
a manufacturer of metal articles of various kinds. To this 
business he succeeded on his father's death in 1759, and in 
consequence of its growth removed his works in 1762 from 
Snowhill to what was then a tract of barren heath at Soho, 2 nr. 
north of Birmingham. Here he undertook the manufacture of 
artistic objects in metal, as well as the reproduction of oil paint- 
ings by a mechanical process in which he was associated with 
Francis Eginton (173 7-1 805), who subsequently achieved a 
reputation as a worker in stained or enamelled glass. About 
1767, Boulton, who was finding the need of improving the motive 
power for his machinery, made the acquaintance of James Watt, 
who on his side appreciated the advantages offered by the Soho 
works for the development of his steam-engine. In 1772 Watt's 
partner, Dr John Roebuck, got into financial difficulties, and 
Boulton, to .whom he owed £1200, accepted the two-thirds share 
in Watt's patent held by him in satisfaction of the debt. Three 
years later Boulton and Watt formally entered into partnership, 
and it was mainly through the energy and self-sacrifice of the 
former, who devoted all the capital he possessed or could borrow 
to the enterprise, that the steam-engine was at length made a 
commercial success. It was also owing to Boulton that in 1 7 7 5 an 
act of parliament was obtained extending the term of Watt's 
1769 patent to 1799. In 1800 the two partners retired from 
the business, which they handed over to their sons, Matthew 
Robinson Boulton and James Watt junior. In 1788 Boulton 
turned his attention to coining machinery, and erected at Soho a 
complete plant with which he struck coins for the Sierra Leone 
and East India companies and for Russia, and in 1797 produced 
a new copper coinage for Great Britain. In 1797 he took out a 
patent in connexion with raising water on the principle of the 
hydraulic ram. He died at Birmingham on the 18th of August 
1809. 

BOUND, or Boundary (from O. Fr. bonde, Med. Lat. bodena or 
bulina, a frontier line), that which serves to indicate the limit or 
extent of land. It is usually defined by a certain mark, such as a 
post, ditch, hedge, dyke, wall of stones, &c, though on the other 
hand it may have to be ascertained by reference to a plan or by 
measurement. In law, the exact boundary of land is always a 
matter of evidence; where no evidence is available, the court 
acts on presumption. For example, the boundary of land on 
opposite sides of a road, whether public or private, is presumed to 
be the middle line of the road. Where two fields are separated by 
a hedge and ditch the boundary line will run between the hedge 
and the ditch. Boundaries of parishes, at common law, depended 
upon ancient and immemorial custom, and in many parishes 
great care was taken to perpetuate the boundaries of the parish 
by perambulations from time to time. The confusion of local 
boundaries in England was the subject of several commissions 
and committees in the 19th century, and much information will 
be found in their reports (1868, 1870, 1873, 1888). The Local 
Government Act 1888, ss. 50-63, contains provisions for the 
alteration of local areas. 

BOUNDS, BEATING THE, an ancient custom still observed in 
many English parishes. In former times when maps were rare 
it was usual to make a formal perambulation of the parish 
boundaries on Ascension day or during Rogation week. The 
latter is in the north of England still called " Gang Week " 



or " Ganging Days " from this " ganging " or procession. The 
priest of the parish with the churchwardens and the parochial 
officials headed a crowd of boys who, armed with green boughs, 
beat with them the parish border-stones. Sometimes the boys 
were themselves whipped or even violently bumped on the 
boundary-stones to make them remember. The object of taking 
boys was obviously to ensure that witnesses to the boundaries 
should survive as long as possible. In England the custom is as 
old as Anglo-Saxon days, as it is mentioned in laws of Alfred and 
iEthelstan. It is thought that it may have been derived from 
the Roman Terminalia, a festival celebrated on the 22nd of 
February in honour of Terminus, the god of landmarks, to whom 
cakes and wine were offered, sports and dancing taking place at 
the boundaries. In England a parish-ale or feast was always 
held after the perambulation, which assured its popularity, and in 
Henry VIII. 's reign the occasion had become an excuse for so 
much revelry that it attracted the condemnation of a preacher 
who declared " these solemne and accustomable processions and 
supplications be nowe growen into a right foule and detestable 
abuse." Beating the bounds had a religious side in the practice 
which originated the term Rogation, the accompanying clergy 
being supposed to beseech (rogare) the divine blessing upon the 
parish lands for the ensuing harvest. This feature originated in 
the 5th century, when Mamercus, bishop of Vienne, instituted 
special prayers and fasting and processions on these days. This 
clerical side of the parish bounds-beating was one of the 
religious functions prohibited by the Injunctions of Queen 
Elizabeth; but it was then ordered that the perambulation 
should continue to be performed as a quasi-secular function, 
so that evidence of the boundaries of parishes, &c. might be 
preserved (Gibson, Codex juris Ecclesiastici Anglicani (1761) 
pp. 213-214). Bequests were sometimes made in connexion with 
bounds-beating. Thus at Leighton Buzzard on Rogation Monday, 
in accordance with the will of one Edward Wilkes, a London 
merchant who died in 1646, the trustees of his almshouses 
accompanied the boys. The will was read and beer and plum 
rolls distributed. A remarkable feature of the bequest was that 
while the will is read one of the boys has to stand on his head. 

BOUNTY (through O. Fr. bontet, from Lat. bonitas, goodness), 
a gift or gratuity; more usually, a premium paid by a govern- 
ment to encourage some branch of production or industry, as in 
England in the case of the bounty on corn, first granted in 1688 
and abolished in 18 14, the herring-fishery bounties, the bounties 
on sail-cloth, linen and other goods. It is admitted that the 
giving of bounties is generally impolitic, though they may some- 
times be justified as a measure of state. The most striking 
modern example of a bounty was that on sugar (q.v.) . Somewhat 
akin to bounties are the subsidies granted to shipping (q.v.) 
by many countries. Bounties or, as they may equally weU be 
termed, grants are often given, more especially in new countries, 
for the destruction of beasts of prey; in the United States and 
some other countries, bounties have been given for tree-planting; 
France has given bounties to encourage the Newfoundland 
fisheries. 

Bounty was also the name given to the money paid to induce 
men to enlist in the army or navy, and, in the United Kingdom, 
to the sum given on entering the militia reserve. During the 
American Civil War, many recruits joined solely for the sake of 
the bounty offered, and afterwards deserted; they were called 
" bounty-jumpers." The term bounty was also applied in the 
English navy to signify money payable to the officers and crew 
of a ship in respect of services on particular occasions. 

Queen Anne's Bounty (q.v.) is a fund applied for the augmenta- 
tion of poor livings in the established church. 

King's Bounty is a grant made by the sovereign of his royal 
bounty to those of his subjects whose wives are delivered of 
three or more children at a birth. 

BOURBAKI, CHARLES DENIS SAUTER (1816-1897), French 
general, was born at Pau on the 22nd of April 1816, the son of a 
Greek colonel who died in the War of Independence in 1827. 
He entered St Cyr, and in 1836 joined the Zouaves, becoming 
lieutenant of the Foreign Legion in 1838, and aide-de-camp to 



BOURBON 



325 



King Louis Philippe. It was in the African expedition that he 
first came to the front. In 1842 he was captain in the Zouaves; 
1847, colonel of the Turcos; in 1850, lieutenant-colonel of the 1st 
Zouaves; 1851, colonel; 1854, brigadier-general. In the 
Crimean War he commanded a portion of the Algerian troops; 
and at the Alma, Inkerman and Sevastopol Bourbaki's name 
became famous. In 1857. he was made general of division, 
commanding in 1859 at Lyons. His success in the war with Italy 
was only second to that of MacMahon, and in 1862 he was pro- 
posed as a candidate for the vacant Greek throne, but declined 
the proffered honour. In 1870 the emperor entrusted him with 
the command of the Imperial Guard, and he played an important 
part in the fighting round Metz. 

A curious incident of the siege of Metz is connected with 
Bourbaki's name. A man who called himself Regnier, 1 about 
the 21st of September, appeared at Hastings, to seek an interview 
with the refugee empress Eugenie, and failing to obtain this he 
managed to get from the young prince imperial a signed photo- 
graph with a message to the emperor Napoleon. This he used, 
by means of a safe-conduct from Bismarck, as credentials to 
Marshal Bazaine, to whom he presented himself at Metz, telling 
him on the empress's alleged authority that peace was about to 
be signed and that either Marshal Canrobert or General Bourbaki 
was to go to Hastings for the purpose. Bourbaki at once went 
to England, with Prussian connivance, as though he had a 
recognized mission, only to discover from the empress at Hastings 
that a trick had been played on him; and as soon as he could 
manage he returned to France. He offered his services to 
Gambetta and received the command of the Northern Army, 
but was recalled on the 19th of November and transferred to the 
Army of the Loire. In command of the hastily-trained and 
ill-equipped Army of the East, Bourbaki made the attempt to 
raise the siege of Belfort, which, after the victory of Villersexel, 
ended in the repulse of the French in the three days' battle of the 
Lisaine. Other German forces under Manteuffel now closed upon 
Bourbaki, and he was eventually driven over the Swiss frontier 
with the remnant of his forces (see Franco-German War). His 
troops were in the most desperate condition, owing to lack of 
food; and out of 150,000 men under him when he started, only 
84,000 escaped from the Germans into Swiss territory. Bourbaki 
himself, rather than submit to the humiliation of a probable 
surrender, on the 26th of January 1871 delegated his functions 
to General Clinchant, and in the night fired a pistol at his own 
head, but the bullet, owing to a deviation of the weapon, was 
flattened against his skull and his life was saved. General 
Clinchant carried Bourbaki into Switzerland, and he recovered 
sufficiently to return to France. In July 1871 he again took the 
command at Lyons, and subsequently became military governor. 
In 1 88 1, owing to his political opinions, he was placed on the 
retired list. In 1885 he was an unsuccessful candidate for the 
senate. He died on the 27th of September 1897. A patriotic 
Frenchman and a brilliant soldier and leader, Bourbaki, like 
some other French generals of the Second Empire whose training 
had been obtained in Africa, was found wanting in the higher 
elements of command when the European conditions of 1870 
were concerned. 

BOURBON. The noble family of Bourbon, from which so 
many European kings have sprung, took its name from Bourbon 
1'Archambault, chief town of a lordship which in the 10th century 
was one of the largest baronies of the kingdom of France. The 
limits of the lordship, which was called the Bourbonnais, were 
approximately those of the modem department of Allier, being 
on the N. the Nivernais and Berry, on the E. Burgundy and 
Lyonnais, on the S. Auvergne and Marche and on the W. Berry. 

1 The whole Regnier affair remained a mystery ; the man himself 
— who on following Bourbaki to England made the impression on 
Lord Granville (see the Life of Lord Granville, by Lord Fitzmaurice, 
ii. 61) of being a " swindler " but honestly wishing to serve the 
empress — was afterwards mixed up in the Humbert frauds of 
1902-1903; he published his own version of the affair in 1870 in 
a pamphlet, Quel est voire nom? It has been suspected that on the 
part either of Bazaine or of the German authorities some undisclosed 
intrigue was on foot. 



The first of the long line of Bourbons known in history was 
Adh6mar or Aimar, who was invested with the barony towards 
the close of the 9th century. Matilda, heiress of the first house 
of Bourbon, brought this lordship to the family of Dampierre 
by her marriage, in 1196, with Guy of Dampierre, marshal of 
Champagne (d. 1215). In 1272 Beatrix, daughter of Agnes 
of Bourbon-Dampierre, and her husband John of Burgundy, 
married Robert, count of Clermont, sixth son of Louis IX. (St 
Louis) of France. The elder branches of the family had become 
extinct, and their son Louis became duke of Bourbon in 1327. 
In 1488 the line of his descendants enddd with Jean II., who 
died in that year. The whole estates passed to Jean's brother 
Pierre, lord of Beaujeu, who was married to Anne, daughter of 
Louis XL Pierre died in 1503, leaving only a daughter, Suzanne, 
who, in 1505, married Charles de Montpensier, heir of the 
Montpensier branch of the Bourbon family. Charles, afterwards 
constable of France, who took the title of duke of Bourbon on 
his marriage, was born in 1489, and at an early age was looked 
upon as one of the finest soldiers and gentlemen in France. 
With the constable ended the direct line from Pierre L, duke of 
Bourbon (d. 1356). But the fourth in descent from Pierre's 
brother, Jacques, count of La Marche, Louis, count of Vendome 
and Chartres (d. 1446), became the ancestor of the royal house 
of Bourbon and of the noble families of Conde, Conti and Mont- 
pensier. The fourth in direct descent from Louis of Vendome 
was Antoine de Bourbon, who in 1548 married Jeanne d'Albret, 
heiress of Navarre, and became king of Navarre in 1554. Their 
son became king of France as Henry IV. Henry was succeeded 
by his son, Louis XIII. , who left two sons, Louis XIV., and 
Philip, duke of Orleans, head of the Orleans branch. Louis XIV. 's 
son, the dauphin, died before his father, and left three sons, 
one of whom died without issue. Of the others the elder, Louis 
of Burgundy, died in 171 2, and his only surviving son became 
Louis XV. The younger, Philip, duke of Anjou, became king 
of Spain, and founded the Spanish branch of the Bourbon 
family. Louis XV. was succeeded by his grandson, Louis XVI., 
who perished on the scaffold. At the restoration the throne of 
France was occupied by Louis XVIIL, brother of Louis XVI., 
who in turn was succeeded by his brother Charles X. The second 
son of Charles X., the due de Berry, left a son, Henri Charles 
Ferdinand Marie Dieudonne d'Artois, due de Bordeaux, and 
comte de Chambord (g.v.). From Louis XIV.'s brother, Philip, 
descended another claimant of the throne. Philip's son was 
the regent Orleans, whose great-grandson, " Philippe Egalite," 
perished on the scaffold in 1793. Egalite's son, Louis Philippe, 
was king of the French from 1830 to 1848; his grandson, Louis 
Philippe, comte de Paris (1 838-1 894), inherited on the death 
of the comte de Chambord the rights of that prince to the throne 
of France, and was called by the royalists Philip VII. He had 
a son, Louis Philippe Robert, due d'Orleans, called by his 
adherents Philip VIII. 

Spanish Branch. — Philip, duke of Anjou, grandson of Louis 
XIV., became king of Spain as Philip V., in 1700. He was 
succeeded in 1746 by his son Ferdinand VI., who died in 1759 
without family, and was followed by his brother Charles III. 
Charles III.'s eldest son became Charles IV. of Spain in 1788, 
while his second son, Ferdinand, was made king of Naples in 
1759. Charles IV. was deposed by Napoleon, but in 1814 his 
son, Ferdinand VII., again obtained his throne. Ferdinand 
was succeeded by his daughter Isabella, who in 1870 abdicated 
in favour of her son, Alphonso XII. (d. 1885). Alphonso's 
posthumous son became king of Spain as Alphonso XIII. 
Ferdinand's brother, Don Carlos (d. 1855), claimed the throne 
in 1833 on the ground of the Salic law, and a fierce war raged 
for some years in the north of Spain. His son Don Carlos, 
count de Montemolin (1818-1861), revived the claim, but was 
defeated and compelled to sign a renunciation. The nephew of 
the latter, Don Carlos Maria Juan Isidor, duke of Madrid, for 
some years carried on war in Spain with the object of attaining 
the rights contended for by the Carlist party. 

Neapolitan Branch. — The first Bourbon who wore the crown 
of Naples was Charles III. of Spain, who on his succession to 



326 



BOURBON 






o 

m 

o 
« 

o 

w 

(/I 

O § 
B -8 

w I 



O £ 



u 

O 

o 

< 

w 
o 






c 

o d5 



55 






OS M 

.-5.2 O 

.So 7 

Ph a,^ 
•Mi, 
3 

-a 



Hf CO 

a cot 

•-" r 
_: 3 03 i(-~ 



CU IO 

.•SOT- 
j o o 
w* h^ 



3 



a) 

- 4) ON 



CU R^-s 

a os 10 

Q, CU 00 
Ph «-. lO Q/+- l> 



O P< 



.3 CU 

9 3 



30* 

-^H ^1 W 

io*T3 

'3 
O 
_) 



J3 
<u y 

■.§&& 

:3^00 
JZ V " 

^w CO 

'3 o J7 

►J c 
3 



CO 

3 _ 
Ovo 

en S 00 

-'3£T- 

0) M 

3 
T3 

CD 

In 
. E on 

>>5w 
K <u e 2 

3 
T3 

t-i 

1) 
'35 

a 

o °V_ 
"IS- 

JT 
3 



•§"°l 
-si? 1 - 

U-i <uco 



~s° T- 

-3 '02 

cu cu 00 
3 



G 

o 

•V R--n 



CU cu~ 
3 



CD 

s 

3 c3 ft 
C 11 N 

E °a 

'-N cu — 

3 
T3 



W 



CO 

- l-t 

as 
w o 

_G R "5 

£ ai O 

- £ <* 

[fl M M 

4)«-i . 
CO J,— ' 

•R.S 
U 3 



3 
_° Oc»_ 

(/J 4^ t-t 

o 



>>w 

R5S 
_ o co 

■M W 
R . 

-o ™ 



10 



Go . 



_0J CUCO 



3 



R 
0) 



fa ". 

CO J3 



O 



C 00 



. 10 



R 
\S 

3 w 

03 t-i 
^ T 4) 1 

- £ 00 — * 5 _ 

o 
J 



a<t/5.e-£-g 

(U cu M"- 1 ^ cu 
Al R co 11 cu 

3^ os— en 

T3 






i °5. 



>> 

R^^ 

3 M 

how 

.2 3 w 

— '3cq I - 

Jog 

3 



J3 
•-3 3« 

.2 1 — »£>- 
1° J3 CN 



2 w 

^w- 



3 
O 



» w 

2 lr ) 

S5: 



£>00 

-XT 



3 »>. 

o w 



i^ 

3 u O 
•^ CU N 

Urn °o 

fe Oci 

jb Ja n 

u 



Rxi 
. * 1- 

co w O 

^ rt E 00 

k p 3 

3 O 



3 
13 






3 
CT 

|H 
CO 

R 
O 



3 
cS 

o 



T3 
R 
cu 



G 

cu w 
— On 



bo 



- G<« I 
R — 



<0J 

"3 "5 

. o ■* 

co MOO 

cu~S- 
A! 

3 



l-< CO 


S •" 


St- 


>K 


_XT 


.2 4 


en 10 


3 io 


•goo 


«- 


^ 


Jii 


ji 



cS 





CO 

R 
- <u 


■a 

G 




•0 a^- 


cS 




R *> ■*• 






OS Goo 


> 




G Oco 




-^s- 


>< 




Cjt,-. JU 






b ° w 


Ul 


cu co 


*i 


'3 


-RPhoo 


3 





T3 


M-i 


jst: T 




O 


Ph "ci- 




1h 

CU 


—«cco 








£ 


3 3 w 




bo 


O O — 




3 


J O 




03 

-0 




-r co 


"3 




a G 


u 




°>c« 


3 




a8^ 


■M 




jaOoo 


03 
G 
oj 




Ph^ « 




. 


T3 




.2 <u& 

3^j 


_cu 




O 3 

>-)-o 


03 
E 

.9" 



BOURBON 



327 



•3 " 
3 ■§ 



a 



8 

a 



a 
m 



J3 
Oh 



3 co 



*C no 

eS *h 






1— 1 10 

H £°° 

esr 1 1 

fe o 
e 



1-5 C 
2oo 



fe £• 



_cS 

a*o\ 

.2<« 
_3^„ 1 _ 

00* 

3-i 
O 



eD 
CO 

•o2» 

- Cu JJ 10 
01 o 00 

3^ 

o 
o 



— cdwi t- 

1-. o n 

3 
O 

u 



1 



- -C ' 
Ph 



^ 








3 
O 


:ount 
Aqui 
b. 18 


t-J 



L_ es 7 - 

.S o 



fa" 



■M C 

-&J C nJ I 

cS 3CQ (N 

fa O ""■ 

" u 00 



ON 



10 



c ° f- 00 

3 -u 5 « 

eS 3.3^2. 

o 8o» 



NO 

Is 00 

"3 c S T 



> ON 

1-1 00 

en *-* 

- v I - 

"Coo 

* :* 
js £■ 

US 



-a "> 

eft ^ 00 
3 

•a 



■9 

« O H 

fa.£3 
3 



Coo 



■O 



y w 



[/J O rt M 

-o-g S»* 
o. S ca . 

<8^e 



.a- 

-CMS 

cS co 
Jhoo 
fa.". 



c •+ 
I — O 00 

D. ■ 



8 ST 

ccjoo 
COO 

-c « 
1) . 






.&00 

-:3 °° 



.a 00 

uoo 

_C00 
C3 w 
1-1 . 

fa.Q 






eft O 

.2 k- 



J3 . 



E 10 

^ om 



crj 

-o E a 

I 3 ^00 

_S >« 1 - 

C ..NO 



O On 

a . 



"c"— o? 

cOoo 






-0^5 






•a M 

0^1 « 
-"<-. J, 

CO o 00 

N-^ QJ 00 

3 % -' 

•a 

S'o' 
- > <^ 

K flJCO 
4h a) 00 



cs 



O§00 -JJ K. 

_~ ^ M _ 6 00 

r"\°£ '3" 

3 

-a 



+- 



?N 00 

o» 



O 00 



- T ("1 

_c--- a . 



^ CO 

-QOO 

c r 
-a L- 

.1^ 00 

-o t- 



I" 

a 00 



J3^ 

a 



& < w 5 



_2 
-3 6 

•9 ^ 
!Soo 



00 

^a^ o 



- en 
-0.fi ON 

<°£ 

0) 



cS^-, 
3 o 



c3 



Q^oo HOOn — o 



o 

bo 

C 

3' 



.- o On 

j;Sc- 
•o 



S s 

IE 1 - 

§-s 

to 
tn o 

£? G 

C 1-. 

D .a 

n£ 

c^ 1 
o 
o . 

•PS 



nj 3 



B?T3 
Oii 

Sg 
£00 

c « 

o 

u 



e.S 



b"0 SI 
S.5J 

So2 



is 

T_ 



c 


3 






J3 


X 


en 


(/) 


3 


1 


O 


>n 


03 


C 




O 


;.J 


eft 


(ft 


X 








M 


<u 


C 


C3 


-a 

3 


O 




c 



S s 

O 3 

>— J3 
T3 O 

eft O 
CU 

■a eu 
^^ 

E"°. 

-2 
■ota 
j: ojo 

«-3 



_eS 

cS c 
eft CS 

to 

o S 
■^ en 
4) "3 

•2 j 

cS s g 
E eu 

•a* 

o.S 
tu"3 

eftfe 

oa'> 

C3 



X 



Coo 

3 « 
O v -' 

o 



eS 

jj" is 00 

euPn 00 

-•£ I*. M 

00 ■ 



<& 



<i>e 

3 
T3 



O en 10 
2 00 4J o 
.2 00 u e3N 
'— ^ — cS w 
'- 1 jB 



td 



vs 



&00 

— eft i-i 
O . 



L_Soo 



328 



BOURBON, CHARLES— BOURBON-LANCY 



the Spanish throne in 1759, resigned his- kingdom of Naples 
to his son Ferdinand. Ferdinand was deposed by Napoleon, 
but afterwards regained his throne, and took the title of 
Ferdinand I., king of the Two Sicilies. In 1825 he was succeeded 
by his son Francis, who in turn was succeeded in 1830 by his son 
Ferdinand II. Ferdinand II. died in 1859, and in the following 
year his successor Francis II. was deprived of his kingdom, 
which was incorporated into the gradually-uniting Italy. 

Duchies of Lucca and Parma. — In 1748 the duchy of Parma 
was conferred on Philip, youngest son of Philip V. of Spain. 
He was succeeded by his son Ferdinand in 1765. Parma was 
ceded to France in i8or, Ferdinand's son Louis being made king 
of Etruria, but the French only took possession of the duchy 
after Ferdinand's death in 1802. Louis's son Charles Louis 
was forced to surrender Etruria to France in 1807, and he was 
given the duchy of Lucca by the congress of Vienna in 1815. 
In 1847, on the death of Marie Louise, widow of Napoleon, 
who had received Parma and Piacenza in accordance with the 
terms of the treaty of Paris of 1814, Charles Louis succeeded 
to the duchies as Charles II., at the same time surrendering 
Lucca to Tuscany. In 1849 he abdicated in favour of his son, 
Charles III., who married a daughter of the duke of Berry, and 
was assassiiiated in 1854, being succeeded by his son Robert. 
In i860 the duchies were annexed by Victor Emmanuel to the 
new kingdom of Italy. 

Bastard Branches. — There are numerous bastard branches 
of the family of Bourbon, the most famous being the Vendome 
branch, descended from Caesar, natural son of Henry IV., and 
the Maine and Toulouse branches, descended from the two 
natural sons of Louis XIV. and Madame de Montespan. 

See Coiffier de Moret, Histoire du Bourbonnais et des Bourbons 
(2 vols., 1824) ; Berand, Histoire des sires et dues de Bourbon (1835) ; 
Desormeaux, Histoire de la maison de Bourbon (5 vols., 1 782-1 788) ; 
Achaintre, Histoire genealogique et chronologique de la maison royale 
de Bourbon (2 vols., 1 825-1 826); and Dussieux, Genealogie de la 
maison de Bourbon (1872). 

BOURBON, CHARLES, Duke of (1490-1527), constable of 
France, second son of Gilbert, count of Montpensier and dauphin 
of Auvergne, was born on the 17th of February 1490, his mother 
being a Gonzaga. In 1505 he married Suzanne, heiress of Peter 
II., duke of Bourbon, by Anne of France, daughter of King Louis 
XL, and assumed the title of duke of Bourbon. The addition 
of this duchy to the numerous duchies, countships and other 
fiefs which he had inherited on the death of his elder brother 
Louis in 1501, made him at the age of fifteen the wealthiest 
noble in Europe. He gained his first military experience in 
the Italian campaigns of Louis XII., taking part in the suppres- 
sion of the Genoese revolt (1507) and contributing to the victory 
over the Venetians at Agnadello (May 14, 1509). Shortly after 
the accession of Francis I. Bourbon received the office of constable 
of France, and for his brilliant services at the battle of Marignano 
(September 1515) he was made governor of the Milanese, which 
he succeeded in defending against an attack of the emperor 
Maximilian. But dissensions arose between Francis and the 
constable. Grave, haughty and taciturn, Bourbon was but ill 
suited to the levities of the court, and his vast wealth and 
influence kindled in the king a feeling of resentment, if not 
of fear. The duke was recalled from the government of the 
Milanese; his official salary and the sums he had borrowed 
for war expenses remained unpaid; and in the campaign in 
the Netherlands against the emperor Charles V. the command 
of the vanguard, one of the most cherished prerogatives of the 
constables, was taken from him. The death of his wife without 
surviving issue, on the 28th of April 1521, afforded the mother 
of the king, Louise of Savoy, a means to gratify her greed, and 
at the same time to revenge herself on Bourbon, who had slighted 
her love. A suit was instituted at her instance against the duke 
in the parlement of Paris, in which Louise, as grand-daughter 
of Charles, duke of Bourbon (d. 1456), claimed the female and 
some of the male fiefs of the duchy of Bourbon, while the king 
claimed those fiefs which were originally appanages, as escheating 
to the crown, and other claims were put forward. Before the 
parlement was able to arrive at a decision, Francis handed over 



to his mother a part of the Bourbon estates, and ordered the 
remainder to be sequestrated. 

Smarting under these injuries, Bourbon, who for some time 
had been coquetting with the enemies of France, renewed his 
negotiations with the emperor and Henry VIII. of England. 
It was agreed that the constable should raise in his own dominions 
an armed force to assist the emperor in an invasion of France, and 
should receive in return the hand of Eleonora, queen dowager 
of Portugal, or of another of the emperor's sisters, and an 
independent kingdom comprising his own lands together with 
Dauphine and Provence. He was required, too, to swear fidelity 
to Henry VIII. as king of France. But Bourbon's plans were 
hampered by the presence of the French troops assembling for 
the invasion of Italy, and for this reason he was unable to effect 
a junction with the emperor's German troops from the east. 
News of the conspiracy soon reached the ears of Francis, who 
was on his way to take command of the Italian expedition. In 
an interview with Bourbon at Moulins the king endeavoured 
to persuade him to accompany the French army into Italy, but 
without success. Bourbon remained at Moulins for a few days, 
and after many vicissitudes escaped into Italy. The joint 
invasion of France by the emperor and his ally of England had 
failed signally, mainly through lack of money and defects of 
combination. In the spring of 1524, however, Bourbon at the 
head of the imperialists in Lombardy forced the French across 
the Sesia (where the chevalier Bayard was mortally wounded) 
and drove them out of Italy. In August 1524 he invested 
Marseilles, but being unable to prevent the introduction of 
supplies by Andrea Doria, the Genoese admiral in the service of 
Francis, he was forced to raise the siege and retreat to the 
Milanese. He took part in the battle of Pa via (1525), where 
Francis was defeated and taken prisoner. But Bourbon's 
troops were clamouring for pay, and the duke was driven to 
extreme measures to satisfy their demands. Cheated of his 
kingdom and his bride after the treaty of Madrid (1526), Bourbon 
had been offered the duchy of Milan by way of compensation. 
He now levied contributions from the townsmen, and demanded 
20,000 ducats for the liberation of the chancellor Girolamo 
Morone (d. 1529), who had been imprisoned for an attempt to 
realize his dream of an Italy purged of the foreigner. But the 
sums thus raised were wholly inadequate. In February 1527 
Bourbon's army was joined by a body of German mercenaries, 
mostly Protestants, and the combined forces advanced towards 
the papal states. Refusing to recognize the truce which the 
viceroy of Naples had concluded with Pope Clement VII., 
Bourbon hastened to put into execution the emperor's plan of 
attaching Clement to his side by a display of force. But the 
troops, starving and without pay, were in open mutiny, and 
Spaniards and Lutherans alike were eager for plunder. On the 
5th of May 1527 the imperial army appeared before the walls 
of Rome. On the following morning Bourbon attacked the 
Leonine City, and while mounting a scaling ladder fell mortally 
wounded by a shot, which Benvenuto Cellini in his Life claims to 
have fired. After Bourbon's death his troops took and sacked 
Rome. 

See E. Armstrong, Charles V. (London, 1902) ; Cambridge Mod. 
Hist. vol. ii., bibliography to chaps, i. ii. and iii. 

BOURBON-LANCY, a watering-place of east-central France 
in the department of Saone-et-Loire, on a hill about 2 m. from 
the right bank of the Loire and on the Borne, 52 m. S.S.E. of 
Nevers by rail. Pop. (1906) town, 1896; commune, 4266. The 
town possesses thermal springs, resorted to in the Roman period, 
and- ancient baths and other remains have been found. The 
waters, which are saline and ferruginous, are used for drinking 
and bathing, in cases of rheumatism, &c. Their temperature 
varies from 117 to 132 F. Cardinal Richelieu, Madame de 
Sevigne, James II. of England, and other celebrated persons 
visited the springs in the 17th and 18th centuries. The town 
has a well-equipped bathing establishment, a large hospital, and 
a church of the nth and 12th centuries (used as an archaeo- 
logical museum), and there are ruins of an old stronghold on a 
hill overlooking the town. A belfry pierced by a gateway of 



BOURBON L'ARCHAMBAULT— BOURDON 



329 



the 15th century and houses of the 15th and 16th centuries also 
remain. The industries of the town include the manufacture of 
farm implements. 

In the middle ages Bourbon-Lancy was an important strong- 
hold and a fief of the Bourbon family, from the name of a member 
of which the suffix to its name is derived. 

BOURBON L'ARCHAMBAULT, a town of central France in 
the department of Allier, on the Burge, 16 m. W. of Moulins by 
rail. Pop. (1906) 2306. The town has thermal springs known 
in Roman times, which are used in cases of scrofula and 
rheumatism. The bathing-establishment is owned by the state. 
A church dating from the 12th century, and ruins of a castle 
of the dukes of Bourbon (13th and 15th centuries), including a 
cylindrical keep, are of interest. There are a military and a 
civil hospital in the town. Stone is quarried in the vicinity. 
Bourbon (Aquae Borvonis or Bormonis) was anciently the capital 
of the Bourbonnais and gave its name to the great Bourbon 
family. The affix Archambault is the name of one of its early 
lords. 

BOURBONNE-LES-BAINS, a- town of eastern France, in the 
department of Haute-Marne, 355 m. by rail E.N.E. of Langres. 
Pop. (1906) 3738. It is much frequented on account of its hot 
saline springs, which were known to the Romans under the name 
Aquae Borvonis. The heat of these springs varies from no° to 
156° F. The waters are used in cases of lymphatic affections, 
scrofula, rheumatism, wounds, &c. The principal buildings are 
a church of the 12th century, the state bathing-establishment 
and the military hospital ; there are also the remains of a castle. 
Timber-sawing and plaster manufacture are carried on in the 
town. In the neighbourhood are the buildings of the celebrated 
Cistercian abbey of Morimond. 

BOURCHIER, ARTHUR (1864- ), English actor, was born 
in Berkshire in 1864, and educated at Eton and Christ Church, 
Oxford. At the university he became prominent as an amateur 
actor in connexion with the O.U.A.D.C, which he founded, and 
in 1889 he joined Mrs Langtry as a professional. He also acted 
with Charles Wyndham at the Criterion, and was for a while in 
Daly's company in America. In 1894 he married the actress 
Violet Vanbrugh, elder sister of the no less well-known actress 
Irene Vanbrugh, and he and his wife subsequently took the lead- 
ing parts under his management of the Garrick theatre. Both 
as tragedian and comedian Mr Bourchier took high rank on the 
London stage, and his career as actor-manager was remarkable 
for the production of a number of successful modern plays, by 
Mr Sutro and others. 

BOURCHIER, THOMAS (c. 1404-1486), English archbishop, 
lord chancellor and cardinal, was a younger son of William 
Bourchier, count of Eu (d. 1420), and through his mother, Anne, 
a daughter of Thomas of Woodstock, duke of Gloucester, was a 
descendant of Edward III. One of his brothers was Henry, 
earl of Essex (d. 1483), and his grand-nephew was John, Lord 
Berners, the translator of Froissart. Educated at Oxford and 
then entering the church, he obtained rapid promotion, and 
after holding some minor appointments he became bishop of 
Worcester in 1434. In the same year he was chancellor of the 
university of Oxford, and in 1443 he was appointed bishop of 
Ely; then in April 1454 he was made archbishop of Canterbury, 
becoming lord chancellor of England in the following March. 
Bourchier's short term of office as chancellor coincided with the 
opening of the Wars of the Roses, and at first he was not a strong 
partisan, although he lost his position as chancellor when 
Richard, duke of York, was deprived of power in October 1456. 
Afterwards, in 1458, he helped to reconcile the contending 
parties, but when the war was renewed in 1459 he appears as a 
decided Yorkist; he crowned Edward IV. in June 1461, and four 
years later he performed a similar service for the queen, Elizabeth 
Woodville. In 1457 Bourchier took the chief part in the trial 
of Reginald Pecock, bishop of Chichester, for heresy; in 1467 he 
was created a cardinal; and in 1475 he was one of the four 
arbitrators appointed to arrange the details of the treaty of 
Picquigny between England and France. After the death of 
Edward IV. in 1483 Bourchier persuaded the queen to allow 



her younger son, Richard, duke of York, to share his brother's 
residence in the Tower of London; and although he had sworn 
to be faithful to Edward V. before his father's death, he crowned 
Richard III. in July 1483. He was, however, in no way 
implicated in the murder of the young princes, and he was 
probably a participant in the conspiracies against Richard. 
The third English king crowned by Bourchier was Henry VII., 
whom he also married to Elizabeth of York in January i486. 
The archbishop died on the 30th of March i486 at his residence, 
Knole, near Sevenoaks, and was buried in Canterbury cathedral. 

See W. F. Hook, Lives of the Archbishops of Canterbury (1860- 
1884;. 

BOURDALOUE, LOUIS (1632-1704), French Jesuit and 
preacher, was born at Bourges on the 20th of August 1632. At 
the age of sixteen he entered the Society of Jesus, and was 
appointed successively professor of rhetoric, philosophy and 
moral theology, in various colleges of the Order. His success as 
a preacher in the provinces determined his superiors to call him 
to Paris in 1669 to occupy for a year the pulpit of the church of 
St 'Louis. Owing to his eloquence he was speedily ranked in 
popular estimation with Corneille, Racine, and the other leading 
figures of the most brilliant period of Louis XIV.'s reign. He 
preached at the court of Versailles during the Advent of 1670 
and the Lent of 1672, and was subsequently called again to 
deliver the Lenten course of sermons in 1674, 1675, 1680 and 
1682, and the Advent sermons of 1684, 1689 and 1693. This 
was all the more noteworthy as it was the custom never to call 
the same preacher more than three times to court. On the 
revocation of the Edict of Nantes he was sent to Languedoc to 
confirm the new converts in the Catholic faith, and he had 
extraordinary success in this delicate mission. Catholics and 
Protestants were unanimous in praising his fiery eloquence in 
the Lent sermons which he preached at Montpellier in 1686. 
Towards the close of his life he confined his ministry to chari- 
table institutions, hospitals and prisons, where his sympathetic 
discourses and conciliatory manners were always effective. He 
died in Paris on the 13th of May 1704. His peculiar strength lay 
in his power of adapting himself to audiences of every kind, and 
throughout his public career he was highly appreciated by all 
classes of society. His influence was due as much to his saintly 
character and to the gentleness of his manners as to the force of 
his reasoning. Voltaire said that his sermons surpassed those of 
Bossuet (whose retirement in 1669, however, practically coincided 
with Bourdaloue's early pulpit utterances); and there is little 
doubt that their simplicity and coherence, and the direct appeal 
which they made to hearers of all classes, gave them' a superiority 
over the more profound sermons of Bossuet. Bourdaloue may 
be with justice regarded as one of the greatest French orators, 
and many of his sermons have been adopted as text-books in 
schools. 

Bibliography. — The only authoritative source for the Sermons 
is the edition of Pere Bretonneau (14 vols., Paris, 1707-1721, followed 
by the Pensees, 2 vols., 1734). There has been much controversy 
both as to the authenticity of some of the sermons in this edition 
and as to the text in general. It is, however, generally agreed that 
the changes confessedly made by Bretonneau were merely formal. 
Other editions not based on Bretonneau are inferior; some, indeed, 
are altogether spurious (e.g. that of Abbe Sicard, 1810). Among 
critical works are: Anatole Feugere, Bourdaloue, sa predication 
et son temps (Paris, 1874) ; Adrien Lezat, Bourdaloue, theologien el 
orateur (Paris, 1874) ; P. M. Lauras, Bourdaloue, sa vie et ses osuvres 
(2 vols., Paris, 1881); Abbe Blampignon, Elude sur Bourdaloue 
(Paris, 1886); Henri Cherot, Bourdaloue inconnu (Paris, 1898), and 
Bourdaloue, sa correspondance et ses correspondans (Paris, 1898- 
1904); L. Pauthe, Bourdaloue (les maitres de la chaire au XVII" 
sihcle) (Paris, 1900) ; E. Griselle, Bourdaloue, histoire critique de sa 
predication (2 vols., Paris, 1901), Sermons inedits; bibliographic, 
&c. (Paris, 1901), Deux sermons inedits sur le royaume de Dieu (Lille 
and Paris, 1904) ; Ferdinand Castets, Bourdaloue, la vie et la predi- 
cation d'un religieux au XVII' siecle, and La Revue Bourdaloue 
(Paris, 1902-1904) ; C. H. Brooke, Great French Preachers (ser- 
mons of Bourdaloue and Bossuet, London, 1904) ; F. Brunetiere, 
" L'Eloquence de Bourdaloue," in Revue des deux mondes (August 
1904), a general inquiry into the authenticity of the sermons and 
their general characteristics. 

BOURDON, FRANCOIS LOUIS (d. 1797), known as Bourdon 
de l'Oise, French revolutionist, was procureur at the parlement 



33° 



BOURG-EN-BRESSE— BOURGES 



of Paris. He ardently embraced the revolutionary doctrines 
and took an active part in the insurrection of the ioth of August 
1792. Representing the department of the Oise in the Conven- 
tion, he voted for the immediate death of the king. He accused 
the Girondists of relations with the court, then turned against 
Robespierre, who had him expelled from the Jacobin club for 
his conduct as commissioner of the Convention with the army of 
La Rochelle. On the 9th Thermidor he was one of the deputies 
delegated to aid Barras to repress the insurrection made by the 
commune of Paris in favour of Robespierre. Bourbon then be- 
came a violent reactionary, attacking the former members of the 
Mountain and supporting rigorous measures against the rioters 
of the 1 2th Germinal and the 1st Prairial of the year III. In 
the council of Five Hundred, Bourdon belonged to the party of 
" Clichyens," composed of disguised royalists, against whom 
the directors made the coup d'etat of the 18th Fructidor. 
Bourdon was arrested and deported to French Guiana, where he 
died soon after his arrival. 

BOURG-EN-BRESSE, a town of eastern France, capital of 
the department of Ain, and formerly capital of the province 
of Bresse, 36 m. N.N.E. of Lyons by the Paris-Lyon railway. 
Pop. (1906) town, 13,916; commune, 20,045. Bourg is situated 
at the western base of the Jura, on the left bank of the Reys- 
souze, a tributary of the Saone. The chief of the older buildings 
is the church of Notre-Dame (16th century), of which the facade 
belongs to the Renaissance ; other parts of the church are Gothic. 
In the interior there are stalls of the 16th century. The other 
public buildings, including a handsome prefecture, are modern. 
The hotel de ville contains a library and the Lorin museum 
with a collection of pictures, while another museum has a collec- 
tion of the old costumes and ornaments characteristic of Bresse. 
Among the statues in the town there is one of Edgar Quinet 
(1803-1875), a native of Bourg. Bourg is the seat of a prefect 
and of a court of assizes, and has a tribunal of first instance, a 
tribunal and a chamber of commerce, and a branch of the Bank 
of France. Its educational establishments include lycees for 
boys and girls, and training colleges. The manufactures consist 
of iron goods, mineral waters, tallow, soap and earthenware, 
and there are flour mills and breweries; and there is considerable 
trade in grain, cattle and poultry. The church of Brou, a 
suburb of Bourg, is of great artistic interest. Marguerite of 
Bourbon, wife of Philibert II. of Savoy, had intended to found a 
monastery on the spot, but died before her intention could be 
carried into effect. The church was actually built early in the 1 6th 
century by her daughter-in-law Marguerite of Austria, wife of 
Philibert le Beau of Savoy, in memory of her husband. The 
exterior, especially the facade, is richly ornamented, but the 
chief interest lies in the works of art in the interior, which date 
from 1532. The most important are the three mausoleums with 
the marble effigies of Marguerite of Bourbon, Philibert le Beau, 
and Marguerite of Austria. All three are remarkable for perfec- 
tion of sculpture and richness of ornamentation. The rood loft, 
the oak stalls, and the reredos in the chapel of the Virgin are 
masterpieces in a similar style. 

Roman remains have been discovered at Bourg, but little is 
known of its early history. Raised to the rank of a free town 
in 1250, it was at the beginning of the 15th century chosen by 
the dukes of Savoy as the chief city of the province of Bresse. 
In 1535 it passed to France, but was restored to Duke Philibert 
Emmanuel, who later built a strong citadel, which afterwards 
withstood a six months' siege by the soldiers of Henry IV. 
The town was finally ceded to France in 1601. In 1814 the in- 
habitants, in spite of the defenceless condition of their town, 
offered resistance to the Austrians, who put the place to 
pillage. 

BOURGEOIS, LEON VICTOR AUGUSTE (1851- ), French 
statesman, was born at Paris on the 21st of May 1851, and was 
educated for the law. After holding a subordinate office (1876) 
in the department of public works, he became successively 
prefect of the Tarn (1882) and the Haute-Garonne (1885), and 
then returned to Paris to enter the ministry of the interior. 
He became prefect of police in November 1887, at the critical 



moment of President Grevy's resignation. In the following 
year he entered the chamber, being elected deputy for the Marne, 
in opposition to General Boulanger, and joined the radical left. 
He was under-secretary for home affairs in the Floquet ministry 
of 1888, and resigned with it in 1889, being then returned to the 
chamber for Reims. In the Tirard ministry, which succeeded, 
he was minister of the interior, and subsequently, on the 18th 
of March 1890, minister of public instruction in the cabinet 
of M. de Freycinet, a post for which he had qualified himself 
by the attention he had given to educational matters. In this 
capacity he was responsible in 1890 for some important reforms 
in secondary education. He retained his office in M. Loubet's 
cabinet in 1892, and was minister of justice under M. Ribot at 
the end of that year, when the Panama scandals were making the 
office one of peculiar difficulty. He energetically pressed the 
Panama prosecution, so much so that he was accused of having 
put wrongful pressure on the wife of one of the defendants in 
order to procure evidence. To meet the charge he resigned in 
March 1893, but again took office, and only retired with the rest 
of the Freycinet ministry. In November 1895 he himself formed 
a cabinet of a pronouncedly radical type, the main interest of 
which was attached to its fall, as the result of a constitutional 
crisis arising from the persistent refusal of the senate to vote 
supply. The Bourgeois ministry appeared to consider that 
popular opinion would enable them to override what they claimed 
to be an unconstitutional action on the part of the upper house; 
but the public was indifferent and the senate triumphed. The 
blow was undoubtedly damaging to M. Bourgeois's career as an 
homme de gouvernement. As minister of public instruction in the 
Brisson cabinet of 1898 he organized courses for adults in primary 
education. After this short ministry he represented his country 
with dignity and effect at the Hague peace congress, and in 1903 
was nominated a member of the permanent court of arbitration. 
He held somewhat aloof from the political struggles of the 
Waldeck-Rousseau and Combes ministries, travelling consider- 
ably in foreign countries. In 1902 and 1903 he was elected 
president of the chamber. In 1905 he replaced the due 
d'Audiffret-Pasquier as senator for the department of Marne, 
and in May 1906 became minister of foreign affairs in the 
Sarrien cabinet. He was responsible for the direction of French 
diplomacy in the conference at Algeciras. 

BOURGEOIS, a French word, properly meaning a freeman of a 
bourg or borough in France; later the term came to have the 
wider significance of the whole class lying between the ouvriers 
or workmen and the nobility, and is now used generally of the 
trading middle-class of any country. In printing, the word 
(pronounced burjoice') is used of a type coming in size between 
longprimer and brevier; the derivation is supposed to be from 
the name of a French printer, otherwise unknown. 

BOURGES, a city of central France, chief town of the depart- 
ment of Cher, 144 m. S. of Paris on the Orleans railway between 
Vierzon and Nevers. Pop. (1906) town, 34,581; commune, 
44,133. Bourges is built amidst flat and marshy country on an 
eminence limited on three sides by the waters of the Canal Of 
Berry, the Yevre, the Auron, and other smaller streams with 
which they unite at this point. The older part of the town with 
its narrow streets and old houses forms a centre, to the south and 
east of which lie important engineering suburbs. Flourishing 
nurseries and market-gardens are situated in the marshy ground 
to the north and north-east. Bourges preserves portions of the 
Roman ramparts of the 4th century, which are for the most part 
built into the houses of the old quarter. They measure consider- 
ably less in circumference than the fortifications of the 13 th 
century, remains of which in the shape of ruined walls and towers 
are still to be seen. The summit of the rise on which the city is 
built is crowned by the cathedral of St Etienne, one of the most 
important in France. Begun at the end of the 12th century, 
it was not completed till the 16th century, to which period 
belong the northernmost of the two unfinished towers flanking 
the facade and two of its five elaborately sculptured portals. 
The interior, which has double aisles, the inner aisles of remark- 
able height, and no transepts, contains, among many other 



BOURGET 



33i 



works of art, magnificent stained glass of the 13th century. 
Beneath the choir there is a crypt of Romanesque construction, 
where traces of the Roman fosses are to be found; the two 
lateral portals are also survivals of a Romanesque church. The 
Jardin de PArcheveche, a pleasant terrace-garden, adjoins the 
choir of the cathedral. Bourges has many fine old houses. The 
hotel Lallemant and the hotel Cujas (now occupied by the 
museum) are of ttte Renaissance period. The hotel de Jacques 
Cceur, named after the treasurer of Charles VII. and now used 
as the law-court, is of still greater interest, though it has been 
doubted whether Jacques Cceur himself inhabited it. The man- 
sion is in the Renaissance style, but two towers of the Roman 
fortifications were utilized in the construction of the south- 
western facade (see House, Plate II. figs. 7 and 8). Its wings 
surround a courtyard into which three staircase turrets project; 
one of these leads to a chapel, the ceiling of which is decorated by 
fine frescoes. 

Bourges is the seat of an archbishopric, a court of appeal, a 
court of assizes and a prefect; and is the headquarters of the 
VIII. army corps. It has tribunals of first instance and of 
commerce, a board of trade-arbitrators, and a chamber of 
commerce, and a branch of the Bank of France. Its educational 
institutions include an ecclesiastical seminary, a lycee for boys, 
and a college for girls, training colleges, and a school of industrial 
art. The industrial activity of Bourges depends primarily on 
its gunpowder and ammunition factories, its cannon-foundry 
and gun-carriage works. These all belong to the government, 
and, together with huge magazines, a school of pyrotechnics, 
and an artillery school, lie in the east of the town. The suburb 
of Mazieres has large iron and engineering works, and there are 
manufactories of anvils, edge-tools, biscuits, woollen goods, 
oil-cloth, boots and shoes, fertilizers, brick and tile works, 
breweries, distilleries, tanneries, saw-mills and dye-works. The 
town has a port on the canal of Berry, and does a considerable 
trade in grain, wine, vegetables, hemp and fruit. 

Bourges occupies the site of the Gallic town of Avaricum, 
capital of the Bituriges, mentioned by Caesar as one of the most 
important of all Gaul. In 52 B.C., during the war with Vercin- 
getorix, it was completely destroyed by the Roman conqueror, 
but under Augustus it rose again into importance, and was made 
the capital of Aquitania Prima. About a.d. 250 it became the 
seat of a bishop, the first occupant of the see being Ursinus. 
Captured by the Visigoths about 47 s, it continued in their posses- 
sion till about 507. In the middle ages it was the capital of 
Berry. During the English occupation of France in the 15th 
century it became the residence of Charles VII., who thus 
acquired the popular title of " king of Bourges." In 1463 a 
university was founded in the city by Louis XL, which continued 
for centuries to be one of the most famous in France, especially 
in the department of jurisprudence. On many occasions Bourges 
was the seat of ecclesiastical councils — the most important being 
the council of 1438, in which the Pragmatic Sanction of the 
Gallican church was established, and that of 1528, in which the 
Lutheran doctrines were condemned. 

BOURGET, PAUL CHARLES JOSEPH (1852- ), French 
novelist and critic, was born at Amiens on the 2nd of September 
1852. His father, a professor of mathematics, was afterwards 
appointed to a post in the college at Clermont-Ferrand. Here 
Bourget received his early education. He afterwards studied 
at the Lycee Louis-le-Grand and at the Ecole des Hautes Etudes. 
In 1872-1873 he produced a volume of verse, Au bord de la mer, 
which was followed by others, the last, Les Aveux, appearing in 
1882. Meanwhile he was making a name in literary journalism, 
and in 1883 he published Essais de psychologie contemporaine, 
studies of eminent writers first printed in the Nouvelle Revue, 
and now brought together. In 1884 Bourget paid a long visit 
to England, and there wrote his first published story (L'lrrepa- 
rable). Cruelle Enigme followed in 1885; and Andre' Cornells 
(1886) and Mensonges (1887) were received with much favour. 
Le Disciple (1889) showed the novelist in a graver attitude; while 
in i8qi Sensations d'llalie, notes of a tour in that country, 
revealed a fresh phase of his powers. In the same year appeared 



the novel Cceur de femme, and Nouveaux Pastels, types of the 
characters of men, the sequel to a similar gallery of female types 
(Pastels, 1890) . His later novels include La Terre promise (1892) ; 
Cosmopolis (1892), a psychological novel, with Rome as a back- 
ground; Une Idylle tragique (1896); La Duchesse bleue (1897); 
Le Fantcme (1901) ; Les Deux Sceurs (1905) ; and some volumes of 
shorter stories — Complications sentimentales (1896), the powerful 
Dramesdefamille(i8g&), Un Homme fort (1900) , V Etape (1902), 
a study of the inability of a family raised too rapidly from the 
peasant class to adapt itself to new conditions. This powerful 
study of contemporary manners was followed by Un Divorce 
(1904), a defence of the Roman Catholic position that divorce is 
a violation of natural laws, any breach of which inevitably 
entails disaster. Etudes et portraits, first published in 1888, 
contains impressions of Bourget's stay in England and Ireland, 
especially reminiscences of the months which he spent at Oxford; 
and Outre-Mer (1895), a book in two volumes, is his critical 
journal of a visit to the United States in 1893. He was admitted 
to the Academy in 1894, and in 1895 was promoted to be an 
officer of the Legion of Honour, having received the decoration 
of the order ten years before. 

As a writer of verse Bourget was merely trying his wings, and 
his poems, which were collected in two volumes (1885-1887), are 
chiefly interesting for the light which they throw upon his 
mature method and the later products of his art. It was in 
criticism that his genius first found its true bent. The habit of 
close scientific analysis which he derived from his father, the 
sense of style produced by a fine ear and moulded by a classical 
education, the innate appreciation of art in all its forms, the 
taste for seeing men and cities, the keen interest in the oldest not 
less than the newest civilizations, and the large tolerance not to 
be learned on the boulevard — all these combined to provide him 
with a most uncommon equipment for the critic's task. It is not 
surprising that the Sensations d'ltalie (1891), and the various 
psychological studies, are in their different ways scarcely sur- 
passed throughout the whole range of literature. Bourget's repu- 
tation as a novelist has long been assured. Deeply impressed 
by the singular art of Henry Beyle (Stendhal), he struck out 
on a new course at a moment when the realist school reigned 
without challenge in French fiction. His idealism, moreover, 
had a character of its own. It was constructed on a scientific 
basis, and aimed at an exactness, different from, yet comparable 
to, that of the writers who were depicting with an astonishing 
faithfulness the environment and the actions of a person or»a 
society. With Bourget observation was mainly directed to the 
secret springs of human character. At first his purpose seemed 
to be purely artistic, but when Le Disciple appeared, in 1889, the 
preface to that remarkable story revealed in him an unsuspected 
fund of moral enthusiasm. Since then he has varied between Jiis 
earlier and his later manner, fcut his work in general has been 
more seriously conceived. From first to last he has painted with 
a most delicate brush the intricate emotions of women, whether 
wronged, erring or actually vicious; and he has described not 
less happily the ideas, the passions and the failures of those 
young men of France to whom he makes special appeal. 

Bourget has been charged with pessimism, and with undue 
delineation of one social class. The first charge can hardly be 
sustained. The lights in his books are usually low; there is a 
certain lack of gaiety, and the characters move in a world of 
disenchantment. But there is no despair in his own outlook* 
upon human destiny as a whole. As regards the other indictment, 
the early stories sometimes dwell to excess on the mere framework 
of opulence; but the pathology of moral irresolution, of com-, 
plicated affairs of the heart, of the ironies of friendship, in which 
the writer revels, can be more appropriately studied in a cultured 
and leisured society than amid the simpler surroundings of 
humbler men and women. The style of all Bourget's writings is 
singularly graceful. His knowledge of the literature of other 
lands gives it a greater flexibility and a finer allusiveness than 
most of his contemporaries can achieve. The precision by which 
it is not less distinguished, though responsible for a certain 
over-refinement, and for some dull pages of the novels, is an 



332 



BOURIGNON— BOURNE 



almost unmixed merit in the critical essays. As a critic, indeed, 
either of art or letters, Bourget leaves little to be desired. If he is 
not in the very first rank of novelists, if his books display more 
ease of finished craftsmanship than joy in spontaneous creation, 
it must be remembered that the supreme writers of fiction have 
rarely succeeded as he has in a different field. 

See also C. Lecigne, L'Evolution morale et religieuse de M. Paul 
Bourget (1903); Sargeret, Les Grands Convertis (1906). His CEuvres 
completes began to appear in a uniform edition in 1899. 

BOURIGNON, ANTOINETTE (1616-1680), Flemish mystic, 
was born at Lille on the 13th of January 1616. From an early 
age she was under the influence of religion, which took in course 
of time a mystical turn. Undertaking the work of a reformer, 
she visited France, Holland, England and Scotland. Her religious 
enthusiasm, peculiarity of views and disregard of all sects 
raised both zealous persecutors and warm adherents. On her 
death at Franeker, Friesland, on the 30th of October 1680, she 
left a large number of followers, who, however, dwindled rapidly 
away; but in the early 18th century her influence revived in 
Scotland sufficiently to call forth several denunciations of her 
doctrines in the various Presbyterian general assemblies of 1701, 
1709 and 1 7 10. So far as appears from her writings and con- 
temporary records, she was. a visionary of the ordinary type, 
distinguished only by the audacity and persistency of her 
pretensions. 

Her writings, containing an account of her life and of her visions 
and opinions, were collected by her disciple, Pierre Poiret (19 vols., 
Amsterdam, 1679-1686), who also published her life (2 vols., 1679). 
For a critical account see Hauck, Realencyklopddie (Leipzig, 1897), 
and Elude sur Antoinette Bourignon, by M. E. S. (Paris, 1876). Three 
of her works at least have been translated into English: — 
An Abridgment of the Light of the World (London, 1786) ; A 
Treatise of Solid Virtue (1699) ; The Restoration of the Gospel Spirit 
(1707). 

BOURKE, a town of Cowper county, New South Wales, 
Australia, 503 m. by rail N.W. from Sydney. Pop. (1901) 2614. 
It is situated on the south bank, and at the head of the ordinary 
winter navigation, of the Darling river. Very rich copper ore 
exists in the district in great abundance. Bourke is the centre 
of a large sheep-farming area, and the annual agricultural show 
is one of the best in the colony. On the west side of the Darling, 
3 m. distant, is the small town of North Bourke, and at Pera, 
10 m. distant, is an important irrigation settlement. 

BOURMONT, LOUIS AUGUSTE VICTOR, Comte de Ghaisne 
de ( 1 773-1846), marshal of France, entered the Gardes Francaises 
of the royal army shortly before the Revolution, emigrated in 
1789, and served with Conde and the army of the Emigres in the 
campaigns of 1792 and 1793, subsequently serving as chief of 
staff to Scepeaux, the royalist leader, in the civil war in lower 
Anjou (1794-1796). Bburmont, excepted from the amnesty of 
April 1796, fled into Switzerland, but soon afterwards, having 
been made by Louis XVIII. a masechal de camp and a knight of 
St Louis, he headed a fresh insurrection, which after some pre- 
liminary successes collapsed (1799-1800). He then made his 
submission to the First Consul, married, and lived in Paris; but 
his thinly veiled royalism caused his arrest a few months later, 
and he remained a prisoner for more than three years, finally 
escaping to Portugal in 1804. Three years later the French army 
under General Junot invaded Portugal, and Bourmont offered 
his. services to Junot, who made him chief of staff of a division. 
He returned to France with Junot after the convention of 
Cintra, and was promptly re-arrested. He was soon released, 
however, on Junot's demand, and was commissioned as an officer 
in the imperial army. He served in Italy for-a time, then went 
on the staff of the viceroy Eugene (Beauharnais), whom he 
accompanied in the Moscow campaign. He was taken prisoner 
in the retreat, but escaped after a time and rejoined the French 
army. His conspicuous courage at the battle of Liitzen in 1813 
led Napoleon to promote him general of brigade, and in 18 14 his 
splendid defence of Nogent (February 13) earned him the rank 
of general of division. At the first Restoration Bourmont was 
naturally employed by the Bourbons, to whose service he had 
devoted his life, but he rejoined Napoleon on his return from 
Elba. On the eve of the campaign of 1815, and at the urgent 



request of Count Gerard, he was given a divisional command in 
the army of the north. On the first day of the Waterloo campaign 
Bourmont went over to the enemy. It is not probable that he 
gave information of French movements to the allies, but the best 
that can be said in exculpation of his treachery is that his old 
friends and comrades, the royalists of Anjou, were again in 
insurrection, and that he felt that he must lead them. He made 
no attempt to defend his conduct, and acted as the accuser of 
Marshal Ney. A year later he was given command of a division 
of the royal guard; and in 1823 he held an important position 
in the army which, under the command of the due d'Angoulgme, 
invaded Spain. He commanded the whole army in Spain for a 
time in 1824, became minister of war in 1829, and in 1830 was 
placed in command of the Algiers expedition. The landing of 
the French and the capture of Algiers were directed by him with 
complete success, and he was rewarded with the bdton of marshal. 
But the revolution of 1830 put an end to his command, and, 
refusing to take the oath to Louis Philippe, he was forced to 
resign. In 1832 Marshal Bourmont took part in the rising of 
the duchesse de Berri, and on its failure retired to Portugal. 
Here, as always, on the side of absolutism, he commanded the 
army of Dom Miguel during the civil war of 1833-1834, and after 
the victory of the constitutional party he retired to Rome. 
At the amnesty of 1840 he returned to France. He died at the 
chateau of Bourmont on the 27th of October 1846. 

Charles de Bourmont, a son of the marshal, wrote several pam- 
phlets in vindication of his father's career. 

BOURNE, VINCENT (1695-1747), English classical scholar, 
familiarly known as " Vinny " Bourne, was born at Westminster 
in 1695. In 1 7 10 he became a scholar at Westminster school, 
and in 17 14 entered Trinity College, Cambridge. He graduated 
in 1717, and obtained a fellowship three years later. Of his after- 
life exceedingly little is known. It is certain that he passed the 
greater portion of it as usher in Westminster school. He died on! 
the 2nd of December 1747. During his lifetime he published 
three editions of his Latin poems, and in 1772 there appeared a 
very handsome quarto volume containing all Bourne's pieces, but 
also some that did not belong to him. The Latin poems are 
remarkable not only for perfect mastery of all linguistic niceties, 
but for graceful expression and genuine poetic feeling. A number 
of them are translations of English poems, and it is not too much 
to say that the Latin versions almost invariably surpass the 
originals. Cowper, an old pupil of Bourne's, Beattie and Lamb 
have combined in praise of his wonderful power of Latin 
versification. 

See an edition (1840) of his Poemata, with a memoir by John 
Mitford. 

BOURNE, or Bourn, a market town in the S. Kesteven or 
Stamford parliamentary division of Lincolnshire, England; 
lying in a fenny district 95 m. N. by W. from London. Pop. of 
urban district (1901) 4361. The Stamford-Sleaford branch of the 
Great Northern railway here crosses the Saxby-Lynn joint line 
of the Great Northern and Midland companies. The church of 
St Peter and St Paul is Norman and Early English with later 
insertions; it is part of a monastic church belonging to a founda- 
tion of Augustinian canons of 1138, of which the other buildings 
have almost wholly disappeared. Trade is principally agri- 
cultural. Bourne is famous through its connexion with the 
ardent opponent of William the Conqueror, Hereward the Wake. 
Of his castle very slight traces remain. Bourne was also the 
birthplace of the Elizabethan statesman Cecil, Lord Burghley. 
The Red Hall, which now forms part of the railway station 
buildings, belonged to the family of Digby, of whom Sir 
Everard Digby was executed in 1606 for his connexion with 
the Gunpowder Plot. 

BOURNE (southern form of burn, Teutonic bom, brun, burna), 
an intermittent stream frequent in chalk and limestone country 
where the rock becomes saturated with winter rain, that slowly 
drains away until the rock becomes dry, when the stream ceases. 
A heavy rainfall will cause streams to run in winter from the 
saturated soil. These are the winter bournes that have given 
name to several settlements upon Salisbury Plain, such as 



BOURNEMOUTH— BOURRIENNE 



333 



Winterbourne Gunning. The " bourne " may also be a permanent 
" burn," but the word is usually applied to an intermittent 
stream. (2) (From the Fr. borne), a boundary; the first use of 
the word in English is in Lord Ferrers' translation of Forrest, 
1523; the figurative meaning of limit, end or final destination 
comes from Shakespeare's Hamlet, " the undiscovered country, 
from whose bourne no traveller returns." 

BOURNEMOUTH, a municipal and county borough and 
watering-place of Hampshire, England, in the parliamentary 
borough of Christchurch, 107J m. S.W. by W. from London 
by the London & South-Western railway. Pop. (1901) 59,762. 
It is beautifully situated on Poole Bay. Considerable sandstone 
cliffs rise from the sandy beach, and are scored with deep pictur- 
esque dells or chines. The town itself lies in and about the valley 
of the Bourne stream. Its sheltered situation and desirable 
winter climate began to attract notice about 1840; in 1855 a 
national sanatorium for consumptive patients was erected by 
subscription; a pier was opened in 1861, and in 1870 railway 
communication was afforded. The climate is remarkably 
equable, being relatively warm in winter and cool in summer; 
the average temperature in July is 61-7° F., and in January 40-3°. 
The town contains numerous handsome buildings, including 
municipal buildings, churches, various places of entertainment, 
sanatoria and hospitals, a public library and a science and art 
school. Its suburbs have greatly extended along the sea front, 
and the beautiful chines of Boscombe, Alum and Branksome 
have attracted a large number of wealthy residents. There are 
piers at the town itself and at Boscombe, and the bathing is 
excellent. The parks, gardens and drives are extensive and 
pleasant. A service of electric tramways is maintained, notable 
as being the first system installed in England with atcombination 
of the trolley and conduit principles of supplying current. There 
are golf links in Meyrick and Queen's parks, both laid out by the 
corporation, which has in other ways studied the entertainment 
of visitors. The two railway stations are the Central and West, 
and through communications with the north are maintained by 
the Somerset & Dorset and Midland, and the Great Western and 
Great Central railways. The town, which is of wholly modern 
and remarkably rapid growth (for in the middle of the 19th 
century the population was less than 1000), was incorporated in 
1890, and became a county borough in 1900. The corporation 
consists of a mayor, n aldermen and 33 councillors. Area, 
5769 acres. 

BOURNONITE, a mineral species, a sulphantimonite of lead 
and copper with the formula PbCuSbS 3 . It is of some interest 
on account of the twinning and the beautiful development of its 
crystals. It was first mentioned by Philip Rashleigh in 1797 as 
" an ore of antimony," and was more completely described by the 
comte de Bournon in 1804, after whom it was named: the name 
given by Bournon himself (in 1813) was endellione, since used in 
the form endellionite, after the locality in Cornwall where the 
mineral was first found. The crystals are orthorhombic, and are 
generally tabular in habit owing to the predominance of the 
basal pinacoid (c); numerous smooth bright faces are often 
developed on the edges and corners of the crystals. An un- 
twinned crystal is represented in fig. 1. Usually, however, the 





Fig. 1. — Crystal of Bournonite. 



Fig. 2. — Twinned Crystal 
of Bournonite. 



crystals are twinned, the twin-plane being a face of the prism (m) ; 
the angle between the faces of this prism being nearly a right 
angle (86° 20') , the twinnitig gives rise to cruciform groups (fig. 2) , 



and when it is often repeated the group has the appearance of a 
cog-wheel, hence the name Radelerz (wheel-ore) of the Kapnik 
miners. The repeated twinning gives rise to twin-lamellae, 
which may be detected on the fractured surfaces, even of the 
massive material. The mineral is opaque, and has a brilliant 
metallic lustre with a lead-grey colour. The hardness is 2|, and 
the specific gravity 5-8. 

At the original locality, Wheal Boys in the parish of Endellion 
in Cornwall, it was found associated with jamesonite, blende and 
chalybite. Later, still better crystals were found in another 
Cornish mine, namely, Herodsfoot mine near Liskeard, which 
was worked for argentiferous galena. Fine crystals of large size 
have been found with quartz and chalybite in the mines at 
Neudorf in the Harz, and with blende and tetrahedrite at 
Kapnik-Banya near Nagy-Banya in Hungary. A few other 
localities are known for this mineral. (L. J. S.) 

BOURRES, a French name for a dance common in Auvergne 
and in Biscay in Spain; also a term for a musical composition 
or a dance-movement in a suite, somewhat akin to the gavotte, in 
quick time with two beats to the bar. 

BOURRIENNE, LOUIS ANTOINE FAUVELET DE (1769- 
1834), French diplomatist, was born at Sens on the 9th of July 
1769. He was educated at the military school of Brienne in 
Champagne along with Napoleon Bonaparte; and although the 
solitary habits of the latter made intimacy difficult, the two 
youths seem to have been on friendly terms. It must, however, 
be 'added that the stories of their very close friendship, as told in 
Bourrienne's memoirs, are open to suspicion. Leaving Brienne in 
1787, and conceiving a distaste for the army, Bourrienne pro- 
ceeded to Vienna. He was pursuing legal and diplomatic 
studies there and afterwards at Leipzig, when the French 
Revolution broke out and went through its first phases. Not 
until the spring of 1792 did Bourrienne return to France; at 
Paris he renewed his acquaintance with Bonaparte. They led a 
Bohemian life together, and among other incidents of that excit- 
ing time, they witnessed the mobbing of the royal family in the 
Tuileries (June 20) and the overthrow of the Swiss Guards 
at the same spot (August 10). Bourrienne next obtained a 
diplomatic appointment at Stuttgart, and soon his name was 
placed on the list of political emigres, from which it was not 
removed until November 1797. Nevertheless, after the affair of 
13th Vendemiaire (October 5, 1795) he returned to Paris and 
renewed his acquaintance with Bonaparte, who was then second 
in command of the Army of the Interior and soon received the 
command of the Army of Italy. Bourrienne did not proceed 
with him into Italy, but was called thither by the victorious 
general at the time of the long negotiations with Austria 
(May-October 1797), when his knowledge of law and diplomacy 
was of some service in the drafting of the terms of the treaty of 
Campo Formio (October 17). In the following year he accom- 
panied Bonaparte to Egypt as his private secretary, and left a 
vivid, if not very trustworthy, account of the expedition in his 
memoirs. He also accompanied him on the adventurous return 
voyage to Frejus (September-October 1799), and was of some 
help in the affairs which led up to the coup d'Stat of Brumaire 
(November) 1799. He remained by the side of the First Consul 
in his former capacity, but in the autumn of 1802 incurred his 
displeasure owing to his very questionable financial dealings. 
In the spring of 1805 he was sent as French envoy to the free city 
of Hamburg. There it was his duty to carry out the measures of 
commercial war against England, known as the Continental 
System ; but it is known that he not only viewed those tyranni- 
cal measures with disgust, but secretly relaxed them in favour 
of those merchants who plied him with douceurs. In the early 
spring of 1807, when directed by Napoleon to order a large 
number of military cloaks for the army, then in East Prussia, 
he found that the only means of procuring them expeditiously 
was to order them from England. After gaining a large fortune 
while at Hamburg, he was recalled to France in disgrace at 
the close of 1810. In 1814 he embraced the royal cause, and 
during the Hundred Days (1815) accompanied Louis XVIII. to 
Ghent. The rest of his life was uneventful; he died at Caen on 



334 



BOURRIT— BOUSSINGAULT 



the 7th of February 1834, after suffering from a mental malady 

for two years. 

The fame of Bourrienne rests, not upon his achievements or his 
original works, which are insignificant, but upon his Memoires, 
edited by C. M. de Villemarest (10 vols., Paris, 1829-1831), which 
have been frequently republished and translated. The best English 
edition is that edited by Colonel R. W. Phipps (4 vols., London, 
1893) ; a new French edition has been edited by D. Lacroix (5 vols., 
Paris, 1899-1900). See Bourrienne et ses erreurs, volontaires et in- 
volontaires (Paris, 1830), by Generals Belliard, Gourgaud, &c, for 
a discussion of the genuineness of his Memoirs ; also Napoleon et ses 
ditracteurs, by Prince Napoleon (Paris, 1887; Eng. trans., London, 
1888). (J. Hl. R.) 

BOURRIT, MARC THEODORE (1739-1819), Swiss traveller 
and writer, came of a family which was of French origin but -had 
taken refuge at Geneva for reasons connected with religion. 
His father was a watchmaker there, and he himself was educated 
in his native city. He was a good artist and etcher, and also a 
pastor, so that by reason of his fine voice and love of music he was 
made (1768) precentor of the church of St Peter (the former 
cathedral) at Geneva. This post enabled him to devote himself 
to the exploration of the. Alps, for which he had conceived a 
great passion ever since an ascent (1761) of the Voirons, near 
Geneva. In 1775 he made the first ascent of the Buet (10,201 ft.) 
by the now usual route from the Pierre a. Berard, on which the 
great fiat rock known as the Table au Chantre still preserves his 
memory. In 1 784-1 785 he was the first traveller to attempt the 
ascent of Mont Blanc (not conquered till 1786), but neither then 
nor later (1788) did he succeed in reaching its summit. On -the 
other hand he reopened (1787) the route over the Col du Geant 
(11,060 ft.), which had fallen into oblivion, and travelled also 
among the mountains of the Valais, of the Bernese Oberland, &c. 
He received a pension from Louis XVI., and was named the 
historiographe des Alpes by the emperor Joseph II., who visited 
him at Geneva. His last visit to Chamonix was in 181 2. His 
writings are composed in a naive, sentimental and rather 
pompous style, but breathe throughout a most passionate love 
for the Alps, as wonders of nature, and not as objects of scientific 
study. His chief works are the Description des glacieres de 
Savoye, 1773 (English translation, Norwich, 1775-1776), the 
Description des Alpes pennines et rhitiennes (2 vols., 1781) 
(reprinted in 1783 under the title of Nouvelle Description des 
vallies de glace, and in 1785, with additions, in 3 vols., under the 
name of Nouvelle Description des glacieres), and the Descriptions 
des cols ou passages des Alpes, (2 vols., 1803), while his Itiniraire 
de Geneve, Lausanne et Chamouni, first published in 1701, went 
through several editions in his lifetime. (W. A. B. C.) 

BOURSAULT, EDME (1638-1701), French dramatist and 
miscellaneous writer, was born at Mussy l'Eveque, now Mussy- 
sur-Seine (Aube), in October 1638. On his first arrival in Paris 
in 1 65 1 his language was limited to a Burgundian patois, but 
within a year he produced his first comedy, Le Mort vivant. 
This and some other pieces of small merit secured for him 
distinguished patronage in the society ridiculed by Moliere 
in the Ecole des femmes. Boursault was persuaded that the 
" Lysidas " of that play was a caricature of himself, and attacked 
Moliere in Le Portrait du peintre ou la contre-critique de V Ecole 
des femmes (1663). Moliere retaliated in L'lmpromptu de 
Versailles, and Boileau attacked Boursault in Satires 7 and 9. 
Boursault replied to Boileau in his Satire des satires (1669), 
but was afterwards reconciled with him, when Boileau on his 
side erased his name from his satires. Boursault obtained 
a considerable pension as editor of a rhyming gazette, which 
was, however, suppressed for ridiculing a Capuchin friar, and 
the editor was only saved from the Bastille by the interposition 
of Conde. In 1671 he produced a work of edification in Ad usum 
Delphini: la veritable itude des souverains, which so pleased 
the court that its author was about to be made assistant tutor 
to the dauphin when it was found that he was ignorant of 
Greek and Latin, and the post was given to Pierre Huet. Perhaps 
in compensation Boursault was made collector of taxes at Mont- 
lucon about 1672, an appointment that he retained until 1688. 
Among his best-known plays are Le Mercure galant, the title 
of which was changed to La Comtdie sans litre (1683); La Prin- 



cesse de Clhes (1676), an unsuccessful play which, when refur- 
bished with fresh names by its author, succeeded as Germanicus; 
itsope d la ville (1690); and Esope & la cour (1701). His lack of 
dramatic instinct could hardly be better indicated than by the 
scheme of his Esope, which allows the fabulist to come on the 
stage in each scene and recite a fable. Boursault died in Paris 
on the 15th of September 1701. 

The CEuvres choisies of Boursault were published in 1811, and 
a sketch of him is to be found in M. Saint- Rene Taillandier's Etudes 
liUeraires (1881). 

BOURSE (from the Med. Lat. bursa, a purse), the French 
equivalent of the Stock Exchange, and so used of the Paris 
Exchange, or of any foreign money-market. The English form 
" burse," as in Sir Thomas Gresham's building, which was known 
as " Britain's Burse," went out of use in the 18th century. 
The origin of the name is doubtful; it is not derived from any 
connexion between purse and money, but rather from the use of 
a purse as a sign. At Bruges a house belonging to the family 
de Bursa is said to have been first used as an Exchange, and to 
have had three purses as a sign on the front. 

BOURSSE, ESAIAS (1630-1673), Dutch painter, was born 
in Amsterdam. He was a follower of Pieter de Hooch, in whose 
manner he worked for many years in his native town; then he 
took service with the Dutch East India Company, and died 
on a sea voyage. His paintings are exceedingly rare, perhaps 
because, in spite of their greater freedom and breadth, many of 
them pass under the names of Vermeer of Delft and Pieter de 
Hooch. Two of the paintings ascribed to the latter (one bears 
the false signature) at the Ryks museum in Amsterdam, are now 
recognized as being the work of Boursse. His subjects are 
interiors with figures, painted with great precision and with 
exquisite quality of colour. The Wallace collection has his 
masterpiece, an interior with a woman and a child in a cradle, 
almost as brilliant as on the day it was painted, and reflecting 
something of the feeling of Rembrandt, by whom he was in- 
fluenced. Other important examples are at the Ryks museum 
and at Aix-la-Chapelle. Boursse's " Boy blowing Soap Bubbles," 
in the Berlin museum, was until lately attributed to Vermeer 
of Delft. More than one picture bearing the false signature 
of Boursse have been publicly shown of late years. 

BOUSSINGAULT, JEAN BAPTISTE JOSEPH DIEUDONNE 
(1802-1887), French chemist, was born in Paris on the 2nd of 
February 1802. After studying at the school of mines at Saint- 
Etienne he went, when little more than twenty years old, to 
South America as a mining engineer on behalf of an English 
company. During the insurrection of the Spanish colonies he 
was attached to the staff of General Bolivar, and travelled 
widely in the northern parts of the continent. Returning to 
France he became professor of chemistry at Lyons, and in 
1839 was appointed to the chair of agricultural and analytical 
chemistry at the Conservatoire des Arts et Metiers in Paris. 
In 1848 he was elected to the National Assembly, where he sat 
as a Moderate republican. Three years later he was dismissed 
from his professorship on account of his political opinions, but 
so much resentment at this action was shown by scientific men 
in general, and especially by his colleagues, who threatened 
to resign in a body, that he was reinstated. He died in Paris 
on the nth of May 1887. His first papers were concerned with 
mining topics, and his sojourn in South America yielded a number 
of miscellaneous memoirs, on the cause of goitre in the Cordilleras, 
the gases of volcanoes, earthquakes, tropical rain, &c, which won 
the commendation of A. von Humboldt. From 1836 he devoted 
himself mainly to agricultural chemistry and animal and 
vegetable physiology, with occasional excursions into mineral 
chemistry. His work included papers on the quantity of nitrogen 
in different foods, the amount of gluten in different wheats, 
investigations on the question whether plants can assimilate free 
nitrogen from the atmosphere (which he answered in the negative), 
the respiration of plants, the function of their leaves, the action 
and value of manures, and other similar subjects. Through 
his wife he had a share in an estate at Bechebronn in Alsace, 
where he carried out many agricultural experiments. He 



BOUTERWEK—BOUTS-RIMES 



335 



collaborated with J. B. A. Dumas in writing an Essai de slatique 
chimique des tires organists (1841), and was the author of Traiti 
d'Sconomie rurale (1844), which was remodelled as Agronomie, 
chimie agricole, et physiologie (5 vols., 1860-1874; 2nd ed., 
1884), and of Etudes sur la transformation du fer en acier 
(1875). 

BOUTERWEK, FRIEDRICH (1766-1828), German philosopher 
and critic, was born at Oker, near Goslar in Lower Saxony, and 
studied law at Gottingen. From 1790, however, he became 
a disciple of Kant, published Aphorismen nach Kanis Lehre 
vorgelegt (1793), and became professor of philosophy at Got- 
tingen (1802), where he died on the 9th of August 1828. As a 
philosopher, he is interesting for his criticism of the theory of 
the " thing-in-itself " {Ding-an-sich) . For the pure reason, as 
described in the Kritik, the " thing-in-itself " can be only an 
inconceivable "something-in-general"; any statement about 
it involves the predication of Reality, Unity and Plurality, 
which belong not to the absolute thing but to phenomena. 
On the other hand, the subject is known by the fact of will, 
and the object by that of resistance; the cognizance of willing 
is the assertion of absolute reality in the domain of relative 
knowledge. This doctrine has since been described as absolute 
Virtualism. Following this train of thought, Bouterwek left 
the Kantian position through his opposition to its formalism. 
In later life he inclined to the views of F. H. Jacobi, whose letters 
to him (published at Gottingen, 1868) shecl much light on the 
development of his thought. His chief philosophical works are 
Ideen zu einer allgemeinen Apodiktik (Gottingen and Halle, 1799) ; 
Aesthstik (Leipzig, 1806; Gottingen, 1815 and 1824); Lehrbuch 
der philos. Vorkenntnisse (Gottingen, 1810 and 1820); Lehrbuch 
der philos. Wissenschaften (Gottingen, 1813 and 1820). In these 
works he dissociated himself from the Kantian school. His 
chief critical work was the Geschichte der neuern Poesie und 
Beredsamkeit (Gottingen, 12 vols., 1801-1819), of which the 
history of Spanish literature has been published separately 
in French, Spanish and English. The Geschichte is a work of 
wide learning and generally sound criticism, but it is not of 
equal merit throughout. He also wrote three novels, Paulus 
Septimus (Halle, 1795), Graf Donamar (Gottingen, 1791) and 
Ramiro (Leipzig, 1804), and published a collection of poems 
(Gottingen, 1802). 

BOUTHILLIER, CLAUDE, Sieur de Fouilletotjrte (1581- 
1652), French statesman, began life as an advocate. In 1613 he 
was councillor in the parlement of Paris, and in 1619 became 
councillor of state and a secretary to the queen-mother, Marie 
de' Medici. The connexion of his father, Denis Bouthillier 
(d. 1622), with Cardinal Richelieu secured for him the title of 
secretary of state in 1628, and he was able to remain on good 
terms with both Marie de' Medici and Richelieu, in spite of their 
rivalry. In 1632 he became superintendent of finances. But 
his great role was in diplomacy. Richelieu employed him on 
many diplomatic missions, and the success of his foreign policy 
was due in no small degree to Bouthillier's ability and devotion. 
In 1630 he had taken part at Regensburg in arranging the 
abortive treaty between the emperor and France. From 1633 
to 1640 he was continually busied with secret missions in 
Germany, sometimes alone, sometimes with Father Joseph. 
Following Richelieu's instructions, he negotiated the alliances 
which brought France into the Thirty Years' War. Meanwhile, 
at home, his tact and amiable disposition, as well as his reputation 
for straightforwardness, had secured for him a unique position 
of influence in a court torn by jealousies and intrigues. Trusted 
by the king, the confidant of Richelieu, the friend of Marie de' 
Medici, and through his son, Leon Bouthillier, who was appointed 
in 1635 chancellor to Gaston d'Orleans, able to bring his influence 
to bear on that prince, he was an invaluable mediator; and the 
personal influence thus exercised, combined with the fact that 
he was at the head of both the finances and the foreign policy 
of France, made him, next to the cardinal, the most powerful 
man in the kingdom. Richelieu made him executor of his will, 
and Louis XIII. named him a member of the council of regency 
which he intended should govern the kingdom after his death. 



But the king's last plans were not carried out, and Bouthillier 
was obliged to retire into private life, giving up his office of 
superintendent of finances in June 1643. He died in Paris on 
the 13th of March 1652. 

His son, Leon Bouthillier (1608-1652), comte de Chavigny, 
was early associated with his father, who took him with him 
from 1629 to 1632 to all the great courts of Europe, instructing 
him in diplomacy. In 1632 he was named secretary of state 
and seconded his father's work, so that it is not easy always to 
distinguish their respective parts. After the death of Louis XIII. 
he had to give up his office; but was sent as plenipotentiary to 
the negotiations at Munster. He showed himself incapable, 
however, giving himself up to pleasure and fetes, and returned 
to France to intrigue against Mazarin. Arrested twice during 
the Fronde, and then for a short time in power during Mazarin's 
exile (April 1651), he busied himself with small intrigues which 
came to nothing. 

BOUTS-RIMES, literally (from the French) " rhymed ends," 
the name given in all literatures to a kind of verses of which 
no better definition can be found than was made by Addison, in 
the Spectator, when he described them as " lists of words that 
rhyme to one another, drawn up by another hand, and given to 
a poet, who was to make a poem to the rhymes in the same 
order that they were placed upon the list." The more odd and 
perplexing the rhymes are, the more ingenuity is required to 
give a semblance of common-sense to the production. For 
instance, the rhymes breeze, elephant, squeeze, pant, scant, 
please, hope, pope are submitted, and the following stanza is 
the result: — 

Escaping from the Indian breeze, 
The vast, sententious elephant 
Through groves of sandal loves to squeeze 
And in their fragrant shade to pant; 
Although the shelter there be scant, 
The vivid odours soothe and please, 
And while he yields to dreams of hope, 
Adoring beasts surround their Pope. 

The invention of bouts-rimes is attributed to a minor French 
poet of the 1 7 th century, Dulot, of whom little else is remembered. 
According to the Menagiana, about the year 1648, Dulot was 
complaining one day that he had been robbed of a number of 
valuable papers, and, in particular, of three hundred sonnets. 
Surprise being expressed at his having written so many, Dulot 
explained that they were all " blank sonnets," that is to say, that 
he had put down the rhymes and nothing else. The idea struck 
every one as amusing, and what Dulot had done seriously was 
taken up as a jest. Bouts-rimes became the fashion, and in 1654 
no less a person than Sarrasin composed a satire against them, 
entitled La Dtfaite des bouts-rimes, which enjoyed a great success. 
Nevertheless, they continued to be abundantly composed in 
France throughout the 17th century and a great part of the 18th 
century. In 1701 Etienne Mallemans (d. 1716) published a 
collection of serious sonnets, all written to rhymes selected for 
him by the duchess of Maine. Neither Piron, nor Marmontel, 
nor La Motte disdained this ingenious exercise, and early in the 
19th century the fashion was revived. The most curious incident, 
however, in the history of bouts-rimes is the fact that the elder 
Alexandre Dumas, in 1864, took them under his protection. 
He issued an invitation to all the poets of France to display their 
skill by composing to sets of rhymes selected for the purpose 
by the poet, Joseph Mery (1798-1866). No fewer than 350 
writers responded to the appeal, and Dumas published the 
result, as a volume, in 1865. 

W. M. Rossetti, in the memoir of his brother prefixed to D. G. 
Rossetti's Collected Works (1886), mentions that, especially in 
1848 and 1849, he and Dante Gabriel Rossetti constantly 
practised their pens in writing sonnets to bouts-rimes, each giving 
the other the rhymes for a sonnet, and Dante Gabriel writing off 
these exercises in verse-making at the rate of a sonnet in five or 
eight minutes. Most of W. M. Rossetti's poems in The Germ 
were bouts-rimes experiments. Many of Dante Gabriel's, a little 
touched up, remained in his brother's possession, but were not 
included in the Collected Works. (E. G.) 



33^ 



BOUTWELL— BOUVINES 



BOUTWELL, GEORGE SEWALL (1818-1905), American 
statesman, was born in Brookline, Massachusetts, on the 28th 
of January 1818. He was reared on a farm, and at an early age 
began a mercantile career at Groton, Mass. There he studied 
law and in 1836 was admitted to the bar, but did not begin 
practice for many years. In 1842-1844 and again in 1847-1850 
he served in the state house of representatives, and became 
the recognized leader on the Democratic side; he was thrice 
defeated for Congress, and was twice an unsuccessful candidate 
for governor. In 1851, however, by means of " Free-Soil " 
votes, he was chosen governor, and was re-elected by the 
same coalition in 1852. In the following year he took an active 
part in the state constitutional convention. He became a 
member of the Massachusetts Board of Education in 1853, 
and as its secretary in 1855-1861 prepared valuable reports and 
rendered much service to the state's school system. The passage 
of the Kansas-Nebraska Bill in 1854 had finally alienated him 
from the Democratic party, and he became one of the founders 
of the new Republican party in the state. He played an in- 
fluential part in the Republican national convention in i860, 
and in 1862 after the passage of the war tax measures he was 
appointed by President Lincoln the first commissioner of internal 
revenue, which department he organized. From 1863 to 1869 
he was a representative in Congress, taking an influential part 
in debate, and acting as one of the managers of President 
Johnson's impeachment. From 1869 to 1873 he was secretary 
of the treasury in President Grant's cabinet, and from 1873 until 
1877 was a United States senator from Massachusetts. Under 
an appointment by President Hayes, he prepared the second 
edition of the United States Revised Statutes (1878). In 1880 he 
represented the United States before the commission appointed 
in accordance with the treaty of that year, between France and 
the United States, to decide the claims brought by French 
citizens against the United States for acts of the American 
authorities during the Civil War, and the claims of American 
citizens against France for acts of French authorities during the 
war between France and Mexico, the Franco- German War and 
the Commune. He opposed the acquisition by the United States 
of the Philippine Islands, became president of the Anti-imperial- 
istic League, and was a presidential elector on the Bryan (Demo- 
cratic) ticket in 1900. He died at Groton, Massachusetts, on 
the 28th of February 1905. He published various volumes, 
including The Constitution of the United States at the End of the 
First Century (1895), and Reminiscences of Sixty Years in Public 
Affairs (2 vols., New York, 1902). 

BOUVARDIA, a genus of handsome evergreen greenhouse 
shrubs, belonging to the natural order Rubiaceae, and a native of 
tropical America. The flowers are in terminal generally many- 
flowered clusters; the corolla has a large tube and a spreading 
four-rayed limb. The cultivated forms include a number of 
hybrids. The plants are best increased by cuttings taken off in 
April, and placed in a brisk heat in a propagating frame with a 
close atmosphere. When rooted they should be potted singly 
into 3-in. pots in fibrous peat and loam, mixed with one-fourth 
leaf-mould and a good sprinkling of sand, and kept in a tempera- 
ture of 70° by night and 80° during the day; shade when re- 
quired; syringe overhead in the afternoon and close the house 
with sun-heat. The plants should be topped to ensure a bushy 
habit, and as they grow must be shifted into 6-in. or 7-in. pots. 
After midsummer move to a cool pit, where they may remain till 
the middle of September, receiving plenty of air and space. 
They should then be removed to a house, and some of the plants 
put at once in a temperature of about 70 at night, with a few 
degrees higher in the daytime, to bring them into flower. Others 
are moved into heat to supply flowers in succession through the 
winter and spring. 

BOUVET, FRANCOIS JOSEPH (1753-1832), French admiral, 
son of a captain in the service of the French East India Company, 
was born on the 23rd of April 1753. He went to sea at the age of 
twelve with his father. Bouvet served in the East Indies in the 
famous campaign of 1781-83 under the command of Suffren, 
but only in a subordinate rank. On the outbreak of the French 



Revolution he very naturally took the anti-royalist side. Murder 
and exile had removed the great majority of the officers of the 
monarchy, and the services of a man of Bouvet's experience were 
valuable. He was promoted captain and received the command 
of the " Audacieux " (80) in the first great fleet collected by the re- 
public. In the same year ( 1 793) he was advanced to rear-admiral, 
and he commanded a division in the fleet which fought the battle 
of the 1st of June 1794 against Lord Howe. Until the close of 
1796 he continued in command of a squadron in the French 
Channel fleet. In the December of that year he was entrusted 
with the van division of the fleet which was sent from Brest to 
attempt to land General Hoche with an expeditionary force in 
the south of Ireland. The stormy weather which scattered the 
French as soon as they left Brest gave Bouvet a prominence 
which he had not been designed to enjoy. Bouvet, who found 
himself at daybreak on the 17th of December separated with 
nine sail of the line from the rest of the fleet, opened his secret 
orders, and found that he was to make his way to Mizen Head. 
He took a wide course to avoid meeting British cruisers, and on 
the 19th had the good luck to fall in with a considerable part of 
the rest of the fleet and some of the transports. On the 21st of 
December he arrived off Dursey Island at the entry to Bantry 
Bay. On the 24th he anchored near Bear Island with part of his 
fleet. The continued storms which blew down Bantry Bay, and 
the awkwardness of the French crews, made it impossible to land 
the troops he had with him. On the evening of the 25th the storm 
increased to such a pitch of violence that the frigate in which 
Bouvet had hoisted his flag was blown out to sea. The wind 
moderated by the 29th, but Bouvet, being convinced that none of 
the ships of his squadron could have remained at the anchorage, 
steered for Brest, where he arrived on the 1st of January 1797. 
His fortune had been very much that of his colleagues in this 
storm-tossed expedition, and on the whole he had shown more 
energy than most of them. He was wrong, however, in thinking 
that all his squadron had failed to keep their anchorage in Bantry 
Bay. The government, displeased by his precipitate return to 
Brest, dismissed him from command soon afterwards. He was 
compelled to open a school to support himself. Napoleon 
restored him to the service, and he commanded the squadron 
sent to occupy Guadaloupe during the peace of Amiens, but he 
had no further service, and lived in obscurity till his death on 
the 21st of July. 1832. 

Tronde, Bataittes navales de la France, vols. ii. and iii., and James, 
Naval History, vols. i. and ii., give accounts of the 1st of June and the 
expedition to Ireland. There is a vigorous account of the expedition 
in Tronde's English in Ireland, and it v is dealt with in Admiral 
Colomb's Naval Warfare. (D. H.) 

BOUVIER, JOHN (1787-1851), American jurist, was born in 
Codogno, France, in 1 7 8 7 . In 1 802 his family, who were Quakers 
(his mother was a member of the well-known Benezet family), 
emigrated to America and settled in Philadelphia, and after 
varied experiences as proprietor of a book shop and as a country 
editor he was admitted to the bar in 1818, having become a 
citizen of the United States in 1812. He attained high standing 
in his profession, was recorder of Philadelphia in 1836, and from 
1838 until his death was an associate justice of the court of 
criminal sessions in that city. He is best known for his able 
legal writings. His Law Dictionary Adapted to the Constitution 
and Laws of the United States of America and of the Several States 
of the American Union (1839, revised and brought up to date by 
Francis Rawle, under the title of Bouvier's Law Dictionary, 2 vols., 
1897) has always been a standard. He published also an edition 
of Bacon's Abridgment of the Law (10 vols., 1842-1846), and a 
compendium of American law entitled The Institutes of American 
Law (4 vols., 1851; new ed. 2 vols., 1876). 

BOUVINES, a village on the French-Belgian frontier between 
Lille and Toumay, the scene of one of the greatest battles of the 
middle ages, fought on the 27th of July 1214, between the forces 
of Philip Augustus, king of France, and those of the coalition 
formed against him, of which the principal members were the 
emperor and King John of England. The plan of campaign 
seems to have been designed by King John, who was the soul of 
the alliance-; his general idea was to draw the French king to 



BOVEY BEDS— BOVIDAE 



337 



the southward against himself, while the emperor Otto IV., the 
princes of the Netherlands and the main army of the allies should 
at the right moment march upon Paris from the north. John's 
part in the general strategy was perfectly executed; the allies in 
the north moved slowly. While John, after two inroads, turned 
back to his Guienne possessions on the 3rd of July, it was not 
until three weeks later that the emperor concentrated his forces at 
Valenciennes, and in the interval Philip Augustus had counter- 
marched northward and concentrated an army at Peronne. 
Philip now took the offensive himself, and in manoeuvring to 
get a good cavalry ground upon which to fight he offered battle 
(July 27), on the plain east of Bouvines and the river Marque — 
the same plain on which in 1794 the brilliant cavalry action of 
Willems was fought. The imperial army accepted the challenge 
and drew up facing south-westward towards Bouvines, the heavy 
cavalry on the wings, the infantry in one great mass in the centre, 
supported by the cavalry corps under the emperor himself. The 
total force is estimated at 6500 heavy cavalry and 40,000 foot. 
The French army (about 7000 cavalry and 30,000 infantry) took 
ground exactly opposite to the enemy and in a similar formation, 
cavalry on the wings, infantry, including the milice des communes, 
in the centre, Philip with the cavalry reserve and the Oriflamme 
in rear of the foot. The battle opened with a confused cavalry 
fight on the French right, in which individual feats of knightly 
gallantry were more noticeable than any attempt at combined 
action. The fighting was more serious between the two centres; 
the infantry of the Low Countries, who were at this time almost 
the best in existence, drove in the French; Philip led the cavalry 
reserve of nobles and knights to retrieve the day, and after a long 
and doubtful fight, in which he himself was unhorsed and 
narrowly escaped death, began to drive back the Flemings. 
In the meanwhile the French feudatories on the left wing had 
thoroughly defeated the imperialists opposed to them, and 
William Longsword, earl of Salisbury, the leader of this corps, 
was unhorsed and taken prisoner by the warlike bishop of 
Beauvais. Victory declared itself also on the other wing, where 
the French at last routed the Flemish cavalry and captured Count 
Ferdinand of Flanders, one of the leaders of the coalition. In the 
centre the battle was now between the two mounted reserves led 
respectively by the king and the emperor in person. Here too 
the imperial forces suffered defeat, Otto himself being saved 
only by the devotion of a handful of Saxon knights. The day 
was already decided in favour of the French when their wings 
began to close inwards to cut off the retreat of the imperial centre. 
The battle closed with the celebrated stand of Reginald of 
Boulogne, a revolted vassal of King Philip, who formed a ring of 
seven hundred Brabangon pikemen, and not only defied every 
attack of the French cavalry, but himself made repeated charges 
or sorties with his small force of knights. Eventually, and long 
after the imperial army had begun its retreat, the gallant schiltron 
was ridden down and annihilated by a charge of three thousand 
men-at-arms. Reginald was taken prisoner in the melee ; and the 
prisoners also included two other counts, Ferdinand and William 
Longsword, twenty-five barons and over a hundred knights. 
The killed amounted to about 1 70 knights of the defeated party, 
and many thousands of foot on either side, of whom no accurate 
account can be given. 

See Oman, History of the Art of War, vii. pp. 457-480; also 
Kohler, Kriegsgeschichte, &c, i. 140, and Delpech, Tactique au 
XIII" Steele, 127. 

BOVEY BEDS, in geology, a deposit of sands, clays and 
lignite, 200-300 ft. thick, which lies in a basin extending from 
Bovey Tracey to Newton Abbot in Devonshire, England. 
The deposit is evidently the result of the degradation of the 
neighbouring Dartmoor granite; and it was no doubt laid down 
in a lake. O. Heer, who examined the numerous plant remains 
from these beds, concluded that they belonged to the same 
geological horizon as the Molasse or Oligocene of Switzerland. 
Starkie Gardiner, however, who subsequently examined the 
flora, showed that it bore a close resemblance to that of the 
Bournemouth Beds or Lower Bagshot; in this view he is sup- 
ported by C. Reid. Large excavations have been made for the 



extraction of the clays, which are very valuable for pottery and 
similar purposes. The lignite or " Bovey Coal " has at times 
been burned in the local kilns, and in the engines and workmen's 
cottages, but it is not economical. 

See S. Gardiner, Q. J. G. S, London, xxxv., 1879; W. Pengelly and 
O. Heer, Phil. Trans., 1862; C. Reid, Q. J. G. S. Hi., 1896, p. 490, 
and loc. cit. liv., 1898, p. 234. An interesting general account is given 
by A. W. Clayden, The History of Devonshire Scenery (London, 1906), 
PP. 159-168. 

BOVIANUM, the name of two ancient Italian towns. (1) 
Undecimanorum [Boiano], the chief city of the Pentri Samnites, 
9 m. N.W. of Saepinum and 18 m. S.E. of Aesernia, on the 
important road from Beneventum to Corfinium, which connected 
the Via Appia and the Via Valeria. The original city occupied 
the height (Civita) above the modern town, where remains of 
Cyclopean walls still exist, while the Roman town (probably 
founded after the Social War, in which Bovianum was the seat 
of the Samnite assembly) lay in the plain. It acquired the 
name Undecimanorum when Vespasian settled the veterans 
of the Legio XL Claudia there. Its remains have been covered 
by over 30 ft. of earth washed down from the mountains. Com- 
paratively few inscriptions have been discovered. (2) Vetus 
(near Pietrabbondante, 5 m. S. of Agnone and 19 m. N.W. of 
Campobasso), according to Th. Mommsen {Corpus Inscrip. 
Lat. ix. Berlin, 1883, p. 257) the chief town of the Caraceni. 
It lay in a remote situation among the mountains, and where 
Bovianum is mentioned the reference is generally to Bovianum 
Undecimanorum. Remains of fortifications and lower down of 
a temple and a theatre (cf. Romische Mitteilungen, 1903, 154) — 
the latter remarkable for the fine preservation of the stone seats 
of the three lowest rows of the auditorium — are to be seen. No 
less than eight Oscan inscriptions have been found. (T. As.) 

BOVIDAE, the name of the family of hollow-horned ruminant 
mammals typified by the common ox (Bos taurus), and specially 
characterized by the presence on the skulls of the males or of 
both sexes of a pair of bony projections, or cores, covered in life 
with hollow sheaths of horn, which are never branched, and at all 
events after a very early stage of existence are permanently 
retained. From this, which is alone sufficient for diagnostic 
purposes, the group is often called the Cavicornia. For other 
characteristics see Pecora. The Bovidae comprise a great 
number of genera and species, and include the oxen, sheep, 
goats, antelopes and certain other kinds which come under 
neither of these designations. In stature they range from the 
size of a hare to that of a rhinoceros; and their horns vary 
in size and shape from the small and simple spikes of the oribi 
and duiker antlers to the enormous and variously shaped struc- 
tures borne respectively by buffaloes, wild sheep and kudu 
and other large antelopes. In geographical distribution the 
Bovidae present a remarkable contrast to the deer tribe, or 
Cervidae. Both of these families are distributed over the whole 
of the northern hemisphere, but whereas the Cervidae are absent 
from Africa south of the Sahara and well represented in South 
America, the Bovidae are unknown in the latter area, but are 
extraordinarily abundant in Africa. Neither group is represented 
in Australasia; Celebes being the eastern limit of the Bovidae. 
The present family doubtless originated in the northern half of 
the Old World, whence it effected an entrance by way of the 
Bering Strait route into North America, where it has always been 
but poorly represented in the matter of genera and species. 

The Bovidae are divided into a number of sections, or sub- 
families, each of which is briefly noticed in the present article, 
while fuller mention of some of the more important representa- 
tives of these is made in other articles. 

The first section is that of the Bovinae, which includes buffaloes, 
bison and oxen. The majority of these are large and heavily- 
built ruminants, with horns present in both sexes, the muzzle 
broad, meist and naked, the nostrils lateral, no face-glands, 
and a large dewlap often developed in the males; while the tail 
is long and generally tufted, although in one instance long- 
haired throughout. The horns are of nearly equal size in both 
sexes, are placed on or near the vertex of the skull, and may 
be either rounded or angulated, while their direction is more or 



338 



BOVILL— BOW 



less outwards, with an upward direction near the tips, and con- 
spicuous knobs or ridges are never developed on their surface. 
The tall upper molars have inner columns. The group is repre- 
sented throughout the Old World as far east as Celebes, and has 
one living North American representative. All the species may 
be included in the genus Bos, with several subgeneric divisions 
(see Anoa, Aurochs, Bantin, Bison, Buffalo, Gaur, Gayal, 
Ox and Yak). 

The second group, or Caprinae, includes the sheep and goats, 
which are smaller animals than most of the Bovidae, generally 
with horns in both sexes, but those of the females small. In 
the males the horns are usually compressed and triangular, 
with transverse ridges or knobs, and either curving backwards 
or spiral. The muzzle is narrow and hairy; and when face- 
glands are present these are small and insignificant; while 
the tail is short and flattened. Unlike the Bovinae, there are 
frequently glands in the feet; and the upper molar teeth differ 
from those of that group in their narrower crowns, which lack 
a distinct inner column. When a face-pit is present in the skull 
it is small. The genera are Ovis (sheep), Capra (goats) and 
Hemitragus (tahr). Sheep and goats are very nearly related, 
but the former never have a beard on the chin of the males, 
which are devoid of a strong odour; and their horns are typically 
of a different type. There are, however, several more or less 
transitional forms. Tahr are short-horned goats. The group 
is unknown in America, and in Africa is only represented in 
the mountains of the north, extending, however, some distance 
south into the Sudan and Abyssinia. All the species are moun- 
tain-dwellers., (See Udad, Argali, Goat, Ibex, Mouelon, 
Sheep and Tahr.) 

The musk-ox (Ovibos mosckatus) alone represents the family 
Ovibovinae, which is probably most nearly related to the next" 
group (see Musk-ox). 

Next come the Rupicaprinae, which include several genera 
of mountain-dwelling ruminants, typified by the European 
chamois (Rupicapra) ; the other genera being the Asiatic serow, 
goral and takin, and the North American Rocky Mountain 
goat. These ruminants are best described as goat-like antelopes. 
(See Antelope, Chamois, Goral, Rocky Mountain Goat, 
Serow and Takin.) 

Under the indefinable term " antelope " (q.v.) may be included 
the seven remaining sections, namely Tragelaphinae (kudu and 
eland), Hippotraginae (sable antelope and oryx), Antilopinae 
(black-buck, gazelles, &c), Cervicaprinae (reedbuck and water- 
buck), Neotraginae (klipspringer and steinbok), Cephalophinae 
(duikers and four-horned antelopes) and Bubalinae (hartebeests 
and gnus). (R. L.*) 

BOVILL, SIR WILLIAM (1814-1873), English judge, a 
younger son of Benjamin Bovill, of Wimbledon, was born at 
Allhallows, Barking, on the 26th of May 1814. On leaving 
school he was articled to a firm of solicitors, but entering the 
Middle Temple he practised for a short time as a special pleader 
below the bar. He was called in 1841 and joined the home circuit. 
His special training in a solicitor's office, and its resulting con- 
nexion, combined with a thorough knowledge of the details of 
engineering, acquired through his interest in a manufacturing 
firm in the east end of London, soon brought him a very extensive 
patent and commercial practice. He became Q.C. in 1855, and in 
1857 was elected M.P. for Guildford. In the House of Commons 
he was very zealous for legal reform, and the Partnership Law 
Amendment Act 1865, which he helped to pass, is always referred 
to as Bovill's Act. In 1866 he was appointed solicitor-general, 
an office which he vacated on becoming chief justice of the 
common pleas in succession to Sir W. Erie in November of the 
same year. He died at Kingston, Surrey, on the is t of November 
1873. As a barrister he was unsurpassed for his remarkable 
knowledge of commercial law; and when promoted to the 
bench his painstaking labour and unswerving uprightness, as 
well as his great patience and courtesy, gained for him the 
respect and affection of the profession. 

SOVILLAE, an ancient town of Latium, a station on the Via 
Appia (which in 293 B.C. was already paved «aj to this point), 



1 1 m. S.E. of Rome. It was a colony of Alba Longa, and appears 
as one of the thirty cities of the Latin league; after the destruc- 
tion of Alba Longa the sacra were, it was held, transferred to 
Bovillae, including the cult of Vesta (in inscriptions virgines 
Vestales Albanae are mentioned, and the inhabitants of Bovillae 
are always spoken of as Albani Longani Bovillenses) and that of 
the gens lulia. The existence of this hereditary worship led to an 
increase in its importance when the Julian house rose to the 
highest power in the state. The knights met Augustus's dead 
body at Bovillae on its way to Rome, and in a.d. 16 the shrine of 
the .family worship was dedicated anew, 1 and yearly games in the 
circus instituted, probably under the charge of the sodales 
Augustales, whose official calendar has been found here. In 
history Bovillae appears as the scene of the quarrel between 
Milo and Clodius, in which the latter, whose villa lay above the 
town on the left of the Via Appia, was killed. The site is not 
naturally strong, and remains of early fortifications cannot be 
traced. It may be that Bovillae took the place of Alba Longa as 
a local centre after the destruction of the latter by Rome, which 
would explain the deliberate choice of a strategically weak 
position. Remains of buildings of the imperial period — the 
circus, a small theatre, and edifices probably connected with the 
post-station — may still be seen on the south-west edge of the 
Via Appia. 

See L. Canina, Via Appia (Rome, 1853), i. 202 seq.; T. Ashby 
in Melanges de I'ecole francaise de Rome (1903), p. 395. (T. As.) 

BOW (pronounced " b5 "), a common Teutonic word for 
anything bent 2 (O. Eng. boZa; cf. O. Sax. and O.H.G. bogo, 
M.H.G. boge, Mod. Ger. bogen; from O. Teut. stem bug- of 
beugan, Mod. Ger. biegen, to bend). Thus it is found in English 
compound words, e.g. " elbow," " rainbow," " bow-net," " bow- 
window," " bow-knot," " saddle-bow," and by itself as the 
designation of a great variety of objects. The Old English use 
of " bow," or stone-bow, for " arch," now obsolete, survives in 
certain names of churches and places, e.g. Bow church (St 
Mary-in-Arcubus) in Cheapside, and Stratford-le-Bow (the 
" Stratford-atte-Bowe " of Chaucer). "Bow," however, is still 
the designation of objects so various as an appliance for shooting 
arrows (see Archery), a necktie in the form of a bow-knot {i.e. a 
double-looped knot) , a ring or hoop forming a handle (e.g. the bow 
of a watch), certain instruments or tools consisting of a bent 
piece of wood with the ends drawn together by a string, used for 
drilling, turning, &c, in various crafts, and the stick strung 
with horsehair by means of which the strings of instruments of 
the violin family are set in vibration. It is with this last that 
the present article is solely concerned. 

Bow in Music. — The modern bow (Fr. archet; Ger. Bogen; 
Ital. arco) consists of five parts, i.e. the " stick," the screw or 
" ferrule," the " nut," the " hair " and the " head." The stick, 
in high-grade bows^ is made of Pernambuco wood (Caesalpinia 
brasiliensis), which alone combines the requisite lightness, elas- 
ticity and power of resistance; for the cheaper bows American 
oak is used, and for the double-bass bow beech. A billet rich 
in colouring matter and straight in the grain is selected, and 
the stick is usually cut from a templet so as to obtain the 
accurate taper, which begins about 4j in. from the nut, decreasing 
according to regular proportions from f in. at the screw to --ft- at 
the back of the head. The stick is cut absolutely straight and 
parallel along its whole length with the fibre of the wood; it 
is then bent by heat until it is slightly convex to the hair and 
has assumed the elegant cambrwe first given to it by Frangois 
Tourte (1747-1835). This process requires the greatest care, for 
if the fibres be not heated right through, they offer a continual 
resistance to the curve, and return after a time to the rigid 

1 It is not likely that any remains of it now exist. 

2 " Bow," the forepart or head of a ship, must be distinguished from 
this word. It is the same word, and pronounced in the same way, 
as " bough," an arm or limb of a tree, and represents a common 
Teutonic word, seen in O. Eng. bog, Ger. Bug, shoulder, and is 
cognate with Gr. vftxvt, forearm. The sense of " shoulder" of 
a ship is not found in O. Eng. bog. but was probably borrowed 
from Dutch or Danish. " Bow," an inclination of the head or body, 
though pronounced as " bough," is of the same origin as " bow." to 
bend. 



BOW 



339 



straight line, a defect often observed in cheap bows. The sticks 
are now of either cylindrical or octagonal section, and are lapped 
or covered with gold thread or leather for some inches beyond the 
nut in order to afford a firm grip. The length of the stick was 
definitely and finally fixed by Francois Tourte at 29-34 to 
29-528 in. 

The centre of gravity in a well-balanced violin bow should be at 
19 cm. (7 \ to 7 J in.) from the nut; 1 in the violoncello bow the hair 
measures from 60 to 62 cm. (24 to 25 in.), and the Centre of gravity 
is at from 175 to 180 mm. (7 to 71 in.) from the nut. Inconsequence 
of the flexure given to the stick, Tourte found it necessary to re- 
adjust the proportions and relative height of head and nut, in order 
to keep the hair at a satisfactory distance from the stick, and at the 
necessary angle in attacking the strings so as to avoid contact 
between stick and strings in bowing. In order to counterbalance 
the consequent increased weight of the head and to keep the centre 
of gravity nearer the hand, Tourte loaded the nut with metal inlays 
or ornamental designs. 

The screw or ferrule, at the cylindrical end of the stick held by the 
hand, provides the means of tightening or loosening the tension of 
the hair. This screw, about 3! in. long, hidden within the stick,_ runs 
through the eye of another little screw at right angles to it, which is 
firmly embedded in the nut. 

The nut is a wooden block at the screw end of the stick, the original 
purpose of which was to keep the hair at a proper distance from the 
stick and to provide a secure attachment for the hair. The whole 
nut slides up and down the stick in a groove in answer to the screw, 
thus tightening or relaxing the tension of the hair. In the nut is a 
little cavity or chamber, into which the knotted end of the hair is 
firmly fixed by means of a little wedge, the hair being then brought 
out and flattened over the front of the nut like a ribbon by the 
pressure of a flat ferrule. The mother-of-pearl slide which runs along 
a mortised groove further protects the hair on the outside of the nut. 
Bows having these attachments of ferrule and slide, added by Tourte 
at the instigation of the violinist Giovanni Battista Viotti, were 
known as archets a recouvrements. 

The hair is chosen from the best white horsehair, and each of the 
150 to 200 hairs which compose the half-inch wide ribbon of the 
bow must be perfectly cylindrical and smooth. It is bought by the 
pound, and must be very carefully sorted, for not more than one 
hair in ten is perfectly cylindrical and fit for use on a high-grade 
bow. Experience determines the right number of hairs, for if the 
ribbon be too thick it hinders the vibration of the strings; if too thin 
the friction is not strong enough to produce a good tone. Fetis 
gives 175 to 250 as the number used in the modern bow, 2 and Julius 
Ruhlmann no to 120. 3 Tourte attached the greatest importance 
to the hairing of the bow, and bestowed quite as much attention 
upon it as upon the stick. He subjected the hair to the following 
process of cleansing: first it was thoroughly scoured with soap and 
water to remove all grease, then steeped in bran-water, freed from 
all heterogeneous matter still adhering to it, and finally rinsed in 
pure water slightly blued. When passed between the fingers in 
the direction from root to tip, the hair glides smoothly and offers 
no resistance, but passed in the opposite direction it feels rough, 
suggesting a regular succession of minute projections. The outer 
epithelium or sheath of the hair is composed of minute scales which 
produce a succession of infinitesimal shocks when the hair is drawn 
across the strings; the force and uniformity of these shocks, which 
produce series of vibrations of equal persistency, is considerably 
heightened by the application of rosin to the hair. The particles 
of rosin cling to the scales of the epithelium, thus accentuating the 
projections and the energy of the attack or " bite " upon the strings. 
With use, the scales of the epithelium wear off, and then no matter 
how much rosin is applied, the bow fails to elicit musical sounds — • 
it is then " played out " and must be re-haired. The organic con- 
struction of horsehair makes it necessary, in hairing the bow, to lay 
the hairs in opposite directions, so that the up and down strokes may 
be equal and a pure and even tone obtained. Waxed silk is wound 
round both ends of the hair to form a strong knot, which is afterwards 
covered with melted rosin and hardens with the hair into a solid mass. 

The head, I in. long and -fa in. wide at the plate, is cut in one piece 
with the stick, an operation which requires delicate workmanship; 
otherwise the head is liable to snap at this point during a sforzando 
passage. The head has a chamber and wedge contrivance similar 
to that of the nut, in which the other end of the hair is immovably 
fixed. The hair on the face of the head is protected by a metal or 
ivory plate. 

The model bow here described, elaborated by Francois Tourte as 
long ago as between 1775 and 1780 according to Fetis, 4 or between 
17.85 and 1790 according to Vidal, 5 has not since been surpassed. 

1 See F. J. Fetis, Antoine Stradivari, pp. 120-121 (Paris, 1856). 

2 Fetis, op. cit. p. 123. 

3 J. Ruhlmann, Die Geschichte der Bogeninstrumente (Brunswick, 
1882), p. 143. 

4 Fetis, op. cit. p. 119. 

6 Antoine Vidal, Les Instruments & archet (Paris, 1876-1878), 
tome i. p. 269. 



That the violin and the bow form one inseparable whole 
becomes evident when we consider the history of the forerunners 
of the viol family: without the bow the ancestor of the violin 
would have remained a guitar; the bow would not have reached 
its present state of perfection had it been required only for instru- 
ments of the rebec and vielle type. As soon as the possibilities of 
the violin were realized, as a solo instrument capable, through the 
agency of the bow, of expressing the emotions of the performer, 
the perfecting of the bow was prosecuted in earnest until it was 
capable of responding to every shade of delicate thought and 
feeling. This* accounts in a measure for the protracted develop- 
ment of the bow, which, although used long before the violin had 
been evolved, did not reach a state of perfection at the hands of 
Tourte until more than a century and a half after the Cremona 
master had given us the violin. 

The question of the origin of the bow still remains a matter of 
conjecture. Its appearance in western Europe seems to have 
coincided with the conquest of Spain by the Moors in the 8th 
century, and the consequent impetus their superior culture gave 
to arts and sciences in the south-west of Europe. We have, 
however, no well-authenticated representation of the bow before 
the 9th century in Europe; the earliest is the bow illustrated 
along with the Lyra Teutonica by Martin Gerbert, 6 the repre- 
sentation being taken from a MS. at the monastery of St Blaise, 
dating in his opinion from the 9th century. On the other hand, 
Byzantine art of the 9th and nth centuries 7 reveals acquaint- 
ance with a bow far in advance of most of the crude contemporary 
specimens of western Europe. The bow undoubtedly came from 
the East, and was obviously borrowed by the Greeks of Asia 
Minor and the Arabs from a common source — probably India, by 
way of Persia. The earliest representation of a bow yet dis- 
covered is to be found among the fine frescoes in one of the 
chapels of the monastery of Bawit 8 in Egypt. The mural 
paintings in question were the work of many artists, covering 
a considerable period of time. The only non-religious subject 
depicted is a picture of a youthful Orpheus, assigned by Jean 
Cledat to some date not later than the 8th century a.d., but more 
probably the work of a 6th -century artist. Orpheus is holding an 
instrument, which appears to be a rebab, against his chin, in the 
act of bowing and stopping the strings. The bow is similar in 
shape to one shown in the Psalter of Labeo Notker, Leipzig, 
10th century, mentioned farther on. On Indian sculptures of 
the first centuries of our era, such as the Buddhist stupas of 
Amaravati, the risers of the topes of Jamal-Garhi, in the Yusafzai 
district of Afghanistan (both in the British Museum), on which 
stringed instruments abound, there is no bow. The bow has 
remained a primitive instrument in India to this day; a Hindu 
tradition assigns its invention to Ravanon, a king of Ceylon, 
and the instrument for which it was invented was called ravana- 
stron; a primitive instrument of that name is still in use in 
Hindustan. 9 F. J. Fetis, 10 Antoine Vidal, 11 Edward Heron- 
Allen, 12 and others have given the question some consideration, 
and readers who wish to pursue the matter farther are referred 
to their works. 

There is thus no absolute proof of the existence of the bow 
in primitive times. The earliest bow known in Europe was 
associated with the rebab (q.v.), the most widely used bowed 
instrument until the 12th century. The development of this 

6 De Cantu et Musica Sacra (1774), tome ii. pi. xxxii. No. 18; the 
MS. has since perished by fire. 

7 See, for an illustration of the bowed instrument on one of the 
sides of a Byzantine ivory casket, 9th century, in the Carrand 
Collection, Florence, A. Venturi, Gallerie Nazionali Italiane, iii. 
(Rome, 1897), plate, p. 263; and Add. MS. zp, 352, British Museum, 
Greek Psalter, dated 1066. 

8 See Jean Cledat, " Le Monastere et la necropole de Baouit," 
in Mem. de Vlnst. franc, d'archeol. orient, du Caire, vol. xii.^1904), 
chap, xviii. pi. lxiv. (2) ; also Fernand Cabrol, Diet. d'archSol. 
chretienne, s.v. " Baouit." 

9 For an illustration, see Sonnerat, Voyage aux Indes orientates 
(Paris, 1806), vol.i. p. 182. 

10 Op. cit. pp. 4-10. 

11 Op. cit. vol. i. p. 3 and pi. ii. 

12 Edward Heron-Allen, Violin-making as it was and is (London, 
1884), pp. 37-42, figs. 5-10. 



340 



BOW 



instrument can be traced with some degree of certainty, but it is 
quite impossible to decide at what date or in what place the use 
of the bow was introduced. The bow developed very slowly in 
Europe and remained a crude instrument as long as it was applied 
to the rebab and its hybrids. Its progress became marked only 
from the time when it was applied to the almost perfect guitar 
(q.v.), which then became the guitar fiddle (q.v.), the immediate 
forerunner of the viols. 

The first improvement on the primitive arched bow was to 
provide some sort of handle in a straight line with the hair or 
string of the bow, such as is shown in 
the MS. translation of the Psalms by 
Labeo Notker, late 10th century, in 
the University library, Leipzig. 1 The 
length of the handle was often greatly 
exaggerated, perhaps by the fancy of 
the artist. Another handle (see Bod- 
leian Library MS., N.E.D. 2, 12th 
century) was in the form of a hilt 
with a knob, possibly a screw-nut, in 
which the arched stick and the hair 
were both fixed. The first develop- 
ment of importance influencing the 
technique of stringed instruments 
was the attempt to find some device 
for controlling the tension of the 
hair. The contrivance known as 
cremaillere, which was the first step 
in this direction, seems to have been 
foreshadowed in the bows drawn in 
a quaint MS. of the 14th century 
in the British Museum (Sloane 3983, 
fol. 43 and 13) on astronomy. Form- 
ing an obtuse angle with the handle 
of the bow is a contrivance shaped 
tx , ,. . , like a spear-head which presumably 

Drawn from the ivory cover of x c J 

the Lothair Psalter, by permission Served Some Useful purpose; if it 
of Sir Thomas Brooke. had notches ( whicn would be toQ 

, Fl 5." , I ~!r? rlie ^ Bow ° f small to show in the drawing), and 

inh centoyr the hair of the bow was finished with 

a loop, then we have here an early 

example of a device for controlling the tension. Another bow in 

the same MS. has two round knobs on the stick which may be 

assumed to have served the same purpose. 

A very early example of the cremaillere bow (fig. 1) occurs on 

a carved ivory plate ornamenting the binding of the fine Caro- 

lingian MS. Psalter of Lothair (a.d. 825), for some time known 

as the Ellis and White Psalter, but now in the library of Sir 

Thomas Brooke at Armitage Bridge House. The carved figure 

of King David, assigned from its characteristic pose and the 

treatment of the drapery to the nth century, holds a stringed 




The artist has added a bow with crimailUre attachment, which 
is startling if the carving be accurately placed in the nth century. 
The earliest representation of a cremaillere bow, with this ex- 
ception, dates from the 1 5th century, according to Viollet-le-Duc, 
who merely states that it was copied from a painting. 3 Fetis 
{op. cit. p. 117) figures a cremaillere bow which he styles" Bassani, 
1680. " Sebastian Virdung draws a bow for a tromba marina, 
with the hair and stick bound together with waxed cord. The 
hair appears to be kept more or less tense by means of a wedge 
of wood or other material forced in between stick and hair, the 
latter bulging slightly at this point like the string of an archery 
bow when the arrow is in position; this contrivance may be 
due to the fancy of the artist. 

The invention of a movable nut propelled by a screw is ascribed 
to the elder Tourte (fig. 2) ; had we not this information on the 
best authority (Vuillaume and Fetis), it might be imagined 
that some of the bows figured by Mersenne, 4 e.g. the bass viol 
bow KL (p. 184), and another KLM (p. 192), had a movable 
nut and screw; the nut is clearly drawn astride the stick as in 
the modern bow. Mersenne explains (p. 178) the construction 
of the bow, which consists of three parts: the bois, bdton or brin, 
the soye, and the demi-roiie or hausse. The term "half-wheel" 
clearly indicates that the base of the nut was cut round so as 
to fit round the stick. In the absence of any allusion to such 
ingenious mechanism as that of screw and nut, we must infer 
that the drawing is misleading and that the very decided button 
was only meant for an ornamental finish to the stick. We are 
informed further that la soye was in reality hairs from the horse 
or some other animal, of which from 80 to 100 were used for each 
bow. The up-stroke of the bow was used on the weak beats, 2, 4, 
6, 8, and the down-stroke on the strong beats, 1, 3, 5, 7 (p. 185). 
The same practice prevailed in England in 1667, when Christopher 
Simpson wrote the Division Viol. He gives information con- 
cerning the construction of the bow in these words: " the 
viol-bow for division should be stiff but not heavy. The length 
(betwixt the two places where the hairs are fastened at each 
end) about seven-and-twenty inches. The nut should be short, 
the height of it about a finger's breadth or a little more " (p. 2). 

As soon as Corelli (1653-1713) formulated the principles of 
the technique of the violin, marked modifications in the con- 
struction of the bow became noticeable. Tartini, who began 
during the second decade of the 18th century to gauge the 
capabilities of the bow, introduced further improvements, 
such as a lighter wood for the stick, a straight contour, and a 
shorter head, in order to give better equilibrium. The Tourtes, 
father and son, accomplished the rest. 

After Francois Tourte, thefollowingmakers are the most esteemed : 
J. B. Vuillaume, who was directly inspired by Tourte and rendered 
an inestimable service to violinists by working out on a scientific 
basis the empirical taper of the Tourte stick, which was found in all 
his bows to conform to strict ratio ; 6 Dominique Peccate, ap- 
prenticed to J. B. Vuillaume; Henry, 1812-1870, who signs his 




Drawn from bows the property of William E. Hill & Sons. 



Fig. 2. — A, B, Tartini 

instrument, a rotta of peculiar shape, which occurs twice in other 
Carolingian MSS. 2 of the 9th century, but copied here without 
understanding, as though it were a lyre with many strings. 

1 MS. 774, fol. 30. For an illustration of it see Hyacinth Abele, 
Vie Violine, ihre Geschichte und ihr Bau (Neuburg-a-D., 1874), 
pi. 5, No. 7. 

2 See Crowd for fig. from the Bible of Charles le Chauve; and 
also King David in the Bible of St Paul extra muros, Rome (photo- 
graphic facsimile by J. O. Westwood, Oxford, 1876). 



Bows ; C, Tourte Bow. 

name and " Paris " on the stick near the nut; Jacques Lefleur, 
1760-1832; Francois Lupot, 1774-1837, the first to line the angular 
cutting of the nut, where it slides along the stick, with a plate of 

3 See Dictionnaire raisonne du mobilier franqais (Paris, 1871), 
vol. ii. part iv. pp. 265 D. and 266 note. 

4 Marin Mersenne, L'Harmonie universelle (Paris, 1636-1637), 
pp. 184 and 192. 

6 Vuillaume's diagram and explanation are reproduced by Fetis, 
op. cit. pp. 125-128. 



BOWDICH— BOWDOIN 



34* 



metal; Simon, born 1808, who also signs his bows on the stick near 
the nut ; John Dodd of Richmond, the greatest English bow-maker, 
who was especially renowned for his violoncello bows, though his 
violin bows had the defect of being rather short. 

The violoncello bow is a little shorter than those used for violin 
and viola, and the head and nut are deeper. 

The principal models of double-bass bows in vogue at the begin- 
ning of the 19th century were the Dragonetti, maintaining the arch 
of the medieval bows, and the Bottesini, shaped and held like the 
violin bow; the former was held over-hand with the hair inclining 
towards the bridge, and was adopted by the Paris Conservatoire 
under Habeneck about 1830; the great artist himself sent over 
the model from London. Illustrations of both bows are given by 
Vidal (op. cit. pi. xviii.). 

Messrs W. E. Hill & Sons probably possess the finest and most 
representative collection of bows in the world. (K. S.) 

BOWDICH, THOMAS EDWARD (1790-1824), English 
traveller and author, was born at Bristol in 1790. In 1 814, 
through his uncle, J. Hope-Smith, governor of the British Gold 
Coast Settlements, he obtained a writership in the service of 
the African Company of Merchants and was sent to Cape Coast. 
In 181 7 he was sent, with two companions, to Kumasi on a 
mission to the king of Ashanti, and chiefly through his skilful 
diplomacy the mission succeeded in its object of securing 
British control over the coast natives (see Ashanti: History). 
In 1818 Bowdich returned to England, and in 1819 published 
an account of his mission and of the study he had made of the 
barbaric court of Kumasi, entitled Mission from Cape Coast 
Castle to Ashantee, &c. (London, 1819). His African collections 
he presented to the British Museum. Bowdich publicly attacked 
the management of the African committee, and his strictures 
were instrumental in leading the British government to assume 
direct control over the Gold Coast. From 1820 to 1822 Bowdich 
lived in Paris, studying mathematics and the natural sciences, 
and was on intimate terms with Cuvier, Humboldt and other 
savants. During his stay in France he edited several works 
on Africa, and also wrote scientific works. In 1822, accompanied 
by his wife, he went to Lisbon, where, from a study of historic 
MSS., he published An Account of the Discoveries of the Portuguese 
in . . . Angola and Mozambique (London, 1824). In 1823 Bow- 
dich and his wife, after some months spent in Madeira and Cape 
Verde Islands, arrived at Bathurst at the mouth of the Gambia, 
intending to go to Sierra Leone and thence explore the interior. 
But at Bathurst Bowdich died on the 10th of January 1824. 
His widow published an account of his last journey, entitled 
Excursions in Madeira and Porto Santo . . . to which is added 
. . . A Narrative of the Continuance of the Voyage to its Completion, 
&c. (London, 1825). Bowdich's daughter, Mrs Hutchinson Hale, 
republished in 1873, with an introductory preface, her father's 
Mission from Cape Coast Castle to Ashantee. 

BOWDITCH, NATHANIEL (1773-1838), American mathe- 
matician, was born at Salem, Massachusetts. He was bred to 
his father's business as a cooper, and afterwards apprenticed 
to a ship-chandler. His taste for mathematics early developed 
itself; and he acquired Latin that he might study Newton's 
Principia. As clerk (1795) and then as supercargo (1796, 1798, 
1799) he made four long voyages; and, being an excellent 
navigator, he afterwards (1802) commanded a vessel, instructing 
his crews in lunar and other observations. He edited two 
editions of Hamilton Moore's Navigation, and in 1802 published 
a valuable work, New American Practical Navigator, founded on 
the earlier treatise by Moore. In 1804 he became president of a 
Salem insurance company. In the midst of his active career he 
undertook a translation of the MScanique celeste of P. S. Laplace, 
with valuable annotations (vol. i., 1829). He was offered, but 
declined, the professorship of mathematics and astronomy at 
Harvard. Subsequently he became president of the Mechanics' 
Institute in-Boston, and also of the American Academy of Arts 
and Sciences. He died at Boston on the 16th of March 1838. 

A life of Bowditch was written by his son Nathaniel Ingersoll 
Bowditch (1805-1861), and was prefixed to the four'th volume (1839) 
of the translation of Laplace. In 1865 this was elaborated into a 
separate biography by another son, Henry Ingersoll Bowditch 
(1808-1892), a famous Boston physician. 

BOWDLER. THOMAS (1754-1825), editor of the '"family" 
Shakespeare, younger son of Thomas Bowdler, a gentleman of 



independent fortune, was born at Ashley, near Bath, on the 
nth of July 1754. He studied medicine at the universities 
of St Andrews and Edinburgh, graduating M.D. in 1776. After 
four years spent in foreign travel, he settled in London, where 
he became intimate with Mrs Montague and other learned 
ladies. In 1800 he left London to live in the Isle of Wight, and 
later on he removed to South Wales. He was an energetic 
philanthropist, and carried on John Howard's work in the 
prisons and penitentiaries. In 1818 he published The Family 
Shakespeare " in ten volumes, in which nothing is added to 
the original text; but those words and expressions are omitted 
which cannot with propriety be read aloud in a family." Criti- 
cisms of this edition appeared in the British Critic of April 1822. 
Bowdler also expurgated Edward Gibbon's History of the Decline 
and Fall of the Roman Empire (published posthumously, 1826); 
and he issued a selection from the Old Testament for the use of 
children. He died at Rhyddings, near Swansea, on the 24th of 
February 1825. 

From Bowdler's name we have the word to " bowdlerize," 
first known to occur in General Perronet Thompson's Letters 
of a Representative to his Constituents during the Session of 1836, 
printed in Thompson's Exercises, iv. 126. The official interpreta- 
tion is " to expurgate (a book or writing) by omitting or modifying 
words or passages considered indelicate or offensive." Both the 
word and its derivatives, however, are associated with false 
squeamishness. In the ridicule poured on the name of Bowdler 
it is worth noting that Swinburne in " Social Verse " (Studies 
in Prose and Poetry, 1894, p. 98) said of him that " no man ever 
did better service to Shakespeare than the man who made it 
possible to put him into the hands of intelligent and imaginative 
children," and stigmatized the talk about his expurgations as 
" nauseous and foolish cant." 

BOWDOIN, JAMES (1726-1790), American political leader, 
was born of French Huguenot descent, in Boston, Massachusetts, 
on the 7th of August 1726. He graduated at Harvard in 1745, 
and was a member of the lower house of the general court of 
Massachusetts in 1753-1756, and from 1757 to 1774 of the Massa- 
chusetts council, in which, according to Governor Thomas 
Hutchinson, he " was without a rival," and, on the approach 
of the War of Independence, was " the principal supporter 
of the- opposition to the government." From August 1775 
until the summer of 1777 he was the president of the council, 
which had then become to a greater extent than formerly an 
executive as well as a legislative body. In 1779-1780 he was 
president of the constitutional convention of Massachusetts, 
also serving as chairman of the committee by which the draft 
of the constitution was prepared. Immediately afterward he was 
a member of a commission appointed " to revise the laws in force 
in the state; to select, abridge, alter and digest them, so as to 
be accommodated to the present government." From 1785 to 
1787 he was governor of Massachusetts, suppressing with much 
vigour Shays' Rebellion, and failing to be re-elected largely 
because it was believed that he would punish the insurrectionists 
with more severity than would his competitor, John Hancock. 
Bowdoin was a member of the state convention which in 
February 1788 ratified for Massachusetts the Federal Constitu- 
tion, his son being also a member. He died in Boston on the 6th 
of November 1790. He took much interest in natural philosophy, 
and presented various papers before the American Academy of 
Arts and Sciences, of which he was one of the founders and, from 
1 780 to 1 790, the first president. Bowdoin College was named in 
his honour. 

His son, James Bowdoin (1752-1811), was born in Boston 
on the 22nd of September 1752, graduated at Harvard in 1771, 
and served, at various times, as a representative, senator and 
councillor of the state. From 1805 until 1808 he was the minister 
plenipotentiary of the United States in Spain. He died on 
Naushon Island, Dukes county, Massachusetts, on the nth of 
October 181 1. To Bowdoin College he gave land, money and 
apparatus; and he made the college his residuary legatee, 
bequeathing to it his collection of paintings and drawings, 
then considered the finest in the country. 



342 



BOWELL— BOWEN 



BOWELL, SIR MACKENZIE (1823- ), Canadian politician, 
son of John Bowell, carpenter and builder, was born at Ricking- 
hall, England, on the 27th of December 1823. In 1833 he moved 
with his family to Belleville, Canada, where he finally became 
editor and proprietor of the Intelligencer. He was elected grand 
master of the Orange Association of British America, and was 
long the exponent in the Canadian parliament of the claims 
of that order. From 1867 till 1892 he represented North Hastings 
in the House, after which he retired to the senate. From 1878 
till 1 89 1 he was minister of customs in the cabinet of Sir John 
Macdonald; then minister of militia; and under the premiership 
of Sir John Thompson, minister of trade and commerce. From 
December 1894 till April 1896 he was premier of Canada, and 
endeavoured to enforce remedial legislation in the question 
of the Manitoba schools. But his policy was unsuccessful, and 
he retired from the government. From 1896 till 1906 he led 
the Conservative party in the senate. In 1894 he presided 
over the colonial conference held in Ottawa, and in 1895 was 
created K.C.M.G. 

BOWEN, CHARLES SYNGE CHRISTOPHER BOWEN, Baron 
(1835-1894), English judge, was born on the 1st of January 1835, 
at Woolaston in Gloucestershire, his father, the Rev. Christopher 
Bowen of Hollymount, Co. Mayo, being then curate of the 
parish. He was educated at Lille, Blackheath and Rugby 
schools, leaving the latter with a Balliol scholarship in 1853. 
At Oxford he made good the promise of his earlier youth, winning 
the principal classical scholarships and prizes of his time. He was 
made a fellow of Balliol in 1858. From Oxford Bowen went to 
London, where he was called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn in 1861, 
and while studying law he wrote regularly for the Saturday 
Review, and also later for the Spectator. For a time he had little 
success at the bar, and came near to exchanging it for the career 
of a college tutor, but he was induced by his friends, who recog- 
nized his talents, to persevere. Soon after he had begun to make 
his mark he was briefed against the claimant in the famous 
" Tichborne Case." Bowen's services to his leader, Sir John 
Coleridge, helped to procure for him the appointment of junior 
counsel to the treasury when Sir John had passed, as he did 
while the trial proceeded, from the office of solicitor-general 
to that of attorney-general; and from this time his practice 
became a very large one. The strain, however, of the Tichborne 
trials had been great, so that his physical health became unequal 
to the tasks which his zeal for work imposed upon it, and in 1879 
his acceptance of a judgeship in the queen's bench division, on 
the retirement of Mr Justice Mellor, gave him the opportunity 
of comparative rest. The character of Charles Bowen's intellect 
hardly qualified him for some of the duties of a puisne judge; 
but it was otherwise when, in 1882, in succession to Lord Justice 
Holker, he was raised to the court of appeal. As a lord justice 
of appeal he was conspicuous for his learning, his industry and 
his courtesy to all who appeared before him; and in spite of 
failing health he was able to sit more or less regularly until 
August 1893, when, on the retirement of Lord Hannen, he was 
made a lord of appeal in ordinary, and a baron for life, with 
the title of Baron Bowen of Colwood. By this time, however, 
his health had finally broken down; he never sat as a law lord 
to hear appeals, and he gave but one vote as a peer, while his 
last public service consisted in presiding over the commission 
which sat in October 1893 to inquire into the Featherstone riots. 
He died on the 10th of April 1894. 

Lord Bowen was regarded with great affection by all who 
knew him either professionally or privately. He had a polished 
and graceful wit, of which many instances might be given, 
although such anecdotes lose force in print. For example, when 
it was suggested on the occasion of an address to Queen Victoria, 
to be presented by her judges, that a passage in it, " conscious as 
we are of our shortcomings," suggested too great humility, he 
proposed the emendation "conscious as we are of one another's 
shortcomings"; and on another occasion he defined a jurist 
as "a person who knows a little about the laws of every country 
except his own." Lord Bowen's judicial reputation will rest 
upon the series of judgments delivered by him in the court of 



appeal, which are remarkable for their lucid interpretation 
of legal principles as applied to the facts and business of life. 
Among good examples of his judgment may be cited that given 
in advising the House of Lords in Angus v. Dalton (6 App. Cas. 
740), and those delivered in Abrath v. North Eastern Railway 
(n Q.B.D. 440); Thomas v. Quartermaine (18 Q.B.D. 685); 
Vagliano v. Bank of England (23 Q.B.D. 243) (in which he pre- 
pared the majority judgment of the court, which was held to be 
wrong in its conclusion by the majority of the House of Lords) ; 
and the Mogul Steamship Company v. M'Gregor (23 Q.B.D. 598). 
Of Lord Bowen's literary works besides those already indicated 
may be mentioned his translation of Virgil's Eclogues, and 
Aeneid, books i.-vi., and his pamphlet, The Alabama Claim and 
Arbitration considered from a Legal Point of View. Lord Bowen 
married in 1862 Emily Frances, eldest daughter of James 
Meadows Rendel, F.R.S., by whom he had two sons and a 
daughter. 

See Lord Bowen, by Sir Henry Stewart Cunningham. 

BOWEN, FRANCIS (1811-1890), American philosophical 
writer and educationalist, was born in Charlestown, Massa- 
chusetts, on the 8th of September 1811. He graduated at 
Harvard in 1833, taught for two years at Phillips Exeter 
Academy, and then from 1835 to 1839 was a tutor and instructor 
at Harvard. After several years of study in Europe, he settled 
in Cambridge, Massachusetts, and was editor and proprietor 
of the North American Review from 1843 to I 8S4- I* 1 1850 
he was appointed professor of history at Harvard; but his 
appointment was disapproved by the board of overseers on 
account of reactionary political opinions he had expressed in a 
controversy with Robert Carter (1819-1879) concerning the 
Hungarian revolution. In 1853 his appointment as Alford 
professor of natural religion, moral philosophy and civil polity 
was approved, and he occupied the chair until 1889. In 1876 he 
was a member of the Federal commission appointed to consider 
currency reform, and wrote (1877) the minority report, in which 
he opposed the restoration of the double standard and the re- 
monetization of silver. He died in Boston, Massachusetts, on the 
22nd of January 1890. His writings include lives of Sir William 
Phipps, Baron von Steuben, James Otis and Benjamin Lincoln 
in Jared Sparks' " Library of American Biography"; Critical 
Essays on the History and Present Condition of Speculative 
Philosophy (1842); Lowell Lectures on the Application of Meta- 
physical and Ethical Science to the Evidences of Religion (1849); 
The Principles of Political Economy applied to the Condition, 
Resources and Institutions of the American People (1856);, A 
Treatise on Logic (1864); American Political Economy (1870); 
Modern Philosophy from Descartes to Schopenhauer and Hartmann 
(1877); and Gleanings from a Literary Life, 1838-1880 (1880). 

BOWEN, SIR GEORGE FERGUSON (1821-1899), British 
colonial governor, eldest son of the Rev. Edward Bowen, after- 
wards rector of Taughboyne, Co. Donegal, was born on the 2nd of 
November 182 1. Educated at Charterhouse school and Trinity 
College, Oxford, he took a first class in classics in 1844, and was 
elected a fellow of Brasenose. In 1847 he was chosen president 
of the university of Corfu. Having served as secretary of govern- 
ment in the Ionian Islands, he was appointed in 1859 the first 
governor of Queensland, which colony had just been separated 
from New South Wales. He was interested in the exploration of 
Queensland and in the establishment of a volunteer force, but 
incurred some unpopularity by refusing to sanction the issue of 
inconvertible paper money during the financial crisis of 1866. 
In 1867 he was made governor of New Zealand, in which position 
he was successful in reconciling the Maoris to the English rule, 
and saw the end of the struggle between the colonists and the 
natives. Transferred to Victoria in 1872, Bowen endeavoured 
to reduce the expenses of the colony, and in 1879 became 
governor of Mauritius. His last official position was that of 
governor of Hong-Kong, which he held from 1882 to 1887. He 
was made a K.C.M.G. in 1856, a privy councillor in 1886, and 
received honorary degrees from both Oxford and Cambridge. In 
December 1887 he was appointed chief of the royal commission 
which was sent to Malta with regard to the new constitution for 



BOWER— BOW-LEG 



343 



the island, and all the recommendations made by him were 
adopted.- He died at Brighton on the 21st of February 1899, 
having been married twice, and having had a family of one son 
and four daughters. Bowen wrote Ithaca in 1850 (London, 
1854), translated into Greek in 1859; and Mount Athos, 
Thessaly and Epirus (London, 1852); and he was the author 
of Murray's Handbook for Greece (London, 1854). 

A selection of his letters and despatches, Thirty Years of Colonial 
Government (London, 1889), was edited by S. Lane-Poole. 

BOWER, WALTER (1385-1449), Scottish chronicler, was born 
about 1385 at Haddington. He was abbot of Inchcolm (in the 
Firth of Forth) from 1418, was one of the commissioners for the 
collection of the ransom of James I., king of Scots, in 1423 and 
1424, and in 1433 one of the embassy to Paris on the business of 
the marriage of the king's daughter to the dauphin. He played 
an important part at the council of Perth (1432) in the defence of 
Scottish rights. During his closing years he was engaged on his 
work the Scotichronicon, on which his reputation now chiefly rests. 
This work, undertaken in 1440 by desire of a neighbour, Sir 
David Stewart of Rosyth, was a continuation of the Chronica 
Gentis Scotorum of Fordun. The completed work, in its original 
form, consisted of sixteen books, of which the first five and a 
portion of the sixth (to 1163) are Fordun's — or mainly his, for 
Bower added to them at places. In the later books, down to the 
reign of Robert 1.(1371), he was aided by Fordun's Gesta A nnalia, 
but from that point to the close the work is original and of 
contemporary importance, especially for James I., with whose 
death it ends. The task was finished in 1447. In the two remain- 
ing years of his life he was engaged on a reduction or " abridg- 
ment " of this work, which is known as the Book of Cupar, and is 
preserved in the Advocates' library, Edinburgh (MS. 35. I. 7). 
Other abridgments, not by Bower, were made about the same 
time, one about 1450 (perhaps by Patrick Russell, a Carthusian of 
Perth) preserved in the Advocates' library (MS. 35. 6. 7) and 
another in 1461 by an unknown writer, also preserved in the 
same collection (MS. 35. 5. 2). Copies of the full text of the 
Scotichronicon, by different scribes, are extant. There are two in 
the British Museum, in The Black Book of Paisley, and in Harl. 
MS. 712; one in the Advocates' library, from which Walter 
Goodall printed his edition (Edin., 1759), and one in the library 
of Corpus Christi, Cambridge. 

Goodall's is the only complete modern edition of Bower's text. 
See also W. F. Skene's edition of Fordun in the series of Historians 
of Scotland (1871). Personal references are to be found in the 
Exchequer Rolls of Scotland, iii. and iv. The best recent account is 
that by T. A. Archer in the Diet, of Nat. Biog. 

BOWERBANK, JAMES SCOTT (1 797-1877), English naturalist 
and palaeontologist, was born in Bishopsgate, London, on the 
14th of July 1797, and succeeded in conjunction with his brother 
to his father's distillery, in which he was actively engaged until 
1847. In early years astronomy and natural history, especially 
botany, engaged much of his attention; he became an enthusi- 
astic worker at the microscope, studying the structure of shells, 
corals, moss-agates, flints, &c, and he also formed an extensive 
collection of fossils. The organic remains of the London Clay 
attracted particular attention, and about the year 1836 he and six 
other workers founded " The London Clay Club " — themembers 
comprising Dr Bowerbank, Frederick E. Edwards (4799-1875), 
author of The Eocene Mollusca (Palaeontograph. Soc), Searles V. 
Wood, John Morris, Alfred White (zoologist), N. T. Wetherell, 
surgeon of Highgate (1800-18 7 5) , and James de Carle Sowerby. In 
1840 Bowerbank published A History of the Fossil Fruits and Seeds 
of the London Clay, and two years later he was elected F.R.S. In 
1847 he suggested the establishment of a society for the publica- 
tion of undescribed British Fossils, and thus originated the 
Palaeontographical Society. From 1844 until 1864 he did much 
to encourage a love of natural science by being " at home " every 
Monday evening at his residence in Park Street, Islington, and 
afterwards in Highbury Grove, where the treasures of his 
museum, his microscopes, and his personal assistance were at 
the service of every earnest student. In the study of sponges he 
became specially interested, and he was author of A Monograph 



of the British Spongiadae in 4 vols., published by the Ray Society, 
1864-1882. He retired in 1864 to St Leonards, where he died on 
the 8th of March 1877. 

BOWIE, JAMES (1796-1836), American pioneer, was born in 
Logan county, Kentucky. He was taken to Louisiana about 
1802, and in 1818-1820 was engaged with his brothers, John J. 
and Rezin P., in smuggling negro slaves into the United States 
from the headquarters of the pirates led by Jean Lafitte on 
Galveston Island. Bowie removed to Texas in 1828 and took a 
prominent part in the revolt against Mexico, being present at the 
battles of Nacogdoches (1832), Concepcion (1835) and the Grass 
Fight (1835). He was one of the defenders of the Alamo (see 
San Antonio) , but was ill of pneumonia at the time of the final 
assault on the 6th of March 1836, and was among the last to be 
butchered. Bowie's name is now perpetuated by a county in 
north-eastern Texas, and by its association with that of the 
famous hunting-knife, which he used, but probably did not 
invent. 

BOW- LEG {Genu Varum), a deformity characterized by separa- 
tion of the knees when the ankles are in contact. Usually there 
is an outward curvature of both femur and tibia, with at times 
an interior bend of the latter bone. At birth all children are 
more or less bandy-legged. The child lies on its nurse's knee 
with the soles of the feet facing one another; the tibiae and 
femora are, curved outwards; and, if the limbs are extended, 
although the ankles are in contact, there is a distinct space 
between the knee-joints. During the first year of life a gradual 
change takes place. The knee-joints approach one another; 
the femora slope downwards and inwards towards the knee- 
joints; the tibiae become straight; and the sole of the foot 
faces almost directly downwards. While these changes are 
occurring, the bones, which at first consist principally of cartilage, 
are gradually becoming ossified, and in a normal child by the 
time it begins to walk the lower limbs are prepared, both by their 
general direction and by the rigidity of the bones which form 
them, to support the weight of the body. If, however, the child 
attempts either as the result of imitation or from encouragement 
to walk before the normal bandy condition had passed off, the 
result will necessarily be either an arrest in the development 
of the limbs or an increase of the bandy condition. If the child 
is weakly, either rachitic or suffering from any ailment which 
prevents the due ossification of the bones, or is improperly fed, 
the bandy condition may remain persistent. Thus the chief 
cause of this deformity is rickets (q.v.). The remaining causes 
are occupation, especially that of a jockey, and traumatism, 
the condition being very likely to supervene after accidents 
involving the condyles of the femur. In the rickety form the 
most important thing is to treat the constitutional disease, at 
the same time instructing the mother never to place the child 
on its feet. In may cases this is quite sufficient in itself to effect 
a cure, but matters can be hastened somewhat by applying 
splints. When in older patients the deformity arises either 
from traumatism or occupation, the only treatment is that of 
operation. 

A far commoner deformity than the preceding is that known 
as knock-knee (or Genu Valgum). In this condition there is close 
approximation of the knees with more or less separation of the 
feet, the patient being unable to bring the feet together when 
standings Occasionally only one limb may be affected, but the 
double form is the more common. There are two varieties of 
this deformity: (i.) that due to rickets and occurring in young 
children (the rachitic form), and (ii.) that met with in adolescents 
and known as the static form. In young children it is practically 
always due to rickets, and the constitutional disease must be 
most rigorously dealt with. It is, however, especially in these 
cases that cod-liver oil is to be avoided, since it increases the body 
weight and so may do harm rather than good. The child if 
quite young must be kept in bed, and the limbs manipulated 
several times a day. Where the child is a little older and it is more 
difficult to keep him off his feet, long splints should be applied 
from the axilla or waist to a point several inches below the level 
of the foot. It is only by making the splints sufficiently long 



344 



BOWLES— BOWLING 



that a naturally active child can be kept at rest. The little 
patient should live in the open air as much as possible. 

The static form of Genu Valgum usually occurs in young 
adolescents, especially in anaemic nurse-girls, young bricklayers, 
and young people who have outgrown their strength, yet have 
to carry heavy weights. Normally in the erect posture the weight 
of the body is passed through the outer condyle of the femur 
rather than the inner, and this latter is lengthened to keep the 
plane of the knee-joint horizontal. This throws considerable 
strain on the internal lateral ligament of the knee-joint, and 
after standing of long duration or with undue weight the muscles 
of the inner side of the limb also become over-fatigued. Thus 
the ligament gradually becomes stretched, giving the knee undue 
mobility from side to side. If the condition be not attended to, 
the outer condyle becomes gradually atrophied, owing to the 
increased weight transmitted through it, and the inner condyle 
becomes lengthened. These changes are the direct outcome 
of a general law, namely, that diminished pressure results in 
increased growth, increased pressure in diminished growth. 
The best example of the former principle is the rapid growth 
that takes place in the child that is confined to bed during 
a prolonged illness. The distorted, stunted, shortened and 
fashionable foot of the Chinese lady is an example of the latter. 
Flat-foot (see Club-Foot) and lateral curvature of the spine, 
scoliosis, are often associated with this form of Genu Valgum, 
the former being due to relaxation of ligaments, the latter being 
compensatory where the deformity only affects one leg, though 
often found merely in association with the more common bilateral 
variety. In the early stages of the static form attention to general 
health, massage and change of air, will often effect a cure. But 
in the more aggravated forms an apparatus is needed. This 
usually consists of an outside iron rod, jointed at the knee, 
attached above to a pelvic band and below to the heel of the 
boot. By the gradual tightening of padded straps passing round 
the limbs the bones can be drawn by degrees into a more 
natural position. But if the patient has reached such an age 
that the deformity is fixed, then the only remedy is that of 
operation. 

BOWLES, SAMUEL (1826-1878), American journalist, was 
born in Springfield, Massachusetts, on the oth of February 1826. 
He was the son of Samuel Bowles (1 779-1851) of the same city, 
who had established the weekly Springfield Republican in 1824. 
The daily issue was begun in 1844, as an evening newspaper, 
afterwards becoming a morning journal. To its service Samuel 
Bowles, junior, devoted his life (with the exception of a brief 
period during which he was in charge of a daily in Boston), 
and he gave the paper a national reputation by the vigour, 
incisiveness and independence of its editorial utterances, and 
the concise and convenient arrangement of its local and general 
news-matter. During the controversies affecting slavery and 
resulting in the Civil War, Bowles supported, in general, the Whig 
and Republican parties, but in the period of Reconstruction 
under President Grant his paper represented anti-administration 
or " Liberal Republican " opinions, while in the disputed elec- 
tion of 1876 it favoured the claims of Tilden, and subsequently 
became independent in politics. Bowles died at Springfield 
on the 16th of January 1878. During his lifetime, and subse- 
quently, the Republican office was a sort of school for young 
journalists, especially in the matter of pungency and conciseness 
of style, one of his maxims being " put it all in the first para- 
graph." Bowles published two books of travel, Across the 
Continent (1865) and The Switzerland of America (1869), which 
were combined into one volume under the title Our New West 
(1869). He was succeeded as publisher and editor-in-chief of 
the Republican by his son Samuel Bowles (b. 1851). 

A eulogistic Life and Times of Samuel Bowles (2 vols., New York, 
1885), by George S. Merriam, is virtually a history of American 
political movements after the compromise of 1 850. 

BOWLES, WILLIAM LISLE (1762-1850), English poet and 
critic, was born at King's Sutton, Northamptonshire, of which 
his father was vicar, on the 24th of September 1762. At the age 
of fourteen he entered Winchester school, the head-master at 



the time being Dr Joseph Warton. In 1781 he left a's captain 
of the school, and proceeded to Trinity College, Oxford, where 
he had gained a scholarship. Two years later he won the chan- 
cellor's prize for Latin verse. In 1789 he published, in a small 
quarto volume, Fourteen Sonnets, which met with considerable 
favour at the time, and were hailed with delight by Coleridge and 
his young contemporaries. The Sonnets even in form were a 
revival, a return to- the older and purer poetic style, and by their 
grace of expression, melodious versification, tender tone of feeling 
and vivid appreciation of the life and beauty of nature, stood 
out in strong contrast to the elaborated commonplaces which 
at that time formed the bulk of English poetry. After taking 
his degree at Oxford he entered the Church, and was appointed 
in 1792 to the vicarage of Chicklade in Wiltshire. In 1797 he 
received the vicarage of Dumbleton in Gloucestershire, and 
in 1804 was presented to the vicarage of Bremhill in Wiltshire. 
In the same year he was collated by Bishop Douglas to a pre- 
bendal stall in the cathedral of Salisbury. In 181 8 he was made 
chaplain to the prince regent, and in 1828 he was elected 
residentiary canon of Salisbury. He died at Salisbury on the 
7th of April 1850, aged 88. 

The longer poems published by Bowles are not of a very high 
standard, though all are distinguished by purity of imagination, 
cultured and graceful diction, and great tenderness of feeling. 
The most extensive were The Spirit of Discovery ( 1 804) , which was 
mercilessly ridiculed by Byron; The Missionary of the Andes 
(1815); The Grave of the Last Saxon (1822); and' St John in 
Patmos (1833). Bowles is perhaps more celebrated as a critic 
of poetry than as a poet. In 1806 he published an edition of 
Pope's works with notes and an essay on the poetical character 
of Pope. In this essay he laid down certain canons as to poetic 
imagery which, subject to some modification, have been since 
recognized as true and valuable, but which were received at the 
time with strong opposition by all admirers of Pope and his 
style. The " Pope and Bowles " controversy brought into 
sharp contrast the opposing views of poetry, which may be 
roughly described as the natural and the artificial. Bowles 
maintained that images drawn from nature are poetically finer 
than those drawn from art; and that in the highest kinds of 
poetry the themes or passions handled should be of the general 
or elemental kind, and not the transient manners of any society. 
These positions were vigorously assailed by Byron, Campbell, 
Roscoe and others of less note, while for a time Bowles was 
almost solitary. Hazlitt and the Blackwood critics, however, 
came to his assistance, and on the whole Bowles had reason 
to congratulate himself on having established certain principles 
which might serve as the basis of a true method of poetical 
criticism, and of having inaugurated, both by precept and by 
example, a new era in English poetry. Among other prose 
works from his prolific pen was a Life of Bishop Ken (2 vols., 
1830-1831). 

His Poetical Works were collected in 1855, with a memoir by 
G. Gilfillan. 

BOWLINE (a word found in most Teutonic languages, 
probably connected with the " bow " of a ship), a nautical 
term for a rope leading from the edge of a sail to the bows, 
for the purpose of steadying the sail when sailing close to the 
wind — " ona bowline." 

BOWLING (Lat. bulla, a globe, through O. Fr. boule, ball), 
an indoor game played upon an alley with wooden balls and nine 
or ten wooden pins. It has been played for centuries in Germany 
and the Low Countries, where it is still in high favour, but attains 
its greatest popularity in the United States, whence it was 
introduced in colonial times from Holland. The Dutch inhabit- 
ants of New Amsterdam, now New York, were much addicted 
to it, and up to the year 1840 it was played on the green, the 
principal resort of the bowlers being the square just north of 
the Battery still called Bowling Green. The first covered alleys 
were made of hardened clay or of slate, but thos,e in vogue at 
present are built up of alternate strips of pine and maple wood, 
about 1x3 in. in size, set on edge, and fastened together and 
to the bed of the alley with the nicest art of the cabinet-maker. 



BOWLING GREEN— BOWLS 



345 



The width of the alley is 41! in., and its whole length about 
80 ft. From the head, or apex, pin to the foul-line, over which 
the player may not step in delivering the ball, the distance is 
60 ft. On each side of the alley is a 9-in. " gutter " to catch 
any balls that are bowled wide. Originally nine pins, set up in the 
diamond form, were used, but during the first part of the 19th 
century the game of " nine-pins " was prohibited by law, on 
account of the excessive betting connected with it. This ordi- 
nance, however, was soon evaded by the addition of a tenth 
pin, resulting in the game of " ten-pins," the pastime in vogue 
to-day. The ten pins are set up at the end of the alley in the 
form of a right-angled triangle in four rows, four pins at the back, 
then three, then two and one as head pin. The back row is 
placed 3 in. from the alley's edge, back of which is the pin-pit, 
10 in. deep and about 3 ft. wide. The back wall is heavily padded 
(often with a heavy, swinging cushion), and there are safety 
corners for the pin-boys, who set up the pins, call the scores 
and place the balls in the sloping " railway " which returns 
them to the players' end of the alley. The pins are made of hard 
maple and are 15 in. high, 2f in. in diameter at their base and 
15 in. in circumference at the thickest point. The balls, which 
are made of some very hard wood, usually lignum vitae, may be 
of any size not exceeding 27 in. in circumference and 165 lb in 
weight. They are provided with holes for the thumb and middle 
finger. As many may play on a side as please, five being the 
number for championship teams, though this sometimes varies. 
Each player rolls three balls, called a frame, and ten frames 
constitute a game, unless otherwise agreed upon. In first-class 
matches two balls only are rolled. If all ten pins are knocked 
down by the first ball the player makes a strike, which counts 
him 10 plus whatever he may make with the first two balls of 
his next frame. If, however, he should then make another 
strike, 10 more are added to his score, making 20, to which are 
added the pins he may knock down with his first ball of the third 
frame. This may also score a strike, making 30 as the score 
of the first frame, and, should the player keep up this high 
average, he will score the maximum, 300, in his ten frames. 
If all the pins are knocked down with two balls it is called a 
spare, and the player may add the pins made by the first ball 
of his second frame. This seemingly complicated mode of scoring 
is comparatively simple when properly lined score-boards are 
used. Of course, if all three balls are used no strike or spare is 
scored, but the number of pins overturned is recorded. The tens 
of thousands of bowling clubs in the United States and Canada 
are under the jurisdiction of the American Bowling Congress, 
which meets once a year to revise the rules and hold contests 
for the national championships. 

Several minor varieties of bowling are popular in America, the 
most in vogue being " Cocked Hat," which is played with three pins, 
one in the head-pin position and the others on either corner of the 
back row. The pins are usually a little larger than those used in the 
regular game, and smaller balls are used. The maximum score is 
90, and all balls, even those going into the gutter, are in play. 
"Cocked hat and Feather" is similar, except thatafourthpinisadded, 
placed in the centre. Other variations of bowling are " Quintet," 
in which five pins, set up like an arrow pointed towards the bowler, 
are used; the "Battle Game," in which 12 can be scored by 
knocking down all but the centre, or king, pin; " Head Pin and 
Four Back," in which five pins are used, one in the head-pin position 
and the rest on the back line; "Four Back"; "Five Back"; 
"Duck Pin"; "Head Pin," with nine pins set up in the old- 
fashioned way, and " Candle Pin," in which thin pins tapering 
towards the top and bottom are used, the other rules being similar 
to those of the regular game. 

The American bowling game is played to a slight extent in Great 
Britain and Germany. In the latter country, however, the old- 
fashioned game of nine-pins (Kegelspiel) with solid balls and the pins 
set up diamond-fashion, obtains universally. The alleys are made 
with less care than the American, being of cement, asphalt, slate or 
marble. 

BOWLING GREEN, a city and the county-seat of Warren 
county, Kentucky, U.S.A., on the Barren river, 113 m. S. by 
W. of Louisville. Pop. (1890) 7803; (1900) 8226, of whom 
2593 were negroes; (1910) 9173. The city is served by the 
Louisville & Nashville railway (which maintains car shops 
here), and by steamboats navigating the river. Macadam- 



ized or gravel roads also radiate from it to all parts of the 
surrounding country, a rich agricultural and live-stock raising 
region, in which there are deposits of coal, iron ore, oil, natural 
gas, asphalt and building stone. The city is the seat of Potter 
College (for girls; non-sectarian, opened 1889); of Ogden 
College (non-sectarian, 1877), a secondary school, endowed by 
the bequest of Major Robert W. Ogden (1796-1873); of the 
West Kentucky State Normal School, opened (as the Southern 
Normal School and Business College) at Glasgow in 1875 and 
removed to Bowling Green in 1884; and of the Bowling Green 
Business University, formerly a part of the Southern Normal 
School and Business College. Bowling Green has two parks, 
a large horse and mule market, and a trade in other live-stock, 
tobacco and lumber; among its manufactures are flour, lumber, 
tobacco and furniture. The municipality owns and operates 
the water-works and the electric lighting plant. Bowling Green 
was incorporated in 1812. During the early part of the Civil War 
Bowling Green was on the right flank of the first line of Con- 
federate defence in the West, and was for some time the head- 
quarters of General Albert Sidney Johnston. It was abandoned, 
however, after the capture by the Federals of Forts Henry 
and Donelson. 

BOWLING GREEN, a city and the county-seat of Wood 
county, Ohio, U.S.A., 20 m. S. by W. of Toledo, of which it is a 
residential suburb. Pop. (1890) 3467; (1900) 5067 (264 foreign- 
born); (1910) 5222. Bowling Green is served by the Cincinnati, 
Hamilton & Dayton and the Toledo & Ohio Central railways, and 
by the Toledo Urban & Interurban and the Lake Erie, Bowling 
Green & Napoleon electric lines, the former extending from 
Toledo to Dayton. It is situated in a rich agricultural region 
which abounds in oil and natural gas. Many of the residences 
and business places of Bowling Green are heated by a privately 
owned central hot-water heating plant. Among the manufac- 
tures are cut glass, stoves and ranges, kitchen furniture, guns, 
thread-cutting machines, brooms and agricultural implements. 
Bowling Green was first settled in 1832, was incorporated as a 
town in 1855, and became a city in 1904. 

BOWLS, the oldest British outdoor pastime, next to archery, 
still in vogue. It has been traced certainly to the 13 th, and 
conjecturally to the 1 2th century. William Fitzstephen History 
(d. about 1 1 90), in his biography of Thomas Becket, 
gives a graphic sketch of the London of his day and, writing 
of the summer amusements of the young men, says that on 
holidays they were " exercised in Leaping, Shooting, Wrestling, 
Casting of Stones [in jactu lapidum], and Throwing of Javelins 
fitted with Loops for the Purpose, which they strive to fling 
before the Mark; they also use Bucklers, like fighting Men." 
It is commonly supposed that by jactus lapidum Fitzstephen 
meant the game of bowls, but though it is possible that round 
stones may sometimes have been employed in an early variety 
of the game— and there is a record of iron bowls being used, 
though at a much later date, on festive occasions at Nairn, 
— nevertheless the inference seems unwarranted. The jactus 
lapidum of which he speaks was probably more akin to the modern 
" putting the weight," once even called " putting the stone." 
It is beyond dispute, however, that the game, at any rate in a 
rudimentary form, was played in the 13th century. A MS. 
of that period in the royal library, Windsor (No. 20, E iv.), 
contains a drawing representing two players aiming at a small 
cone instead of an earthenware ball or jack. Another MS. of 
the same century has a picture — crude, but spirited — which 
brings us into close touch with the existing game. Three figures 
are introduced and a jack. The first player's bowl has come 
to rest just in front of the jack; the second has delivered his 
bowl and is following after it with one of those eccentric 
contortions still not unusual on modern greens, the first 
player meanwhile making a repressive gesture with his hand, 
as if to urge the bowl to stop short of his own; the third player 
is depicted as in the act of delivering his bowl. A 14th-century 
MS. Book of Prayers in the Francis Douce collection in the 
Bodleian library at Oxford contains a drawing in which two 
persons are shown, but they bowl to no mark. Strutt (Sports 



346 



BOWLS 



and Pastimes) suggests that the first player's bowl may have 
been regarded by the second player as a species of jack; but in 
that case it is not clear what was the first player's target. In 
these three earliest illustrations of the pastime it is worth noting 
that each player has one bowl only, and that the attitude in 
delivering it was as various five or six hundred years ago as it 
is to-day. In the third he stands almost upright; in the first 
he kneels; in the second he stoops, halfway between the 
upright and the kneeling position. 

As the game grew in popularity it came under the ban of king 
and parliament, both fearing it might jeopardize the practice of 
archery, then so important in battle; and statutes forbidding it 
and other sports were enacted in the reigns of Edward III., 
Richard II. and other monarchs. Even when, on the invention of 
gunpowder and firearms, the bow had fallen into disuse as a 
weapon of war, the prohibition was continued. The discredit 
attaching to bowling alleys, first established in London in 1455, 
probably encouraged subsequent repressive legislation, for many 
of the alleys were connected with taverns frequented by the 
dissolute and gamesters. The word " bowls " occurs for the first 
time in the statute of 1511 in which Henry VIII. confirmed 
previous enactments against unlawful games. By a further 
act of 1 54 1 — which was not repealed until 1845 — artificers, 
labourers, apprentices, servants and the like were forbidden to 
play bowls at any time save Christmas, and then only in their 
master's house and presence. It was further enjoined that any 
one playing bowls outside of his own garden or orchard was liable 
to a penalty of 6s. 8d., while those possessed of lands of the yearly 
value of £100 might obtain licences to play on their own private 
greens. But though the same statute absolutely prohibited 
bowling alleys, Henry VIII. had them constructed for his own 
pleasure at Whitehall Palace, and was wont to back himself when 
he played. In Mary's reign (1555) the licences were withdrawn, 
the queen or her advisers deeming the game an excuse for 
" unlawful assemblies, conventicles, seditions and conspiracies." 
The scandals of the bowling alleys grew rampant in Elizabethan 
London, and Stephen Gosson in his School of Abuse (1579) says, 
" Common bowling alleys are privy moths that eat up the credit 
of many idle citizens; whose gains at home are not able to weigh 
down their losses abroad ; whose shops are so far from maintain- 
ing their play, that their wives and children cry out for bread, 
and go to bed supperless often in the year." 

Biased bowls were introduced in the 16th century. " A little 
altering of the one side," says Robert Recorde, the mathe- 
matician, in his Castle of Knowledge (1556), " maketh the bowl 
to run biasse waies." And Shakespeare (Richard II., Act. in. 
Sc. 4) causes the queen to remonstrate, in reply to her lady's 
suggestion of a game at bowls to relieve her ennui, " 'Twill make 
me think the world is full of rubs, and that my fortune runs 
against the bias." This passage is interesting also as showing 
that women were accustomed to play the game in those days. 
It is pleasant to think that there is foundation for the familiar 
story of Sir Francis Drake playing bowls on Plymouth Hoe as the 
Armada was beating up Channel, and finishing his game before 
tackling the Spaniards. Bowls, at that date, was looked upon as 
a legitimate amusement for Sundays, — as, indeed, were many 
other sports. When John Knox visited Calvin at Geneva one 
Sunday, it is said that he discovered him engaged in a game; 
and John Aylmer (1521-1594), though bishop of London, en- 
joyed a game of a Sunday afternoon, but used such language 
" as justly exposed his character to reproach." The pastime 
found favour with the Stuarts. In the Book of Sports (1618), 
James I. recommended a moderate indulgence to his son, Prince 
Henry, and Charles I. was an enthusiastic bowler, unfortunately 
encouraging by example wagering and playing for high stakes, 
habits that ultimately brought the green into as general disrepute 
as the alley. It is recorded that the king occasionally visited 
Richard Shute, a Turkey merchant who owned a beautiful green 
at Barking Hall, and that after one bout his losses were £1000. 
He was permitted to play his favourite game to beguile the tedium 
of his captivity. The signboard of a wayside inn near Goring 
Heath in Oxfordshire long bore a portrait of the king with 



couplets reciting how his majesty " drank from the bowl, and 
bowl'd for what he drank." During his stay at the Northampton- 
shire village of Holdenby or Holmby — where Sir Thomas 
Herbert complains the green was not well kept — Charles fre- 
quently rode over to Lord Vaux's place at Harrowden, or to 
Lord Spencer's at Althorp, for a game, and, according to one 
account, was actually playing on the latter green when Cornet 
Joyce came to Holmby to remove him to other quarters. During 
this period gambling had become a mania. John Aubrey, the 
antiquary, chronicles that the sisters of Sir John Suckling, the 
courtier-poet, once went to the bowling-green in 'Piccadilly, 
crying, " for fear he should lose all their portions." If the 
Puritans regarded bowls with no friendly eye, as Lord Macaulay 
asserts, one can hardly wonder at it. But even the Puritans 
could not suppress betting. So eminently respectable a person 
as John Evelyn thought no harm in bowling for stakes, and once 
played at the Durdans, near Epsom, for £10, winning match and 
money, as he triumphantly notes in his Diary for the 14th of 
August 1657. Samuel Pepys repeatedly mentions finding great 
people " at bowles." But in time the excesses attending the 
game rendered it unfashionable, and after the Revolution it 
became practically a pothouse recreation, nearly all the greens, 
like the alleys, having been constructed in the grounds and 
gardens attached to taverns. 

After a long interval salvation came from Scotland, somewhat 
unexpectedly, because although, along with its winter analogue 
of curling, bowls may now be considered, much more than golf, 
the Scottish national game, it was not until well into the 19th 
century that the pastime acquired popularity in that country. 
It had been known in Scotland since the close of the 16th century 
(the Glasgow kirk session fulminated an edict against Sunday 
bowls in 1595), but greens were few and far between. There is 
record of a club in Haddington in 1709, of Tom Bicket's green 
in Kilmarnock in 1 740, of greens in Candleriggs and Gallowgate, 
Glasgow, and of one in Lanark in 1750, of greens in the grounds 
of Heriot's hospital, Edinburgh, prior to 1768, and of one in 
Peebles in 1775. These are, of course, mere infants compared 
with the Southampton Town Bowling Club, founded in 1299,: 
which still uses the green on which it has played for centuries 
and possesses the quaint custom of describing its master, or 
president, as " sir," and are younger even than the Newcastle-on- 
Tyne club established in 1657. But the earlier clubs did nothing 
towards organizing the game. In 1848 and 1849, however, when 
many clubs had come into existence in the west and south of 
Scotland (the Willowbank, dating from 1816, is the oldest club in 
Glasgow) , meetings were held in Glasgow for the purpose of pro- 
moting a national association. This was regarded, by many, as 
impracticable, but a decision of final importance was reached 
when a consultative committee was appointed to draft a uniform 
code of laws to govern the game. This body delegated its 
functions to its secretary, W. W. Mitchell (1 803-1 884), who 
prepared a code that was immediately adopted in Scotland as the 
standard laws. It was in this sense that Scottish bowlers saved 
the game. They were, besides, pioneers in laying down level 
greens of superlative excellence. Not satisfied with seed-sown 
grass or meadow turf, they experimented with seaside turf and 
found it answer admirably. The 13th earl of Eglinton also set 
an example of active interest which many magnates emulated. 
Himself a keen bowler, he offered for competition, in 1854, a 
silver bowl and, in 1857, a gold bowl and the Eglinton Cup, all 
to be played for annually. These trophies excited healthy 
rivalry in Ayrshire and Lanarkshire, and the enthusiasm as well 
as the skill with which the game was conducted in Scotland at 
length proved contagious. Clubs in England began to consider 
the question of legislation, and to improve their greens. More- 
over, Scottish emigrants introduced the game wherever they 
went, and colonists in Australia and New Zealand established 
many clubs which, in the main, adopted Mitchell's laws; while 
clubs were also started in Canada and in the United States, in 
South Africa, India (Calcutta, Karachi), Japan (Kobe, Yoko- 
hama, Kumamoto) and Hong-Kong. In Ireland the game took 
root very gradually, but in Ulster, owing doubtless to constant 



BOWLS 



3*7 



intercourse with Scotland, such clubs as have been founded are 
strong in numbers and play. 

On the European continent the game can scarcely be said to be 
played on scientific principles. It has existed in France since 
the 17 th century. When John Evelyn was in Paris in 1644 
he saw it played in the gardens of the Luxembourg Palace. 
In the south of France it is rather popular with artisans, who, 
however, are content to pursue it on any flat surface and use 
round instead of biased bowls, the bowler, moreover, indulging 
in a preliminary run before delivering the bowl, after the fashion 
of a bowler in cricket. A rude variety of the game occurs in 
Italy, and, as we have seen, John Calvin played it in Geneva, 
where John Evelyn also noticed it in 1646. There is evidence of 
its vogue in Holland in the 17th century, for the painting by 
David Teniers (1610-1690), in the Scottish National Gallery at 
Edinburgh, is wrongly described as " Peasants playingat Skittles." 
In this picture three men are represented as having played a 
bowl, while the fourth is in the act of delivering his bowl. The 
game is obviously bowls, the sole difference being that an upright 
peg, about 4 in. high, is employed instead of a jack, — recalling, in 
this respect, the old English form of the game already mentioned. 

Serious efforts to organize the game were made in the last 
quarter of the 10th century, but this time the lead came from 
Australia. The Bowling Associations of Victoria and New 
South Wales were established in 1880, and it was not until 1892 
that the Scottish Bowling Association was founded. Then in 
rapid succession came several independent bodies — the Midland 
Counties (1895), the London and Southern Counties (1896), 
the Imperial (1899), the English (1903) and the Irish and Welsh 
(1904). These institutions were concerned with the task of 
regularizing the game within the territories indicated by their 
titles, but it soon appeared that the multiplicity of associations 
was likely to prove a hindrance rather than a help, and with 
a view, therefore, to reducing the number of clashing jurisdictions 
and bringing about the establishment of a single legislative 
authority, the Imperial amalgamated with the English B.A. in 
1905. The visits to the United Kingdom of properly organized 
teams of bowlers from Australia and New Zealand in 1901 and 
from Canada in 1904 demonstrated that the game had gained 
enormously in popularity. The former visit was commemorated 
by the institution of the Australia Cup, presented to the Imperial 
Bowling Association (and now the property of the English B.A.) 
by Mr Charles Wood, president of the Victorian Bowling Associa- 
tion. An accredited team of bowlers from the mother country 
visited Canada in 1906, and was accorded a royal welcome. 
Perhaps the most interesting proof that bowls is a true Volksspiel 
is to be found in the fact that it has become municipalized. 
In Edinburgh, Glasgow, and elsewhere in Scotland, and in 
London (through the county council), Newcastle and other 
English towns, the corporations have laid down greens in public 
parks and open spaces. In Scotland the public greens are self- 
supporting, from a charge, which includes the use of bowls, of 
one penny an hour for each player; in London the upkeep of the 
greens falls on the rates, but players must provide their own bowls. 

There are two kinds of bowling green, the level and the crown. 
The crown has a fall which may amount to as much as 18 in. 
all round from the centre to the sides. This type of 
green is confined almost wholly to certain of the northern 
and midland counties of England, where it is popular for single- 
handed, gate-money contests. But although the crown-green 
game is of a sporting character, it necessitates the use of bowls 
of narrow bias and affords but limited scope for the display of 
skill and science. It is the game on the perfectly level green 
that constitutes the historical game of bowls. Subject to the 
rule as to the shortest distance to which the jack must be thrown 
(25 yds.), there is no prescribed size for the lawn; but 42 yds. 
square forms an ideal green. The Queen's Park and Titwood 
clubs in Glasgow have each three greens, and as they can quite 
comfortably play six rinks on each, it is not uncommon to see 
144 players making their game simultaneously. An under- 
sized lawn is really a poor pitch, because it involves playing 
irom corner to corner instead of up and down — the orthodox 



The game. 



direction. For the scientific construction of a green, the whole 
ground must be excavated to a depth of 18 in. or so, and 
thoroughly drained, and layers of different materials (gravel, 
cinders, moulds, silver-sand) laid down before the final covering 
of turf, 2\ or 3 in. thick. Seaside turf is the best. It wears 
longest and keeps its " spring " to the last. Surrounding the 
green is a space called a ditch, which is nearly but not quite 
on a level with the green and slopes gently away from it, the side 
next the turf being lined with boarding, the ditch itself bottomed 
with wooden spars resting on the foundation. Beyond the ditch 
are banks generally laid with turf. A green is divided into 
spaces usually from 18 to 21 ft. in width, commonly styled 
" rinks " — a word which also designates each set of players — 
and these are numbered in sequence on a plate fixed in the bank 
at each end opposite the centre of the space.- The end ditch 
within the limits of the space is, according to Scottish laws, 
regarded as part of the green, a regulation which prejudices 
the general acceptance of those laws. In match play each space 
is further marked off from its neighbour by thin string securely 
fastened flush with the turf. 

Every player uses four lignum vitae bowls in single-handed 
games and (as a rule) in friendly games, but only two in matches. 
Every bowl must have a certain amount of bias, which was 
formerly obtained by loading one side with lead, but is now 
imparted by the turner making one side more convex than the 
other, the bulge showing the side of the bias. No bowl must 
have less than No. 3 bias — that is, it should draw about 6 ft. to 
a 30 yd. jack on a first-rate green: it follows that on an inferior 
green the bowler, though using the same bowl, would have to 
allow for a narrower draw. It is also a rule that the diameter 
of the bowl shall not be less than 4! in. nor more than sJ in., 
and that its weight must not exceed 3! lb. The jack or kitty, 
as the white earthenware ball to which the bowler bowls is called, 
is round and 2j to 2§ in. in diameter. On crown-greens it is 
customary to use a small biased wooden jack to give the bowler 
some clue to the run of the green. The bowler delivers his bowl 
with one foot on a mat or footer, made of india-rubber or cocoa- 
nut fibre, the size of which is also prescribed by rule as 24 by 16 
in., though, with a view to protecting the green, Australasian 
clubs employ a much larger size, and require the bowler to keep 
both feet on the mat in the act of delivery. 

In theory the game of bowls is very simple, the aim of the 
player being to roll his bowl so as to cause it to rest nearer to 
the jack than his opponent's, or to protect a well-placed bowl, 
or to dislodge a better bowl than his own. But in practice there 
is every opportunity for skill. On all good greens the game is 
played in rinks of four a side, there being, however, on the part 
of many English clubs still an adherence to the old-fashioned 
method of two and three a side rinks. Ordinarily a match team 
consists of four rinks of four players each, or sixteen men in 
all. The four players in a rink are known as the leader, second 
player, third player and skip (or driver, captain or director), 
and their positions, at least in matches, are unchangeable. 
Great responsibility is thus thrown on the skip in the choice 
of his players, who are selected for well-defined reasons. The 
leader has to place the mat, to throw the jack, to count the game, 
and to call the result of each end or head to the skip who is at 
the other end of the green. He is picked for his skill in playing 
to the jack. It is, therefore, his business to " be up." There is 
no excuse for short play on his part, and his bowls would be better 
off the green than obstructing the path of subsequent bowls. 
So he will endeavour to be "on the jack," the ideal position 
being a bowl at rest immediately in front of or behind it. The 
skip plays last, and directs his men from the end that is being 
played to. The weakest player in the four is invariably played 
in the second place (the " soft second "). Most frequently he 
will be required either to protect a good bowl or to rectify a 
possible error of the leader. His official duty is to mark the game 
on the scoring card when the leader announces the result. He 
keeps a record of the play of both sides. The third player, who 
does any measuring that may be necessary to determine which 
bowl or bowls may be nearest the jack, holds almost as responsible 



348 



BOWNESS-ON- WINDERMERE 



a position as the captain, whose place, in fact, he takes when- 
ever the skip is temporarily absent. The duties of the skip will 
already be understood by inference. Before he leaves the jack 
to play, he must observe the situation of the bowls of both sides. 
It may be that he has to draw a shot with the utmost nicety 
to save the end, or even the match, or to lay a cunningly con- 
trived block, or to " fire " — that is, to deliver his bowl almost 
dead straight at the object, with enough force to kill the bias 
for the moment. The score having been counted, the leader 
then places the mat, usually within a yard of the spot where 
the jack lay at the conclusion of the head, and throws the jack 
in the opposite direction for a fresh end. On small greens play, 
for obvious reasons, generally takes place from each ditch. The 
players play in couples — the first on both sides, then the second 
and so on. The leader having played his first bowl, the opposing 
leader will play his first and so on. As a rule, a match consists 
of 21 points, or 21 ends (or a few more, by agreement). 

Certain points in the play call for notice. In throwing the jack, 
the leader is bound to throw (i.e. roll) a legal jack. A legal jack 
must travel at least 25 yds. from the footer and not come to rest 
within 2 yds. of either side boundary ; but it may be thrown as far 
beyond this as the leader chooses, provided that it does not run 
within 2 yds. of the end ditch or either side boundary. In English 
practice the leader is entitled to a second throw if he fail to roll a 



On Scottish greens the game of points is frequently played, but 
it is rarely seen on English greens. Its main object is to perfect 
the proficiency of players in certain departments of bowls proper. 
There are four sections in the game, namely, drawing, guarding, 
trailing and driving. I n drawing (fig. 1 ) , the obj ect is to draw as near 
as possible to the jack, the player's bowl passing outside of two other 
bowls placed 5 ft. apart in a horizontal line 15 ft. from the jack, 
without touching either of them. Three points are scored if the bowl 
come to rest within 1 ft. of the jack, two points if within 2 ft., and one 
point if within 3 ft. Circles of these radii are usually marked around 
the jack for convenience' sake. In guarding (fig. 2), two jacks are 
laid at the far end of the green 12 ft. apart in a vertical line. A 
thread is then pinned down between them, and on each side of this 
thread three others are pinned down parallel with it and 6 in. apart 
from each other. A bowl that comes to rest on the central line, or 
within 6 in. of it, counts three points, a bowl 12 in. away two points, 
and a bowl 18 in. off'one point. In trailing (fig. 3), two bowls are laid 
on the turf 3 ft. apart, and straight lines are chalked from bowl to 
bowl across their back and front faces, and a jack is then deposited 
equidistant from each bowl and immediately before the front line. 
A semicircle is then drawn behind the bowls with a radius of 9 ft. 
from the jack. Three points are given to the bowl that trails the 
jack over both lines into the semicircle and goes over them itself. 
If a bowl trail the jack over both lines, but only itself cross the first; 
or if it pass both lines, but the jack cross only the first, two points are 
awarded. A bowl passing between the jack and either of the station- 
ary bowls, and passing over the back line; or touching the jack, yet 
not trailing it past the first line, but itself crossing the back line; 




7 Feet 



* 

c 

k 
C 

* 


> 

kkk 

) 
1 




B 




B 


«L 


2 Feet 


_# 




O 
j 





F 











F 






Fig. 1. — Drawing. 



Fig. 2.— Guarding. Fig. 3. — Trailing. 

(In every case F is the Footer, B the Bowl, J the Jack.) 



Fig. 4. — Driving. 



legal jack at his first attempt; should he fail again, the right to 
throw passes to his opponent, but not the right of playing first. 
On Scottish greens the leader has only a single throw. A legal jack 
should not be interfered with except by the course of play. Should 
the jack be driven towards the side boundary, it is legitimate for a 
player to cause his bowl to draw outside of the dividing string, 
provided that when it has ceased running it shall have come to rest 
entirely within his own space. If it stop on the string, or outside 
of it, the bowl is " dead " and must be removed to the bank. A 
" toucher " bowl is a characteristic of the Scottish game to which 
great exception is taken by many English clubs. Should a bowl 
running jackwards touch the jack, however slightly, it is called a 
toucher and must be marked by the skip with a chalk cross as soon as it 
is at rest. Such a bowl is alive until the end is finished wherever it 
may lie, within the limits of the space. Even if it run into the ditch 
or be driven in by another bowl, it will yet count as alive. A bowl, 
however, that is forced on to the jack by another is not a toucher. 
The feat of hitting the jack is so common that it really calls for 
no special reward. Difference of opinion prevails as to the condition 
of the jack after it has been driven into the ditch. According to 
Scottish rules, unless it has been forced clean out of bounds, such 
a jack is still alive. On most English greens it is a " dead " jack and 
the end void. Every bowler should learn both forehand and back- 
hand play. In forehand play the bowl as it courses to the jack 
describes its segment of a circle on the right, in backhand play 
on the left. In both styles the biased side must always be the 
inner. 

In the United Kingdom the regular bowling season extends from 
May day till the end of September or the middle of October. At its 
close the green must be carefully examined, weeds uprooted, worn 
patches re-turfed, and the whole laid under a winter blanket of 
silver-sand. 



or trailing the jack over the front line without crossing it itself, 
receives one point. In no case must the stationary bowls be touched, 
or the semicircle crossed by the trailed jack or played bowls. In 
driving (fig. 4), two bowls are laid down 2 ft. apart, and then a jack 
is placed in front of them, 15 in. apart from each, and occupying the 
position of the apex of an inverted pyramid. The player who drives 
the jack into the ditch between the two bowls scores three. If he 
moves the jack, but does not carry it through to the ditch, he scores 
two. If he pass between the jack and either bowl he scores one, 
although it is not easy to see what driving he has done. The played 
bowl must itself run into the ditch without touching either of the 
stationary bowls. It is obvious that the points game demands an 
ideally perfect green. 

See W. W. Mitchell, Manual of Bowl-playing (Glasgow, 1880); 
Laws of the Game issued by the Scottish B.A. (1893, et sqq.); H. J. 
Dingley, Touchers and Rubs (Glasgow, 1893) ; Sam Aylwin, The 
Gentle Art of Bowling, with 26 diagrams (London, 1904) ; James A. 
Manson, The Bowler's Handbook (London, 1906). (J. A. M.) 

BOWNESS-ON-WINDERMERE, an urban district in. the 
Appleby parliamentary division of Westmorland, England, on the 
east shore of Windermere, ij m. S.W. of Windermere station on 
the London & North-Western railway. Together with the town 
of Windermere it forms an urban district (pop. 5061 in 1901), but 
the two towns were separate until 1905. Its situation is fine, 
the lake-shore here rising sharply, while at this point the lake 
narrows and is studded with islands. The low surrounding hills 
are richly wooded, and a number of country seats stand upon 
them. Bowness lies at the head of a small bay, is served by 
the lake-steamers of the Furness Railway Company, and is a 



BOWRING— BOX 



349 



favourite yachting, boating, fishing and tourist centre. The 
church of St Martin is ancient, and contains stained glass from 
Cartmel priory in Furness. (See Windermere.) 

BOWRING, SIR JOHN (1792-1872), English linguist, political 
economist and miscellaneous writer, was born at Exeter, on the 
17th of October 1792, of an old Puritan family. In early life he 
came under the influence of Jeremy Bentham. He did not, 
however, share his master's contempt for belles-lettres, but was a 
diligent student of literature and foreign languages, especially 
those of eastern Europe. As a linguist he ranked with Mezzo- 
fanti and von Gabelentz among the greatest of the world. The 
first-fruits of his study of foreign literature appeared in Specimens 
of the Russian Poets (1821-1823). These were speedily followed 
by Batavian Anthology (1824), Ancient Poetry and Romances of 
Spain (1824), Specimens of the Polish Poets, and Servian Popular 
Poetry, both in 1827. During this period he began to contribute 
to the newly founded Westminster Review, of which he was 
appointed editor in 1825. By his contributions to the Review 
he obtained considerable reputation as political economist and 
parliamentary reformer. He advocated in its pages the cause 
of free trade long before it was popularized by Richard Cobden 
and John Bright. He pleaded earnestly in behalf of parlia- 
mentary reform, Catholic emancipation and popular education. 
In 1828 he visited Holland, where the university of Groningen 
conferred on him the degree of doctor of laws. In the following 
year he was in Denmark, preparing forthe publication of a collec- 
tion of Scandinavian poetry. Bowring, who had been the trusted 
friend of Bentham during his life, was appointed his literary 
executor, and was charged with the task of preparing a collected 
edition of his works. This appeared in eleven volumes in 1843. 
Meanwhile Bowring had entered parliament in 1835 as member 
for Kilmarnock; and in the following year he was appointed 
head of a government commission to be sent to France to inquire 
into the actual state of commerce between the two countries. 
He was engaged in similar investigations in Switzerland, Italy, 
Syria and some of the German states. The results of these 
missions appeared in a series of reports laid before the House of 
Commons. After a retirement of four years he sat in parliament 
from 1841 till 1849 as member for Bolton. During this busy 
period he found leisure for literature, and published in 1843 a 
translation of the Manuscript of the Queen's Court, a collection of 
old Bohemian lyrics, &c. In 1849 he was appointed British 
consul at Canton, and superintendent of trade in China, a post 
which he held for four years. After his return he distinguished 
himself as an advocate of the decimal system, and published 
a work entitled The Decimal System in Numbers, Coins and 
Accounts (1854). The introduction of the florin as a preparatory 
step was chiefly due to his efforts. Knighted in 1854, he was 
again sent the same year to Hong-Kong as governor, invested 
with the supreme military and naval power. It was during his 
governorship that a dispute broke out with the Chinese; and the 
irritation caused by his " spirited " or high-handed policy led 
to the second war with China. In 1855 he visited Siam, and 
negotiated with the king a treaty of commerce. After the usual 
five years of service he retired and received a pension. His last 
employment by the English government was as a commissioner 
to Italy in 1861, to report on British commercial relations with 
the new kingdom. Sir John Bowring subsequently accepted 
the appointment of minister plenipotentiary and envoy extra- 
ordinary from the Hawaiian government to the courts of Europe, 
and in this capacity negotiated treaties with Belgium, Holland, 
Italy, Spain and Switzerland. In addition to the works already 
named he published — Poetry of the Magyars (1830) ; Cheskian 
Anthology (1832); The Kingdom and People of Siam (18 57); 
a translation of Peter Schlemihl (1824); translations from the 
Hungarian poet, Alexander Petofi (1866) ; and various pamphlets. 
He was elected F.R.S. and F.R.G.S., and received the decora- 
tions of several foreign orders of knighthood. He died at Clare- 
mont, near Exeter, on the 23rd of November 1872. His valuable 
collection of coleoptera was presented to the British Museum by 
his second son, Lewin Bowring, a well-known Anglo-Indian 
administrator; and his third son, E. A. Bowring, member of 



parliament for Exeter from 1868 to 1874, became known in the 
literary world as an able translator. 

Sir John Bowring's Recollections were edited by Lewin Bowring 
(d. 1910) in 1877. 

BOWTELL, a medieval term in architecture for a round or 
corniced moulding; the word is a variant of " boltel," which is 
probably the diminutive of " bolt," the shaft of an arrow or 
javelin. A " roving " bowtell is one which passes up the side of a 
bench end and round a finial, the term " roving " being applied to 
that which follows the line of a curve. 

BOWYER, WILLIAM (1663-1737), English printer, was born 
in 1663, apprenticed to a printer in 1679, made a liveryman of the 
Stationers' Company in 1700, and nominated as one of the 
twenty printers allowed by the Star Chamber. He was burned 
out in the great fire of 1 7 1 2, but his loss was partly made good by 
the subscription of friends and fellow craftsmen, as recorded on a 
tablet in Stationers' Hall, and in 1713 he returned to his White- 
friars shop and became the leading printer of his day. He died on 
the 27th of December 1737. 

His son, William Bowyer (1699-1777), was born in London 
on the 19th of December 1699. He was educated at St John's 
College, Cambridge, and in 1722 became a partner in his father's 
business. In 1729 he was appointed printer of the votes of the 
House of Commons, and in 1736 printer to the Society of Anti- 
quaries, of which he was elected a fellow in 1737. In 1737 he 
took as apprentice John Nichols, who was to be his successor 
and biographer. In 1761 Bowyer became printer to the Royal 
Society, and in 1767 printer of the rolls of the House of Lords and 
the journals of the House of Commons. He died on the 13th of 
November 1777, leaving unfinished a number of large works and 
among them the reprint of Domesday Book. He wrote a great 
many tracts and pamphlets, edited, arranged and published a 
host of books, but perhaps his principal work was an edition of 
the New Testament in Greek, with notes. His generous bequests 
in favour of his own profession are administered by the Stationers' 
Company, of which he became a liveryman in 1738, and in whose 
hall is his portrait bust and a painting of his father. He was 
known as " the learned printer." 

BOX (Gr. irv£os, Lat. buxus, box-wood; cf. tti>£is, a pyx), 
the most varied of all receptacles. A box may be square, oblong, 
round or oval, or of an even less normal shape; it usually opens 
by raising, sliding or removing the lid, which may be fastened 
by a catch, hasp or lock. Whatever its shape or purpose or the 
material of which it is fashioned, it is the direct descendant 
of the chest, one of the most ancient articles of domestic furniture. 
Its uses are infinite, and the name, preceded by a qualifying 
adjective, has been given to many objects of artistic or anti- 
quarian interest. 

Of the boxes which possess some attraction beyond their 
immediate purpose the feminine work-box is the commonest. 
It is usually fitted with a tray divided into many small com- 
partments, for needles, reels of silk and cotton and other 
necessaries of stitchery. The date of its introduction is in con- 
siderable doubt, but 17th-century examples have come down 
to us, with covers of silk, stitched with beads and adorned with 
embroidery. In the 18th century no lady was without her 
work-box, and, especially in the second half of that period, 
much taste and elaborate pains were expended upon the case, 
which was often exceedingly dainty and elegant. These boxes 
are ordinarily portable, but sometimes form the top of a table. 

But it is as a receptacle for snuff that the box has taken its 
most distinguished and artistic form. The snuff-box, which is 
now little more than a charming relic of a disagreeable practice, 
was throughout the larger part of the 18th century the indis- 
pensable companion of every man of birth and breeding. It 
long survived his sword, and was in frequent use until nearly 
the middle of the 19th century. The jeweller, the enameller 
and the artist bestowed infinite pains upon what was quite as 
often a delicate bijou as a piece of utility; fops and great 
personages possessed numbers of snuff-boxes, rich and more 
ordinary, their selection being regulated by their dress and by 
the relative splendour of the occasion. From the cheapest wood 



35° 



BOXING 



that was suitable — at one time potato-pulp was extensively 
used — to a frame of gold encased with diamonds, a great variety 
of materials was employed. Tortoise-shell was a favourite, 
and owing to its limpid lustre it was exceedingly effective. 
Mother-of-pearl was also used, together with silver, in its natural 
state or gilded. Costly gold boxes were often enriched with 
enamels or set with diamonds or other precious stones, and some- 
times the lid was adorned with a portrait, a classical vignette, 
or a tiny miniature, often some choice work by an old master. 
After snuff-taking had ceased to be general it lingered for some 
time among diplomatists, either because — as Talleyrand ex- 
plained — they found a ceremonious pinch to be a useful aid to 
reflection in a business interview, or because monarchs retained 
the habit of bestowing snuff-boxes upon ambassadors and other 
intermediaries, who could not well be honoured in any other 
way. ' It is, indeed, to the cessation of the habit of snuff-taking 
that we may trace much of modern lavishness in the distribution 
of decorations. To be invited to take a pinch from a monarch's 
snuff-box was a distinction almost equivalent to having one's 
ear pulled by Napoleon. At the coronation of George IV. of 
England, Messrs Rundell & Bridge, the court jewellers, were paid 
£8205 for snuff-boxes for foreign ministers. Now that the snuff- 
box is no longer used it is collected by wealthy amateurs or de- 
posited in museums, and especially artistic examples command 
large sums. George, duke of Cambridge (1819-1904), possessed 
an important collection; a Louis XV. gold box was sold by 
auction after his death for £2000. 

A jewel-box is a receptacle for trinkets. It may take a very 
modest form, covered in leather and lined with satin, or it may 
reach the monumental proportions of the jewel cabinets which 
were made for Marie Antoinette, one of which is at Windsor, 
and another at Versailles, the work of Schwerdfeger as cabinet- 
maker, Degault as miniature-painter, and Thomire as chaser. 

A strong-box is a receptacle for money, deeds and securities. 
Its place has been taken in modern life by the safe. Some of those 
which have survived, such as that of Sir Thomas Bodley in the 
Bodleian library, possess locks with an extremely elaborate 
mechanism contrived in the under-side of the lid. 

The knife-box is one of the most charming of the minor pieces 
of furniture which we owe to the artistic taste and mechanical 
ingenuity of the English cabinet-makers of the last quarter of 
the 1 8th century. Some of the most elegant were the work of 
Adam, Hepplewhite and Sheraton. Occasionally flat-topped 
boxes, they were most frequently either vase-shaped, or tall and 
narrow with a sloping lid necessitated by a series of raised stages 
for exhibiting the handles of knives and the bowls of spoons. 
Mahogany and satinwood were the woods most frequently em- 
ployed, and they were occasionally inlaid with marqueterie 
or edged with boxwood. These graceful receptacles still exist 
in large numbers; they are often converted into stationery 
cabinets. 

The Bible-box, usually of the 17 th century, but now and again 
more ancient, probably obtained its name from the fact that it 
was of a size to hold a large Bible. It often has a carved or 
incised lid. 

The powder-box and the patch-box were respectively re- 
ceptacles for the powder and the patches of the 18th century; 
the former was the direct ancestor cif the puff-box of the modern 
dressing-table. 

The etui is a cylindrical box or case of very various materials, 
often of pleasing shape or adornment, for holding sewing materials 
or small articles of feminine use. It was worn on the chatelaine. 
BOXING (M.E. box, a blow, probably from Dan. bask, a buffet), 
the art of attack and defence with the fists protected by padded 
gloves, as distinguished from pugilism, in which the bare fists, 
or some kind of light gloves affording little moderation of the 
blow, are employed. The ancient" Greeks used a sort of glove 
in practice, but, although far less formidable than the terrible 
caestus worn in serious encounters, it was by no means so mild 
an implement as the modern boxing-glove, the invention of which 
is traditionally ascribed to Jack Broughton (1705-1789), " the 
father of British pugilism." In any case gloves were first used 



in his time, though only in practice, all prize-fights being decided 
with bare fists. Broughton, who was for years champion 
of England, also drew up the rules by which prize-fights were 
for many years regulated, and no doubt, with the help of the 
newly invented gloves, imparted instruction in .boxing to the 
young aristocrats of his day. The most popular teacher of the 
art was, however, John Jackson (1769-1845), called " Gentleman 
Jackson," who was champion from 1795 to 1800, and who is 
credited with imparting to boxing its scientific principles, such 
as countering, accurate judging of distance in hitting, and 
agility on the feet. Tom Moore, the poet, in his Memoirs, 
asserted that Jackson " made more than a thousand a year 
by teaching sparring." Among his pupils was Lord Byron, who, 
when chided for keeping company with a pugilist, insisted that 
Jackson's manners were " infinitely superior to those of the 
fellows of the college whom I meet at the high table," and 
referred to him in the following lines in Hints from Horace: — 
" And men unpractised in exchanging knocks 
Must go to Jackson ere they dare to box." 

His rooms in Bond- Street were crowded with men of birth and 
distinction, and when the allied monarchs visited London he 
was entrusted with the management of a boxing carnival with 
which they were vastly pleased. In 1814 the Pugilistic Club, 
the meeting-place of the aristocratic sporting element, was 
formed, but the high-water mark of the popularity of boxing 
had been reached, and it declined rapidly, although throughout 
the country considerable interest continued to be manifested 
in prize-fighting. 

The sport of modern boxing, as distinguished from pugilism, 
may be said to date from the year 1866, when the public had 
become disgusted with the brutality and unfair practices of the 
professional " bruisers," and the laws against prize-fighting 
began to be more rigidly enforced. In that year the " Amateur 
Athletic Club " was founded, principally through the efforts 
of John G. Chambers (1843-1883), who, in conjunction with the 
8 th marquess of Queensberry, drew up a code of laws (known 
as the Queensberry Rules) which govern all glove contests in 
Great Britain, and were also authoritative in America until 
the adoption of the boxing rules of the Amateur Athletic Union 
of America. In 1867 Lord Queensberry presented cups for the 
British amateur championships at the recognized weights. 

For the history of pugilism in classic antiquity and an account 
of modern prize-fighting see Pugilism. At present two kinds 
of boxing contests are in vogue, that for a limited number of 
rounds (as in the amateur championships) and that for endurance, 
in which the one who cannot continue the fight loses. Endurance 
contests, which contain the essential element of the old prize- 
fights, are now indulged in only by professionals. Among 
amateurs boxing is far less popular than it once was, owing to 
the importance placed upon brute strength, and the prevailing 
ambition of the modern boxer to " knock out " his opponent, 
i.e. reduce him to a state of insensibility. Even in 3-round 
matches between gentlemen, in which points win, and there is 
therefore no need to knock an opponent senseless, it is neverthe- 
less a common practice to strike a dazed and reeling adversary 
a heavy blow with a view to ending the battle at once. During 
the annual boxing competitions between Oxford and Cambridge 
more than half the bouts have been known to end in this manner. 
Undoubtedly the prettiest boxing is seen when two men pro- 
ficient in the art indulge in a practice bout — or "sparring." 

Boxing is the art of hitting without getting hit. The boxers 
face each other just out of reach and balanced equally on both 
feet, the left from 10 to 20 in. in advance of the right. The left 
foot is planted flat on the floor, while the right heel is raised 
slightly from it. The left side of the body is turned a little 
towards the opponent and the right shoulder slightly depressed. 
When the hands are clenched inside the gloves the thumb is 
doubled over the second and third fingers to avoid a sprain when 
hitting. The general position of the guard is a matter of in- 
dividual taste. In the " crouch," affected by many American 
professionals, the right hip is thrust forward and the body bent 
over towards the right, while the left arm is kept well sketched. 



BOXING 



35 1 



out to keep the opponent at a distance. No good master, how- 
ever, teaches a beginner any other than the upright position. 
Some boxers stand with the right foot forward, a practice 
common in the 18th century, which gives freer play with the 
right hand but is rather unstable. A boxer should stand lightly 
on his feet, ready to advance or retreat on the instant, using short 
steps, advancing with the left foot first and retreating with the 
right. Attacks are either simple or secondary. Simple attacks 
consist in straight leads, i.e. blows aimed with or without pre- 
liminary feints, at some part of the opponent's body or head. 
All other attacks are either " counters " or returns after a guard 
or " block." A counter is a -lead carried out just as one is 
attacked, the object being to block (parry) the blow and land on 
the opponent at the same time. Counters are often carried out 
in connexion with a side-step, a slip or a crouch. In hitting, a 
boxer seeks to exert the greatest force at the instant of impact. 
Blows may be either straight, with or without the weight of the 
body behind them (" straight from the shouder " hits); jabs, 
short blows (usually with the left hand when at close quarters) ; 
hooks, or side-blows with bent arm; upper cuts (short swinging 
blows from beneath to the adversary's chin) ; chops (short blows 
from above) ; punches (usually at close quarters, with the 
right hand); or swings (round-arm blows, usually delivered 
with a partial twist of the body to augment the force of the 
blow). Of the dangerous blows, which often result in a knock- 
out, or in seriously weakening an adversary, the following may 
be mentioned: — on the pit of the stomach, called the solar 
plexus, from the sensitive network of nerves situated there; a 
blow on the point of the chin, having a tendency slightly to 
paralyse the brain; a blow under the ear, painful and often 
resulting in partial helplessness; and one directly over the heart, 
kidney or liver. As a boxer is allowed ten seconds after being 
knocked down in which to rise, an experienced ring-fighter will 
drop on one knee when partially stunned, remaining in that 
position in order to recover until the referee has counted nine. 
Guarding is done with the arm or hand, either open or shut. 
If a blow is caught or stopped short it is called blocking, but 
a blow may also be shoved aside, or avoided altogether by 
slipping, i.e. moving the head quickly to one side, or by ducking 
and allowing the adversary's swing to pass harmlessly over 
the head. Still another method of avoiding a blow without 
guarding is to bend back the head or body so as narrowly to 
escape the opponent's glove. 

The rules of the Amateur Boxing Association (founded 1884) 
contain the following provisions. " An amateur is one who has 
never competed for a money prize or staked bet with or against a 
professional for any prize, except with the express sanction of the 
A.B.A., and who has never taught, pursued or assisted in the 
practice of athletic exercises as a means of obtaining a liveli- 
hood." The ring shall be roped and between 1 2 and 24 ft. square. 
No spikes shall be worn on shoes. Boxers are divided into the 
following classes by weight: — Bantam, not exceeding 8 st. 4 lb 
(116 lb); Feather, not exceeding 9 st. (126 lb); Light, not 
exceeding 10 st. (140 lb); Middle, not exceeding n st. 4 lb (158 
lb) ; and Heavy, any weight above. There shall be two judges, 
a referee and a timekeeper. The votes of the judges decide the 
winner of a bout, unless they disagree, in which case the referee 
has the deciding vote. In case of doubt he may order an extra 
round of two minutes' duration. Each match is for three rounds, 
the first two lasting three minutes and the third four, with one 
minute rest between the rounds. A competitor failing to come 
up at the call of time loses the match. When a competitor draws 
a bye he must box for a specified time with an opponent chosen 
by the judges. A competitor is allowed one assistant (second) 
only, and no advice or coaching during the progress of a round is 
permitted. Unless one competitor is unable to respond to the 
call of time, or is obliged to stop before the match is over, the 
judges decide the winner by points, which are for attack, com- 
prising successful hits cleanly delivered, and defence, comprising 
guarding, slipping, ducking, counter-hitting and getting away in 
time to avoid a return. When the points are equal the decision 
is given in favour of the boxer who has done the most leading, i.e. 



has been the more aggressive. Fouls are hitting below the 
belt, kicking, hitting with the open hand, the side of the hand, 
the wrist, elbow or shoulder, wrestling or " roughing " on the 
ropes, i. e. unnecessary shouldering and jostling. 

The boxing rules of the American Amateur Athletic Associa- 
tion differ slightly from the British. The ring is roped but must 
be from 16 to 24 ft. square. Gloves must not be worn more than 
8 oz. in weight. The recognized classes by weight are: Bantam, 
105 lb and under; .Feather, 115 lb and under; Light, 135 lb 
and under; Welter, 145 lb and under; Middle, 158 lb and under; 
and Heavy, over 158 lb. The rules for officials and rounds are 
identical with the British, except that only in final bouts does the 
last round last four minutes. Two " seconds " are allowed. The 
rules for points and fouls coincide with the British. The amateur 
rules are very strict, and any one who competes in a boxing 
contest of more than four rounds is suspended from membership 
in the Athletic Association. 

Glossary of terms not mentioned above : — Break away, to get away 
from the adversary, usually a command from the referee when the 
men clinch. Break ground, retire diagonally to right or left. CotoA- 
weight,^&ny weight. Corners, the opposite angles of the square 

ring," in which the boxers rest between the rounds. Cross-counter, 
a blow in which the right or left arm crosses that of the adversary 
as he leads off; the arm is slightly curved to get round that of the 
opponent but is straightened at the moment of impact. Clinching, 
grappling after an exchange of blows; when breaking from a clinch 
one tries to pin the adversary's hands in order to prevent his hitting 
at close quarters. Drawing an opponent, enticing him by leaving 
an apparent opening into making an attack for which a counter is 
prepared. _ Fiddling, forward and back movements of the arms at 
the beginning of a round, a part of sparring for an opening. Fool- 
work, the manner in which a boxer uses his feet. In-fighting, boxing 
at very close quarters. Mark, the pit of the stomach. Side-step, 
springing quickly to one side to avoid a blow, the movement being 
usually followed up by a counter attack. Timing, a blow delivered 
on the enemy's preparation of an attack of his own, but more quickly. 

SeeBoxing,by R.AIlansonWinn(IsthmianLibrary, London,i8o7) ; 
Boxing, by Wm. Elder (Spalding's Athletic Library, New York, 1902) 
(these two books are excellent for' the technicalities of boxing). 
The article " Boxing," by B. Jno. Angle and G. W. Barroll, in the 
Encyclopaedia of Sport; Boxing, by J. C. Trotter (Oval Series,' 
London, 1896); Fencing, Boxing and Wrestling, in the Badminton 
Library (London, 1892). £ 

French Boxing (la boxe francaise) dates from about 1830. 
It is more like the ancient Greek pankration (see Pugilism) than is 
British boxing, as not only striking with the fists, but also kicking 
with the feet, butting with the head and wrestling are allowed. 
It is a development of the old sport of savate, in which the feet, 
and not the hands, were used in attack. Lessons in savate, 
which was practised especially by roughs, were usually given in 
some low resort, and there were no respectable teachers. While 
Paris was restricted to savate, another sport, called chausson or 
jeu marseillais, was practised in the south of France, especially 
among the soldiers, in which blows of the fist as well as kicks were 
exchanged, and the kicks were given higher than in savate, in 
the stomach or even the face. It was an excellent exercise, but 
could hardly be reckoned a serious means of defence, for the 
high kicks usually fell short, and the upward blows of the fist 
could not be compared with the terrible sledge-hammer blows 
of the English boxers. Alexandre Dumas pere says that Charles 
Lecour first conceived the idea of combining English boxing with 
savate. For this purpose he went to England, and took lessons 
of Adams and Smith, the London boxers. He then returned 
to Paris, about 1852, and opened a school to teach the sport 
since called la boxe francaise. Around him, and two provincial 
instructors who came to Paris about this time with similar ideas, 
there grew up a large number of sportsmen, who between 1845 
and 1855 brought French boxing to its highest development. 
Among others who gave public exhibitions was Lecour's brother 
Hubert, who although rather undersized, was quick as lightning, 
and had an English blow and a French kick that were truly 
terrible. Charles Ducros was another whose style of boxing, 
more in the English fashion, but with low kicks about 
his opponent's shins, made a name for himself. Later came 
Vigneron, a " strong man," whose style, though slow, was 
severe in its punishment. About 1856 the police interfered in 
these fights, and Lecour and Vigneron had to cease giving public 



352 



BOXWOOD— BOY-BISHOP 



exhibitions and devote themselves to teaching. Towards 1862 
a new boxer, J. Charlemont, was not only very clever with his 
fists and feet, but an excellent teacher, and the author of a 
treatise on the art. Lecour, Vigneron and Charlemont may be 
said to have created la boxe franqaise, which, for defence at 
equal weights, the French claim to be better than the English. 

See L'Art de la boxe francaise et de la canne, by J. Charlemont 
(Paris, 1899) ; The French Method of the Noble Art of Self Defence, 
by Georges d'Amoric (London, 1898). 

BOXWOOD, the wood obtained from the genus Buxus, the 
principal species being the well-known tree or shrub, B. semper- 
virens, the common box, in general use for borders of garden 
walks, ornamental parterres, &c. The other source of the 
ordinary boxwood of commerce is B. balearica, which yields the 
variety known as Turkey boxwood. The common box is grown 
throughout Great Britain (perhaps native in the chalk-hills of 
the south of England), in the southern part of the European 
continent generally, and extends through Persia into India, 
where it is found growing on the slopes of the western Himalayas. 
There has been much discussion as to whether it is a true native 
of Britain. Writing more than 200 years ago, John Ray, the 
author of the important Historia Plantarum, says, " The Box 
grows wild on Boxhill, hence the name; also at Boxwell, on the 
Cotteswold Hills in Gloucestershire, and at Boxley in Kent. . . . 
It grows plentifully on the chalk hills near Dunstable." On the 
other hand the box is not wild in the Channel Islands, and in the 
north of France, Holland and Belgium is found mainly in hedge- 
rows and near cultivation, and it may have been one of the many 
introductions owed to the Romans. Only a very small proportion 
of the wood suitable for industrial uses is now obtained in Great 
Britain. The box is a very slow-growing plant, adding not more 
than 15 or 2 in. to its diameter in twenty years, and on an average 
attaining only a height of 16 ft., with a mean diameter of io| in. 
The leaves of this species are small, oval, leathery in texture and 
of a deep glossy green colour. B. balearica is a tree of consider- 
able size, attaining to a height of 80 ft., with leaves three times 
larger than those of the common box. It is a native of the islands 
of the Mediterranean, and grows in Turkey, Asia Minor, and 
around the shores of the Black Sea, and is supposed to be the 
chief source of the boxwood which comes into European com- 
merce by way of Constantinople. The wood of both species pos- 
sesses a delicate yellow colour; it is very dense in structure and 
has a fine uniform grain, which has given it unique value for the 
purposes of the wood-engraver. A large amount is used in the 
manufacture of measuring rules, various mathematical instru- 
ments, flutes and other musical instruments, as well as for turning 
into many minor articles, and for inlaying, and it is a favourite 
wood for small carvings. The use of boxwood for turnery and 
musical instruments is mentioned by Pliny, Virgil and Ovid. 

BOYACA, or Bojaca, an inland department of Colombia, 
bounded by the departments of Santander and Cundinamarca 
on the N., W. and S., and the republic of Venezuela on the E., 
and having an area of 33,321 sq. m., including the Casanare 
territory. Pop. (1899, estimate) 508,940. The department is 
very mountainous, heavily forested and rich in minerals. The 
famous Muso emerald mines are located in the western part of 
Boyaca. The capital, Tunja (pop. 1902, 10,000), is situated in 
the Eastern Cordilleras, 9054 ft. above sea-level, and has a cool, 
temperate climate, though only s|° N. of the equator. It was 
an important place in colonial times, and occupies the site of one 
of the Indian towns of this region (Hunsa), which had acquired 
a considerable degree of civilization before the discovery of 
America. Other towns of note in the department are Chiquin- 
quira (20,000), Moniquira (18,000), Sogamoso (10,787), and 
Boyaca (7000), where on the 7th of August 1819 Bolivar defeated 
the Spanish army and secured the independence of New Granada. 

BOYAR (Russ. boyarin, plur. boy are), a dignity of Old Russia 
conterminous with the history of the country. Originally the 
boyars were the intimate friends and confidential advisers of 
the Russian prince, the superior members of his druzhina or 
bodyguard, his comrades and champions. They were divided 
into classes according to rank, most generally determined by 



personal merit and service. Thus we hear of the " oldest," 
" elder " and the " younger " boyars. At first the dignity 
seems to have been occasionally, but by no means invariably, 
hereditary. At a later day the boyars were the chief members 
of the prince's duma, or council, like the senatores of Poland 
and Lithuania. Their further designation of luchshie lyudi or 
" the best people " proves that they were generally richer than 
their fellow subjects. So long as the princes, in their interminabk, 
struggles with the barbarians of the Steppe, needed the assistance 
of the towns, " the best people " of the cities and of the druzhina 
proper mingled freely together both in war and commerce; but 
after Yaroslav's crushing victory over the Petchenegs in 1036 
beneath the walls of Kiev, the two classes began to draw apart, 
and a political and economical difference between the members 
of the princely druzhina and the aristocracy of the towns becomes 
discernible. The townsmen devote themselves henceforth more 
exclusively to commerce, while the druzhina asserts the privileges 
of an exclusively military caste with a primary claim upon the 
land. Still later, when the courts of the northern grand dukes 
were established, the boyars appear as the first grade of a full- 
blown court aristocracy with the exclusive privilege of possessing 
land and serfs. Hence their title of dvoryane (courtiers) , first used 
in the 1 2th century. On the other hand there was no distinction, 
as in Germany, between the Dienst A del (nobility of service) 
and the simple Adel. The Russian boyardom had no corporate 
or class privileges, (1) because their importance was purely local 
(the dignity of the principality determining the degree of dignity 
of the boyars), (2) because of their inalienable right of transmi- 
gration from one prince to another at will, which prevented the 
formation of a settled aristocracy, and (3) because birth did not 
determine but only facilitated the attainment of high rank, e.g. 
the son of a boyar was not a boyar born, but could more easily at- 
tain to boyardom, if of superior personal merit. It was reserved 
for Peter the Great to transform the boyarstvo or boyardom into 
something more nearly resembling the aristocracy of the West. 

• See Alexander Markevich, The History of Rank-priority in the 
Realm of Muscovy in the i^th-iSth Centuries (Russ.) (Odessa, 1888) ; 
V. Klyuchevsky, The Boyar Duma of Ancient Russia (Russ.) (Moscow, 
1888). ' (R. N. B.) 



BOY-BISHOP, the name given to the " bishop of the boys " 
(episcopus puerorum or innocentium, sometimes episcopus 
scholariorum or chorestarum) , who, according to a custom very 
wide-spread in the middle ages, was chosen in connexion with 
the festival of Holy Innocents. For the origin of the curious 
authority of the boy-bishop and of the rites over which he 
presided, see Fools, Feast of. In England the boy-bishop 
was elected on December 6, the feast of St Nicholas, the patron 
of children, and his authority lasted till Holy Innocents' day 
(December 28). The election made, the lad was dressed in full 
bishop's robes with mitre and crozier and, attended by comrades 
dressed as priests, made a circuit of the town blessing the people. 
At Salisbury the boy-bishop seems to have actually had ecclesi- 
astical patronage during his episcopate, and could make valid 
appointments. The boy and his colleagues took possession of 
the cathedral and performed all the ceremonies and offices 
except mass. Originally, it seems, confined to the cathedrals, 
the custom spread to nearly all the parishes. Several ecclesi- 
astical councils had attempted to abolish or to restrain the 
abuses of the custom, before it was prohibited by the council 
of Basel in 1431. It was, however, too popular to be easily 
suppressed. In England it was abolished by Henry VIII. in 
1542, revived by Mary in 1 5 5 2 and finally abolished by Elizabeth. 
On the continent it survived longest in Germany, in the so-called 
Gregoriusfest, said to have been founded by Gregory IV. in 828 
in honour of St Gregory, the patron of schools. A school-boy 
was elected bishop, duly vested, and, attended by two boy- 
deacons and the town clergy, proceeded to the parish church, 
where, after a hymn in honour of St Gregory had been sung, he 
preached. At Meiningen this custom survived till 1799. 

See Brand, Pop. Antiquities of Great Britain (1905); Gasquet, 
Parish Life in Medieval England (1906) ; Du Cange, Glossarium 
(London, 1884), s.v. " Episcopus puerorum." 



BOYCE— BOYD, LORD 



353 



BOYCE, WILLIAM (1710-1779), English musical composer, 
the son of a cabinet-maker, was born in London on the 7 th of 
February 17 10. As a chorister in St Paul's he received his early 
musical education from Charles King and Dr Maurice Greene, 
and he afterwards studied the theory of music under Dr Pepusch. 
In 1734, having become organist of Oxford chapel, Vere Street, 
Cavendish Square, he set Lord Lansdowne's masque of Pelens 
a-nd Thetis to music. In 1736 he left Oxford chapel and was 
appointed organist of St Michael's church, Cornhill, and in the 
same year he became composer to the chapel royal, and wrote 
'the music for John Lockman's oratorio David's Lamentation 
over Saul and Jonathan. In 1737 he was appointed to conduct 
the meetings of the three choirs of Gloucester, Worcester and 
Hereford. In 1743 was written the serenata Solomon, in which 
occurs the favourite song " Softly rise, O southern breeze." 
In 1749 he received the degree of doctor of music from the 
university of Cambridge, as an acknowledgment of the merit 
of his setting of the ode performed at the installation of Henry 
Pelham, duke of Newcastle, as chancellor; and in this year he 
became organist of All- hallows the Great and Less, Thames Street. 
A musical setting to The Chaplet, an entertainment by Moses 
Mendez, was Boyce's most successful achievement in this 
year. In 1750 he wrote songs for Dryden's Secular Masque 
and in 17 51 set another piece {The Shepherd's Lottery) by 
Mendez. He became master of the king's band in succession 
to Greene in 1757, and in 1758 he was appointed principal 
organist to the chapel royal. As an ecclesiastical composer 
Boyce ranks among the best representatives of the English 
school. His two church services and his anthems, of which the 
best specimens are By the* Waters of Babylon and O, Where shall 
Wisdom be found, are frequently performed. It should also 
be remembered that he wrote additional accompaniments and 
choruses for Purcell's Te Deum and Jubilate, which the earlier 
musician had composed for the St Cecilia's day of 1694. 
Boyce did this in his capacity of conductor at the annual 
festivals of the Sons of the Clergy at St Paul's cathedral, an 
office which he had taken in succession to Greene. His twelve 
trios for two violins and a bass were long popular. One of 
his most valuable services to musical art was his publication 
in three volumes quarto of a work on Cathedral Music. 
The collection had been begun by Greene, but it was mainly 
the work of Boyce. The first volume appeared in 1760 and 
the last in 1778. On the 7th of February 1779 Boyce died 
from an attack of gout. He was buried under the dome of St 
Paul's cathedral. 

BOYCOTT, the refusal and incitement to refusal to have 
commercial or social dealings with any one on whom it is wished 
to bring pressure. As merely a form of " sending to Coventry " 
or (in W. E. Gladstone's phrase) " exclusive dealing," boycotting 
may be, from a legal point of view, unassailable, and as such 
has frequently been justified by its original political inventors. 
But in practice it has usually taken the form of what is un- 
doubtedly an illegal conspiracy to injure the person, property 
or business of another by unwarrantably putting pressure on all 
and sundry to withdraw from him their social or business inter- 
course. The word was first used in Ireland, and was derived 
from the name of Captain Charles Cunningham Boycott (1832- 
1897), agent for the estates of the earl of Erne in Co. Mayo. 
For refusing in 1880 to receive rents at figures fixed by the tenants, 
Captain Boycott had his life threatened, his servants compelled 
to leave him, his fences torn down, his letters intercepted and his 
food supplies interfered with. It took a force of 900 soldiers 
to protect the Ulster Orangemen (" Emergency Men ") who 
succeeded finally in getting in his crops. He was hooted and 
mobbed in the streets, and hanged and burnt in effigy. The 
system of boycotting was an essential part of the Irish Nation- 
alist " Plan of Campaign," and was dealt with under the Crimes 
Act of 1887. The term soon came into common English use, 
and was speedily adopted by the French, Germans, Dutch and 
Russians. In the United States this method of " persuasion " 
was taken up by the trade unions about 1886, an employer who 
refused their demands being brought to terms by a combination 



to refuse to buy his product or do his work, or to deal with any 
who did. Various cases have occurred in America in which 
labour organizations have pronounced such a boycott against a 
firm; and its illegal nature has been established in the law-courts-, 
notably in the case of the Bucks Stove Company v. The American 
Federation of Labor (1907) in the Supreme Court of the district 
of Columbia, and in a suit against the Hatters' Union (February 
1908) in the U.S. Supreme Court. A boycott has also been held 
by the U.S. Supreme Court to be a violation of the Sherman 
Anti-Trust law. 

BOYD, ANDREW KENNEDY HUTCHISON (1825-1899), 
Scottish author and divine, was born at Auchinleck manse :n 
Ayrshire on the 3rd of November 1825. He studied at King's 
College, London, and at the Middle Temple, with the idea of 
practising at the English bar. Returning to Scotland, however, 
he entered Glasgow University and there qualified for the 
Scottish ministry, being licensed as a preacher by the presbytery 
of Ayr. He served in succession the parishes of Newton-on-Ayr, 
Kirkpatrick-lrongray near Dumfries, St Bernard's, Edinburgh, 
and finally, in 1865, became minister of the first charge at St 
Andrews. Here he advocated an improved ritual in the Scottish 
church, his action resulting in the appointment by the general 
assembly of a committee, with Boyd as convener, to prepare 
a new hymnal. In 1890 he was appointed moderator of the 
general assembly, and fulfilled the duties of the position with 
admirable dignity and tact. He died at Bournemouth on the 
1st of March 1899. Dr Boyd was a very famous preacher and 
talker, and his desultory essays have very much of the charm of 
his conversation. Among his numerous publications may be 
specially mentioned the two works (each in three series), Recrea- 
tions of a Country Parson (1859, 1861 and 1878), and Graver 
Thoughts of a Country Parson (1862-1865 and 1875); he also 
wrote Twenty-five Years at St Andrews (1892), and St Andrews 
and Elsewhere (1894). He was familiarly known to the public 
as a writer by his initials " A.K.H.B." 

BOYD, ROBERT BOYD, Lord (d.e. 1470), Scottish statesman, 
was a son of Sir Thomas Boyd (d. 1439), and belonged to an old 
and distinguished family, one member of which, Sir Robert Boyd, 
had fought with Wallace and Robert Bruce. Boyd, who was 
created a peer about 1454, was one of the regents of Scotland 
during the minority of James III., but, in 1466, with some 
associates he secured the person of the young king and was 
appointed his sole governor. As ruler of Scotland he was instru- 
mental in reforming some religious foundations; he arranged 
the marriage between James III. and Margaret, daughter of 
Christian I., king of Denmark and Norway, and secured the 
cession of the Orkney Islands by Norway. However, when in 
1467 he obtained the offices of chamberlain and justiciary for 
himself, and the hand of the king's sister Mary, with the title 
of earl of Arran for his eldest son Thomas, his enemies became 
too strong for him, and he was found guilty of treason and 
sentenced to death. He escaped to England, and the date of 
his death is unknown. His brother and assistant, Sir Alexander 
Boyd, was beheaded on the 22nd of November 1469. 

Boyd's son Thomas, earl of Arran, was in Denmark when his 
father was overthrown. However, he fulfilled his mission, that 
of bringing the king's bride, Margaret, to Scotland, and then, 
warned by his wife, escaped to the continent of Europe. He is 
mentioned very eulogistically in one of the Paston Letters, 
but practically nothing is known of his subsequent history. 

Lord Boyd's grandson Robert (d. c. 1550), a son of Alexander 
Boyd, was confirmed in the possession of the estates and honours 
of his grandfather in 1549, and is generally regarded as the 
3rd Lord Boyd. His son Robert, 4th Lord Boyd (d. 1590), 
took a prominent part in Scottish politics during the troubled 
time which followed the death of James V. in 1542- At first 
he favoured the reformed religion, but afterwards his views 
changed and he became one of the most trusted advisers of Mary, 
queen of Scots, whom he accompanied to the battle of Langside 
in 1568. During the queen's captivity he was often employed 
on diplomatic errands; he tried to stir up insurrections in her 
favour, and he was suspected of participation in the murder 



354 



BOYD, Z.— BOYLE, ROBERT 



of the regent Murray. He enjoyed a high and influential position 
under the regent James Douglas, earl of Morton, but was banished 
in 1583 for his share in the seizure of King James VI., a plot 
known as the Raid of Ruthven. He retired to France, but 
was soon allowed to return to Scotland. He died on the 3rd 
of January 1590. 

William, 8th or 9th Lord Boyd (d. 1692), was created earl of 
Kilmarnock in 1661, and this nobleman's grandson William, 
the 3rd earl (d. 1717), was a partisan of the Hanoverian kings and 
fought for George I. during the rising of 1715. His son William, 
the 4th earl (1 704-1 746), was educated in the same principles, 
but in 1745, owing either to a personal affront or to the influence 
of his wife or to his straitened circumstances he deserted George II . 
and joined Charles Edward, the Young Pretender. The 4th earl 
fought at Falkirk and Culloden, where he was made prisoner, and 
was beheaded on the 18th of August 1746. The title of earl of 
Kilmarnock is now merged in that of earl of Erroll. 

BOYD, ZACHARY (is8s?-i653), Scottish divine, was edu- 
cated at the universities of Glasgow and St Andrews. He was for 
many years a teacher in the Protestant college of Saumur in 
France, but returned to Scotland in 1621, to escape the Huguenot 
persecution. In 1623 he was appointed minister of the Barony 
church in Glasgow, and he was rector of the university in 1634, 
1635 and 1645. He bequeathed to the university the half of his 
fortune, a sum amounting to £20,000 Scots, besides his library 
and twelve volumes of MSS. His poetical compositions, though 
often eccentric, have some merit. The common statement that 
he made the printing of his metrical version of the Gospels and 
other Biblical narratives a condition of the reception of his grant 
to the university is a mistake. In later years he was a staunch 
Covenanter, and though for a time opposed to Oliver Cromwell, 
afterwards became friendly with him. His best-known works 
are The Battel of the Soul in Death (1629), of which a new, edition, 
with a biography by G. Neil, was published in Glasgow in 183 1 ; 
Zion's Flowers — often called "Boyd's Bible" (1644); Four 
Letters of Comfort (1640, reprinted, Edinburgh, 1878). 

BOYDELL, JOHN (1719-1804), English alderman and pub- 
lisher, was born at Dorrington, and at the age of twenty-one 
came to London and was apprenticed for seven years to an 
engraver. In 1746 he published a volume of views in England 
and Wales, and started in business as a print-seller. By his good 
taste and liberality he managed to secure the services of the best 
artists, and his engravings were executed with such skill that his 
business became extensive and lucrative. He succeeded in his 
plan of a Shakespeare gallery, and obtained the assistance of the 
most eminent painters of the day, whose contributions were 
exhibited publicly for many years. The engravings from these 
paintings form a splendid companion volume to his large illus- 
trated edition of Shakespeare's works. Towards the close of his 
life Boydell sustained severe losses through the French Revolu- 
tion, and was compelled to dispose of his Shakespeare gallery 
by lottery. Boydell had previously become an alderman, and 
rose to be lord mayor of London. 

BOYER, ALEXIS (1757-1833), French surgeon, was born on 
the 1st of March 1757 at Uzerches (Correze). The son of a 
tailor, he obtained his first medical knowledge in the shop of a 
barber-surgeon. Removing to Paris he had the good fortune to 
attract the notice of Antoine Louis (1723-1792) and P. J. 
Desault (1744-1795); and his perseverance, anatomical skill 
and dexterity as an operator, became so conspicuous, that at 
the age of thirty-seven he obtained the appointment of second 
surgeon to the Hotel Dieu of Paris. On the establishment of the 
Ecole de Sante he gained the chair of operative surgery, but soon 
exchanged it for the chair of clinical surgery. In 1805 Napoleon 
nominated him imperial family surgeon, and, after the brilliant 
campaigns of 1806-7, conferred on him the legion of honour, 
with the title of baron of the empire and a salary of 2 5,000 francs. 
On the fall of Napoleon the merits of Boyer secured him the 
favour of the succeeding sovereigns of France, and he was con- 
sulting surgeon to Louis XVIII. , Charles X., and Louis Philippe. 
In 1825 he succeeded J. F. L. Deschamps (1 740-1824) as surgeon- 
in-chief to the Hopital de la Charite, and was chosen a member of 



the Institute. He died in Paris on the 23rd of November 1833. 
Perhaps no French surgeon of his time thought or wrote with 
greater clearness and good sense than Boyer; and while his 
natural modesty made him distrustful of innovation, and 
somewhat tenacious of established modes of treatment, he was as 
judicious in his diagnosis and as cool and skilful in manipulating, 
as he was cautious in forming his judgment on individual cases. 
His two great works are: — Traite complet de I'anatomie (in 4 vols., 
1797-1799), of which a fourth edition appeared in 1815, and 
Traite des maladies chirurgicales et des operations qui leur con- 
viennent (in n vols., 1814-1826), of which a new edition in 7 vols. 
was published in 1844-1853, with additions by his son, Philippe 
Boyer (1801-1858). 

BOYER, JEAN PIERRE (1776-1850), president of the re- 
public of Haiti, a mulatto, was born at Port-au-Prince on the 
28th of February 1776. He received a good education in France, 
and, returning to St Domingo, joined the army in 1792. In 1794 
he was already in command of a battalion, and fought with 
distinction under General Rigaud against the English. The 
negro insurrectionunderToussaintl'Ouverture, which was directed 
against the mulattoes as well as the whites, ultimately forced him 
to take refuge in France. He was well received by Napoleon, 
and in 1802 obtained a commission in Leclerc's expedition. 
Being opposed to the reinstitution of slavery, he turned against 
the French and succeeded in producing an alliance between 
the negroes and mulattoes by which they were driven from 
the island. Dessalines, a negro, was proclaimed king, but his 
cruelty and despotism were such that Boyer combined with 
A. A. S. Petion and General Christophe to overthrow him (1806). 
Christophe now seized the supreme power, but Petion set up an 
independent republic in the southern part of the island, with 
Boyer as commander-in-chief. Christophe's efforts to crush this 
state were defeated by Boyer's gallant defence of Port-au- 
Prince, and a series of brilliant victories, which, on Petion's death 
in 1818, led to Boyer's election as president. Two years later 
the death of Christophe removed his only rival, and he gained 
almost undisputed possession of the whole island. During his 
presidency Boyer did much to set the finances and the ad- 
ministration in order, and to encourage the arts and sciences, 
and in 1825 obtained French recognition of the independence of 
Haiti, in return for a payment of 150,000 francs. The weight 
of this debt excited the greatest discontent in Haiti. Boyer 
was able to carry on his government for some years longer, 
but in March 1843 a violent insurrection overthrew his 
power and compelled him to take refuge in Jamaica. He 
resided there till 1848, when he removed to Paris, where he 
died in 1850. 

See Wallez, Precis kistorique des negociations entre la France et 
Saint-Domingue, avec une notice biographique sur le general Boyer 
(Paris, 1826). 

BOYLE, JOHN J. (1851- ), American sculptor, was born 
in New York City. He studied in the Pennsylvania Academy 
of Fine Arts, Philadelphia, and in the Ecole des Beaux Arts, 
Paris. He is particularly successful in the portrayal of Indians. 
Among his principal works are: " Stone Age," Fairmount Park, 
Philadelphia; "The Alarm," Lincoln Park, Chicago; and, a 
third study in primitive culture, the two groups, " The Savage 
Age " at the Pan-American Exposition of 1901. His work also 
includes the seated "Franklin," in Philadelphia; and "Bacon" 
and "Plato" in the Congressional library, Washington, D.C. 

BOYLE, ROBERT (1627-1691), English natural philosopher, 
seventh son and fourteenth child of Richard Boyle, the great 
earl of Cork, was born at Lismore Castle, in the province of 
Munster, Ireland, on the 25th of January 1627. While still 
a child he learned to speak Latin and French, and he was only 
eight years old when he was sent to Eton, of which his father's 
friend, Sir Henry Wotton, was then provost. After spending over 
three years at the college, he went to travel abroad with a French 
tutor. Nearly two years were passed in Geneva; visiting Italy 
in 1641, he remained during the winter of that year in Florence, 
studying the " paradoxes of the great star-gazer " Galileo, who 
died within a league of the city early in 1642. Returning to 



BOYLE, ROBERT 



355 



England in 1644 he found that his father was dead and had left 
him the manor of Stalbridge in Dorsetshire, together with estates 
in Ireland. From that time he gave up his life to study and 
scientific research, and soon took a prominent place in the band 
of inquirers, known as the " Invisible College," who devoted 
themselves to the cultivation of the " new philosophy." They 
met frequently in London, often at Gresham College; some of 
the members also had meetings at Oxford, and in that city Boyle 
went to reside in 1654. Reading in 1657 of Otto von Guericke's 
air-pump, he set himself with the assistance of Robert Hooke 
to devise improvements in its construction, and with the result, 
the " machina Boyleana " or " Pneumatical Engine," finished 
in 1659, he began a series of experiments on the properties of 
air. An account of the work he did with this instrument was 
published in 1660 under the title New Experiments Physico- 
Mechanical touching the spring of air and its effects. Among the 
critics of the views put forward in this book was a Jesuit, Fran- 
ciscus Linus (1595-1675), and it was while answering his objec- 
tions that Boyle enunciated the law that the volume of a gas 
varies inversely as the pressvire, which among English-speaking 
peoples is usually called after his name, though on the continent 
of Europe it is attributed to E. Mariotte, who did not publish 
it till 1676. In 1663 the " Invisible College " became the 
" Royal Society of London for improving natural knowledge," 
and the charter of incorporation granted by Charles II. named 
Boyle a member of the council. In 1680 he was elected president 
of the society, but declined the honour from a scruple about 
oaths. In 1668 he left Oxford for London where he resided 
at the house of his sister, Lady Ranelagh, in Pall Mall. About 
1689 his health, never very strong, began to fail seriously and 
he gradually withdrew from his public engagements, ceasing 
his communications to the Royal Society, and advertising his 
desire to be excused from receiving guests, " unless upon occa- 
sions very extraordinary," on Tuesday and Friday forenoon, and 
Wednesday and Saturday afternoon. In the leisure thus gained 
he wished to " recruit his spirits, range his papers," and prepare 
some important chemical investigations which he proposed to 
leave " as a kind of Hermetic legacy to the studious disciples 
of that art," but of which he did not make known the nature. 
His health became still worse in 1691, and his death occurred 
on the 30th of December of that year, just a week after that of 
the sister with whom he had lived for more than twenty years. 
He was buried in the churchyard of St Martin's in the Fields, 
his funeral sermon being preached by his friend Bishop Burnet. 
Boyle's great merit as a scientific investigator is that he carried 
out the principles which Bacon preached in the Novum Organum. 
Yet he would not avow himself a follower of Bacon or indeed of 
any other teacher: on several occasions he mentions that in 
order to keep his judgment as unprepossessed as might be with 
any of the modern theories of philosophy, till he was " provided of 
experiments " to help him Judge of them, he refrained from any 
study of the Atomical and the Cartesian systems, and even of 
the Novum Organum itself, though he admits to " transiently 
consulting " them about a few particulars. Nothing was more 
alien to his mental temperament than the spinning of hypotheses. 
He regarded the acquisition of knowledge as an end in itself, 
and in consequence he gained a wider outlook on the aims of 
scientific inquiry than had been enjoyed by his predecessors 
for many centuries. This, however, did not mean that he paid 
no attention to the practical application of science nor that he 
despised knowledge which tended to use. He himself was an 
alchemist; and believing the transmutation of metals to be a 
possibility, he carried out experiments in the hope of effecting 
it; and he was instrumental in obtaining the repeal, in 1689, 
of the statute of Henry IV. against multiplying gold and silver. 
With all the important work he accomplished in physics — the 
enunciation of Boyle's law, the discovery of the part taken by 
air in the propagation of sound, and investigations on the ex- 
pansive force of freezing water, on specific gravities and refractive 
powers, on crystals, on electricity, on colour, on hydrostatics, 
&c. — chemistry was his peculiar and favourite study. His first 
book on the subject was The Sceptical Chemist, published in 166 1, 



in which he criticized the " experiments whereby vulgar Spagy- 
rists are wont to endeavour to evince their Salt, Sulphur and 
Mercury to be the true Principles of Things." For him chemistry 
was the science of the composition of substances, not merely an 
adjunct to the arts of the alchemist or the physician. He 
advanced towards the modern view of elements as the undecom- 
posable constituents 'of material bodies; and understanding 
the distinction between mixtures and compounds, he made 
considerable progress in the technique of detecting their in- 
gredients, a process which he designated by the term " analysis." 
He further supposed that the elements were ultimately com- 
posed of particles of various sorts and sizes, into which, however, 
they were not to be resolved in any known way. Applied 
chemistry had to thank him for improved methods and for an 
extended knowledge of individual substances. He also studied 
the chemistry of combustion and of respiration, and made 
experiments in physiology, where, however, he was hampered 
by the " tenderness of his nature " which kept him from anatomi- 
cal dissections, especially of living animals, though he knew 
them to be " most instructing." 

Besides being a busy natural philosopher, Boyle devoted 
much time to theology, showing a very decided leaning to the 
practical side and an indifference to controversial polemics. 
At the Restoration he was favourably received at court, and 
in 1665 would have received the provostship of Eton, if he would 
have taken orders; but this he refused to do, on the ground 
that his writings on religious subjects would have greater weight 
coming from a layman than a paid minister of the Church. He 
spent large sums in promoting the spread of Christianity, con- 
tributing liberally to missionary societies, and to the expenses 
of translating the Bible or portions of it into various languages. 
By his will he founded the Boyle lectures, for proving the Christian 
religion against " notorious infidels, viz. atheists, theists, pagans, 
Jews and Mahommedans," with the proviso that controversies 
between Christians were not to be mentioned. 

In person Boyle was tall, slender and of a pale countenance. 
His constitution was far from robust, and throughout his life he 
suffered from feeble health and low spirits. While his scientific 
work procured him an extraordinary reputation among his 
contemporaries, his private character and virtues, the charm 
of his social manners, his wit and powers of conversation, en- 
deared him to a large circle of personal friends. He was never 
married. His writings are exceedingly voluminous, and his 
style is clear and straightforward, though undeniably prolix. 

' The following are the more important of his works in addition to 
the two already mentioned : — Considerations touching the Usefulness 
of Experimental Natural Philosophy (1663), followed by a second 
part in 1671 ; Experiments and Considerations upon Colours, with 
Observations on a Diamond that Shines in the Dark (1663); New 
Experiments and Observations upon Cold (1665); Hydrostalical 
Paradoxes (1666); Origin of Forms and Qualities according to the 
Corpuscular Philosophy (1666); a continuation of his work on the 
spring of air (1669); tracts about the Cosmical Qualities of Things, 
the Temperature of the Subterraneal and Submarine Regions, the 
Bottom of the Sea, &c. with an Introduction to the History of Particular 
Qualities (1670) ; Origin and Virtues of Gems (1672) ; Essays of the 
strange Subtilty, great Efficacy, determinate Nature of Effluviums 
(1673) ; two volumes of tracts on the Saltness of the Sea, the Hidden 
Qualities of the Air, Cold, Celestial Magnets, Ayiimadversions on 
Hobbes's Problemata de Vacuo (1674) ; Experiments and Notes 
about the Mechanical Origin or Production of Particular Qualities, 
including some notes on electricity and magnetism (1676); Obser- 
vations upon an artificial Substance that Shines without any Preceding 
Illustration (1678); the Aerial Noctiluca (1680); New Experiments 
and Observations upon the Icy Noctiluca (1682) ; a further continua- 
tion of his work on the air; Memoirs for the Natural History of the 
Human Blood (1684) ; Short Memoirs for the Natural Experimental 
History of Mineral Waters (1685) ; Medicina Hydrostatica (1690) ; 
and Experimenta et Observationes Physicae (1691). Among his 
religious and philosophical writings were: — Seraphic Love, written 
in 1648, but not published till 1660; an Essay upon the Style of 
the Holy Scriptures (1663) ; Occasional Reflections upon Several 
Subjects (1665), which was ridiculed by Swift in A Pious Meditation 
upon a Broomstick, and by Butler in An Occasional Reflection on 
Dr Charlton's Feeling a Dog's Pulse at Gresham College; Excellence 
of Theology compared with Natural Philosophy (1664); Some Con- 
siderations about the Reconcileableness of Reason and Religion, with a 
Discourse about the Possibility of the Resurrection (1675); Discourse 



35 6 



BOYLE— BRABANT 



nf Things above Reason (1681) ; High Veneration Man owes to God 
(1685); A Free Inquiry into the vulgarly received Notion of Nature 
(1686) ; and the Christian Virtuoso (1690). Several other works 
appeared after his death, among them The General History of the 
Air designed and begun (1692); a " collection of choice remedies," 
Medicinal Experiments (1692-1698); and A Free Discourse against 
Customary Swearing (1695). An incomplete and unauthorized 
edition of Boyle's works was published at Geneva in 1677, but the 
first complete edition was that of Thomas Birch, with a life, pub- 
lished in 1744, in five folio volumes, a second edition appearing in 
1772 in six volumes, 4to. Boyle bequeathed his natural history 
collections to the Royal Society, which also possesses a portrait of 
him by the German painter, Friedrich Kerseboom (1632-1690). 

BOYLE, a market town of Co. Roscommon, Ireland, in the 
north parliamentary division, on the Sligo line of the Midland 
Great Western railway, 106J m. N.W. by W. from Dublin and 
28 m. S. by E. from Sligo. Pop. (1901) 2477. It is beautifully 
situated on both banks of the river Boyle, an affluent of the 
Shannon, between Loughs Gara and Key. Three bridges connect 
the two parts of the town. There is considerable trade in agricur- 
tural produce. To the north of the town stand the extensive 
ruins of a Cistercian abbey founded in 1161, including remains 
of a cruciform church, with a fine west front, and Norman 
and Transitional arcades with carving of very beautiful detail. 
The offices of the monastery are well preserved, and an interesting 
feature is seen in the names carved on the door of the lodge, 
attributed in Cromwell's soldier, who occupied the buildings. 
Neighbouring antiquities are Asselyn church near Lough Key, 
and a large cromlech by the road towards Lough Gara. Boyle 
was incorporated by James I., and returned two members to 
the Irish parliament. 

BOYNE, a river of Ireland, which, rising in the Bog of Allen, 
near Carbery in Co. Kildare, and flowing in a north-easterly 
direction, passes Trim, Navan and Drogheda, and enters the 
Irish Sea, 4 m. below the town last named. It is navigable for 
barges to Navan, 19 m. from its mouth. Much of the scenery on 
its banks is beautiful, though never grand. About 2 m. west of 
Drogheda, an obelisk, 1 50 ft. in height, marks the spot where the 
forces of William III. gained a celebrated victory over those of 
James II., on the 1st of July 1 1690, known as the battle of the 
Boyne. 

BOYS' BRIGADE, an organization founded in Glasgow by 
Mr (afterwards Sir) W. A. Smith in 1883 to develop Christian 
manliness by the use of a semi-military discipline and order, 
gymnastics, summer camps and religious services and classes. 
There are about 2200 companies connected with different 
churches throughout the United Kingdom, the British empire 
and the United States, with 10,000 officers and 100,000 boys. A 
similar organization, confined to the Anglican communion, is the 
Church Lads' Brigade. Boys' and girls' life brigades are a more 
recent movement; they teach young people how to save life from 
fire and from water, and hold classes in hygiene, ambulance and 
elementary nursing. 

BOZDAR, a Baluch tribe of Rind (Arab) extraction, usually 
associated with the mountain districts of the frontier near Dera 
Ghazi Khan. They are also to be found in Zhob, Thal-Chotiali 
and Las Bela, whilst the majority of the population are said to 
live in the Punjab. They are usually graziers, and the name 
Bozdar is probably derived from Buz, the Persian name for goat. 
Within the limits of their mountain home on the outer spurs of the 
Suliman hills they have always been a turbulent race, mustering 
about 2700 fighting men, and they were formerly constantly at 
feud with the neighbouring Ustarana and Sherani tribes. In 
1857 their raids into the Punjab drew upon them an expedi- 
tion under Brigadier-General Sir N. B. Chamberlain. The 
Sangarh pass was captured and the Bozdars submitted. Since 
Baluchistan has been taken over they have given but little 
trouble. 

1 This was the " old style " date, which in the new style (see 
Calendar) would be July nth (not 12th, as Lecky says, Hist, of 
Ireland, iii. p. 427). The 12th of July is annually celebrated by the 
Orangemen in the north of Ireland as the anniversary, but this 
is a confusion between the supposed new style for July 1st and the 
old style date of the battle of Aughrim, July 12th; the intention 
being to commemorate both. 



BOZRAH. (1) A capital of Edom (Gen. xxxvi. ZZ', Amos i. 12; 
Is. xxxiv. 6, Ixiii. 1), doubtfully identified with el-Buseireh, S.E. of 
the Dead Sea, in the broken country N. of Petra; the ruins here 
are comparatively unimportant. It is the centre of a pastoral 
district, and its inhabitants, who number between 100 and 200, 
are all shepherds. (2) A city in the Mishor or plain country of 
Moab, denounced by Jeremiah (xlviii. 24) . It has been identified 
(also questionably) with a very extensive collection of ruins of 
various ages, now called Bosra (the Roman Bostra), situated in 
the Hauran, about 80 m. south of Damascus. The area within the 
walls is about ij m. in length, and nearly 1 m. in breadth, while 
extensive suburbs lie to the east, north and west. The principal 
buildings which can still be distinguished are a temple, an 
aqueduct, a large theatre (enclosed by a castle of much more 
recent workmanship), several baths, a triumphal and other 
arches, three mosques, and what are known as the church and 
convent of the monk Boheira. In a.d. 106 the city was beautified 
and perhaps restored from ruin by Trajan, who made it the capital 
of the new province of Arabia. In the reign of Alexander 
Severus it was made a colony, and in 244, a native of the place, 
Philippus, ascended the imperial throne. By the time of Con- 
stantine the Great it seems to have been Christianized, and not 
long after it was the seat of an extensive bishopric. It was one of 
the first cities of Syria to be subjected to the Mahommedans, and 
it successfully resisted all the attempts of the Crusaders to wrest 
it from their hands. As late as the 14th century it was a populous 
city, after which it gradually fell into decay. It is now inhabited 
by thirty or forty families only. Another suggested identification 
is with Kusur el-Besheir, equidistant (2 m.) from Dibon and 
Aroer. This is perhaps the same as the Bezer mentioned in 
Deuteronomy and Joshua as a levitical city and a city of refuge. 

In 1 Mace. v. 26 there is mention of Bosor and of Bosora. 
The latter is probably to be identified with Bosra, the former 
perhaps with the present Busr el-Hariri in the south-east corner 
of the Leja. (R. A. S. M.) 

BRABANT, a duchy which existed from 11 90 to 1430, when it 
was united with the duchy of Burgundy, the name being derived 
from Brabo, a semi-mythical Frankish chief. 

The history of Brabant is connected with that of the duchy of 
Lower Lorraine (q.v.), which became in the course of the nth 
century split up into a number of small feudal states. The counts 
of Hainaut, Namur, Luxemburg and Limburg asserted their 
independence, and the territory of Liege passed to the bishop9 
of that city. The remnant of the duchy, united since 1100 with 
the margraviate of Antwerp, was conferred in 1106 by the 
emperor Henry V., with the title of duke of Lower Lorraine, upon 
Godfrey (Godefroid) I., " the Bearded," count of Louvain and 
Brussels. His title was disputed by Count Henry of Limburg, 
and for three generations the representatives of the rival houses 
contested the possession of the ducal dignity in Lower Lorraine. 
The issue was decided in favour of the house of Louvain by Duke 
Godfrey III. in 1159. His son, Henry I., " the Warrior " (1183- 
1 23 5) , abandoned the title of duke of Lower Lorraine and assumed 
in 1 190 that of duke of Brabant. His successors were Henry II., 
" the Magnanimous " (1235-1248), Henry III., " le Debonnair " 
(1248-1261), and John I., "the Victorious" (1261-1294). 
These were all able rulers. Their usual place of residence was 
Louvain. John I., in 1283 bought the duchy of Limburg 
from Adolf of Berg, and secured his acquisition by defeat- 
ing and slaying his competitor, Henry of Luxemburg, at the 
battle of Woeringen (June 5, 1288). His own son, John II., 
" the Pacific " (1294-1312), bestowed liberties upon his subjects 
by the charter of Cortenberg. This charter laid the foundation 
of Brabantine freedom. By it the imposition of grants (beden) 
and taxes was strictly limited and regulated, and its execution 
was entrusted to a council appointed by the duke for life (four 
nobles, ten burghers) whose duty it was to consider all com- 
plaints and to see that the conditions laid down by the charter 
concerning the administration of justice and finance were not 
infringed. He was succeeded by his son, John III., " the 
Triumphant" (1312-1355), who succeeded in maintaining his 
position in spite of formidable risings in Louvain and Brussels, 



BRABANT— BRABANT, NORTH 



357 



and a league formed against him by his princely neighbours, but 
he had a hard struggle to face, and many ups and downs of 
fortune. He it was to whom Brabant owed the great charter of 
its liberties, called Lajoyeuse entree, because it was granted on the 
occasion of the marriage of his daughter Johanna (Jeanne) with 
Wenzel (Wenceslaus) of Luxemburg, and was proclaimed on 
their state entry into Brussels (1356). 

Henry, the only legitimate son of John III., having died in 
1349, the ducal dignity passed to his daughter and heiress, the 
above-named Johanna (d. 1406). She had married in first wed- 
lock William IV., count of Holland (d. 1345). Wenzel of Luxem- 
burg, her second husband, assumed in right of his wife, and by 
the sanction of the charter Lajoyeuse entree, the style of duke of 
Brabant. Johanna's title was, however, disputed by Louis II., 
count of Flanders (d. 1384), who had married her sister Margaret. 
The question had been compromised by the cession to Margaret in 
1347 of the margraviate of Antwerp by John III., but a war broke 
out in 1356 between Wenzel supported by the gilds, and Louis, 
who upheld the burgher-patrician party in the Brabant cities. 
The democratic leaders were Everhard Tserclaes at Brussels 
and Peter Coutercel at Louvain. In the course of a stormy reign 
Wenzel was taken prisoner in 1371 by the duke of Gelderland, 
and had to be ransomed by his subjects. After his death (1383) 
his widow continued to rule over the two duchies for eighteen 
years, but was obliged to rely on the support of the house of 
Burgundy in her contests with the turbulent city gilds and with 
her neighbours, the dukes of Jiilich and Gelderland. In 1390 
she revoked the deed which secured the succession to Brabant to 
the house of Luxemburg, and appointed her niece, Margaret of 
Flanders (d. 1405) , daughter of Louis II. and Margaret of Brabant 
(see Flanders), and her husband, Philip the Bold of Burgundy, 
her heirs. Margaret of Flanders had married (1) Philip I. de 
Rouvre of Burgundy (d. 1361) and (2) Philip II., the Bold, 
(d. 1404), son of John II., king of France (see Burgundy). Of 
her three sons by her second marriage John succeeded to 
Burgundy, and Anthony to Brabant on the death of Johanna in 
1406. Anthony was killed at the battle of Agincourt in 1415 and 
was succeeded by his eldest son by Jeanne of Luxemburg St Pol, 
John IV. (d. 1427). He is chiefly memorable for the excitement 
caused by his divorce from his wife Jacoba {q.v.), countess of 
Holland. John IV. left no issue, and the succession passed to his 
brother Philip I., who also died without issue in 1430. 

On the extinction of the line of Anthony the duchy of Brabant 
became the inheritance of the elder branch of the house of 
Burgundy, in the person of Philip III., " the Good," of Burgundy, 
II. of Brabant, son of John. His grand-daughter Mary (d. 1482), 
daughter and heiress of Charles I., " the Bold," (d. 1477) married 
the archduke Maximilian of Austria (afterwards emperor) and 
so brought Brabant with the other Burgundian possessions to 
the house of Habsburg. The chief city of Brabant, Brussels, 
became under the Habsburg regime the residence of the court 
and the capital of the Netherlands. In the person of the emperor 
Charles V. the destinies of Brabant and the other Netherland 
states were linked with those of the Spanish monarchy. The 
attempt of Philip H. of Spain to impose despotic rule upon the 
Netherlands led to the outbreak of the Netherland revolt, 1 568 
(see Netherlands). 

In the course of the eighty years' war of independence the 
province of Brabant became separated into two portions. In 
the southern and larger part Spanish rule was maintained, 
and Brussels continued to be the seat of government. The 
northern (smaller) part was conquered by the Dutch under 
Maurice and Frederick Henry of Orange. The latter captured 
's Hertogenbosch (1629), Maastricht (1632) and Breda (1637). 
At the peace of Munster this portion, which now forms the Dutch 
province of North Brabant, was ceded by Philip IV. to the United 
Provinces and was known as Generality Land, and placed under 
the direct government of the states-general. The southern 
portion, now divided into the provinces of Antwerp and South 
Brabant, remained under the rule of the Spanish Habsburgs 
until the death of Charles II., the last of his race in 1700. After 
the War of the Spanish Succession the southern Netherlands 



passed by the treaty of Utrecht (17 13) to the Austrian branch 
of the Habsburgs. During the whole period of Austrian rule 
the province of Brabant succeeded in maintaining, to a very 
large extent unimpaired, the immunities and privileges to which 
it was entitled under the provisions of its ancient charter of 
liberty, the Joyous Entry. An ill-judged attempt by the 
emperor Joseph II., in his zeal for reform, to infringe these 
inherited rights stirred up the people under the leadership of 
Henry van der Noot to armed resistance in the Brabancon revolt 
of 1 789-1 790. 

Since the French conquest of 1794 the history of Brabant 
is merged in that of Belgium (q.v.). The revolt against Dutch 
rule in 1830 broke out at Brussels and was in its initial stages 
largely a Brabancon movement. The important part played 
by Brabant at this crisis of the history of the southern Nether- 
lands was marked in 1831 by the adoption of the ancient 
Brabancon colours to form the national flag, and of the lion of 
Brabant as the armorial bearings of Belgium. The title of duke 
of Brabant has been revived as the style of the eldest son of the 
king of the Belgians. (G. E.) 

BRABANT, the central and metropolitan province of Belgium, 
is formed out of part of the ancient duchy. From 1815 to 1830, 
that is to say, during the existence of the kingdom of the Nether- 
lands, Belgian Brabant was distinguished from Dutch by the 
employment of the geographical terms South and North. The 
surface of Brabant is undulating, and the highest points, some 
400 ft. in altitude, are to be found at and near Mont St Jean. 
The province is well cultivated, and the people are well known 
for their industry. There are valuable stone quarries, and many 
manufactures flourish in the smaller towns, such as Ottignies, 
as well as in the larger cities of Brussels and Louvain. Brabant 
contains 820,740 acres or 1268 sq. m. Its principal towns are 
Brussels, Louvain, Nivelles, Hal, Ottignies, and its three adminis- 
trative divisions are named after the first three of those towns. 
They are subdivided into 50 cantons and 344 communes. In 
1904 the population of the province was 1,366,389 or a proportion 
of 1077 per sq.m. 

BRABANT, NORTH, the largest province in Holland, bounded 
S. by Belgium, W. and N.W. by the Scheldt, the Eendracht, 
the Volkerak and the Hollandsch Diep, which separate it from 
Zealand and South Holland, N. and N. E. by the Merwede and 
Maas, which separate it from South Holland and Gelderland, 
and E. by the province of Limburg. It has an area of 231 sq.m. 
and a pop. (1900) of 553,842. The surface of the province is a 
gentle slope from the south-east (where it ranges between 80 and 
160 ft. in height) towards the north and north? west, and the soil 
is composed of diluvial sand, here and there mixed with gravel, 
but giving place to sea-clay along the western boundary and 
river-clay along the banks of the Maas and smaller rivers. 
The watershed is formed by the north-eastern edge of the 
Belgian plateau of Campine, and follows a curved line drawn 
through Bergen-op-Zoom, Turnhout and Maastricht. The land- 
scape consists for the most part of waste stretches of heath, 
occasionally slightly overlaid with high fen. Between the valleys 
of the Aa and the Maas lies the long stretch of heavy high-fen 
called the Peel (" marshy land "). Deurne, a few miles east of 
Helmond, the site of a prehistoric burial-ground, was an early 
fen colony. The work of reclamation was removed farther 
eastwards to Helena veen in the second half of the 19th century. 
Agriculture (potatoes, buckwheat, rye) is the main industry, 
generally combined with cattle-raising. On the clay lands 
wheat and barley are the principal products, and in the western 
corner of the province beetroot is largely cultivated for the 
beet sugar industry, factories being found at Bergen-op-Zoom, 
Steenbergen and Oudenbosch. There is a special cultivation of 
hops in the district north-west of 's Hertogenbosch. The large 
majority of the population is Roman Catholic. The earliest de- 
velopment of towns and villages took place along the river Maas 
and its tributaries, and the fortified Roman camps which were the 
origin of ma.ny such afterwards developed in the hands of feudal 
lords. The chief town of the province, 's Hertogenbosch, may be 
cited as an interesting historical example. Geertruidenberg, 



358 



BRACCIANO— BRACEGIRDLE 



Heusden, Ravestein and Grave are all similarly situated. Breda 
is the next town in importance to the capital. Bergen-op- 
Zoom had originally a more maritime importance. Rozendaal, 
Eindhoven and Bokstel (or Boxtel) are important railway 
junctions. Bokstel was formerly the seat of an independent 
barony which came into the possession of Philip the Good in 
1439. The castle was restored in modern times. The precarious 
position of the province on the borders of the country doubtless 
militated against an earlier industrial development, but since 
the separation from Belgium and the construction of roads, 
railways and canals there has been a general improvement, 
Tilburg, Eindhoven and Helmond all having risen into 
prominence in modern times as industrial centres. Leather- 
tanning and shoe-making are especially associated with the 
district called Langstraat, which is situated between Geert- 
ruidenberg and 's Hertogenbosch, and consists of a series of 
industrial villages along the course of the Old Maas. 

BRACCIANO, a town in the province of Rome, Italy, 25 m. 
N.W. of Rome by rail, situated on the S.W. shore of the Lake 
of Bracciano, 915 ft. above sea-level. Pop. (1901) 3987. It is 
chiefly remarkable for its fine castle (built by the Orsini in 1460, 
and since 1696 the property of the Odescalchi) which has pre- 
served its medieval character. The beautiful lake is the ancient 
Lacus Sabatinus, supposed to derive its name from an Etruscan 
city of the name of Sabate, which is wrongly thought to be 
mentioned in the Itineraries; the reference is really to the lake 
itself, which bore this name and gave it to one of the Roman 
Iribes, the tribus Sabatina, founded in 387 B.C. (O. Cuntz in 
Jahreshefte dcs Osterr. Arch. InstUuts, ii., 1899, 85). It is 22 sq.m. 
in area, 538 ft. above sea-level, and 530 ft. deep; it is almost 
circular, but is held to be, not an extinct crater, but the result 
of a volcanic subsidence. The tufa deposits which radiate from 
it extend as far as Rome; various small craters surround it, 
while the existence of warm springs in the district (especially 
those of Vicarello, probably the ancient Aquae Apollinares) 
may also be noted. Many remains of ancient villas may be seen 
round the lake: above its west bank is the station of Forum 
Clodii, and on its north shore the village of Trevignano, which 
retains traces of the fortifications of an ancient town of unknown 
name. About half-a-mile east of it was a post station called 
Ad Novas. The site of Anguillara, on the south shore, was 
occupied by a Roman villa. The water of the lake partly 
supplies the Acqua Paola, a restoration by Paul V. of the Aqua 
Traiana. (T. As.) 

BRACCIOLINI, FRANCESCO (1566-1645), Italian poet, was 
born at Pistoia, of a noble family, in 1566. On his removing to 
Florence he was admitted into the academy there, and devoted 
himself to literature. At Rome he entered the service of Cardinal 
Maffeo Barberini, with whom he afterwards went to France. 
After the death of Clement VIII. he returned to his own country; 
and when his patron Barberini was elected pope, under the name 
of Urban VIII. , Bracciolini repaired to Rome, and was made 
secretary to the pope's brother, Cardinal Antonio. He had also 
the honour conferred on him of taking a surname from the arms 
of the Barberini family, which were bees; whence he was after- 
wards known by the name of Bracciolini dell' A pi. During 
Urban's pontificate the poet lived at Rome in considerable 
reputation, though at the same time he was censured for his 
sordid avarice. On the death of the pontiff he returned to 
Pistoia, where he died in 1645. There is scarcely any species of 
poetry, epic, dramatic, pastoral, lyric or burlesque, which 
Bracciolini did not attempt; but he is principally noted for his 
mock-heroic poem Lo Scherno degli Dei, published in 1618, 
similar but confessedly inferior to the contemporary work of 
Tassoni, Secchia Rapita. Of his serious heroic poems the most 
celebrated is La Croce Racquistata. 

For the Italian humanist Poggio Bracciolini see Poggio. 

BRACE, CHARLES LORING (1826-1890), American philan- 
thropist, was born on the 19th of June 1826 in Litchfield, Con- 
necticut. He graduated at Yale in 1846, studied theology there 
in 1847-1848, and graduated from Union Theological Seminary 
in 1849. From this time he practically devoted his life to social 



work among the poor of New York, and to Christian propaganda 
among the criminal classes; and he became well known as a 
social reformer, at home and abroad. He started in 1852 to hold 
" boys' meetings," and in 1853 helped to found the Children's 
Aid Society, establishing workshops, industrial schools and 
lodging-houses for newsboys. In 1872 he was a delegate to the 
international prison congress which met in London. He died at 
Campfer, in Tirol, on the nth of August 1890. He published 
from time to time several volumes embodying his views on 
practical Christianity and its application to the improvement of 
social conditions. 

See The Life and Letters of Charles Loring Brace (New York, 
1894), edited by his daughter, Emma Brace. 

BRACE, JULIA (1806-1884), American blind deaf-mute, was 
born at Newington, Connecticut, on the 13th of June 1806. In 
her fifth year she became blind and deaf, and lost the power of 
speech. At the age of eighteen she entered the asylum for the 
deaf and dumb at Hartford. The study of blind deaf-mutes and 
their scientific training was then in its infancy; but she learnt 
to sew well, was neat in her dress, and had a good memory. Dr 
S. G. Howe's experiments with her were interesting as leading to 
his success with Laura Bridgman. She died at Bloomington, 
Conn., on the 12th of August 1884. 

BRACE (through the Fr. from the plural of the Lat. bracchium, 
the arm), a measure of length, being the distance between the 
extended arms. From the original meaning of " the two arms " 
comes that of something which secures, connects, tightens or 
strengthens, found in.numerous uses of the word, as a carpenter's 
tool with a crank handle and socket to hold a bit for boring; 
a beam of wood or metal used to strengthen any building or 
machine; the straps passing over the shoulders to support the 
trousers; the leathern thong which slides up and down the cord 
of a drum, and regulates the tension and the tone; a writing and 
printing sign ( { ) for uniting two or more lines of letterpress or 
music; a nautical term for. a rope fastened to the yard for trim- 
ming the sails (cf. the corresponding French term bras de vergue). 
As meaning " a couple " or " pair " the term was first applied 
to dogs, probably from the leash by which they were coupled in 
coursing. In architecture " brace mould " is the term for two 
ressaunts or ogees united together like a brace in printing, 
sometimes with a small bead between them. 

BRACEGIRDLE, ANNE (c. 1674-1748), English actress, is 
said to have been placed under the care of Thomas Betterton 
and his wife, and to have first appeared on the stage as the 
page in The Orphan at its first performance at Dorset Garden 
in 1680. She was Lucia in Shadwell's Squire of Alsalia at the 
Theatre Royal in 1688, and played similar parts until, in 1693, 
as Araminta in The Old Bachelor, she made her first appearance 
in a comedy by Congreve, with whose works and life her name 
is most closely connected. In 1695 she went with Betterton 
and the other seceders to Lincoln's Inn Fields, where, on its 
opening with Congreve's Love for Love, she played Angelica. 
This part, and those of Belinda in Vanbrugh's Provoked Wife, 
and Almira in Congreve's Mourning Bride, were among her best 
impersonations, but she also played the heroines of some of 
Nicholas Rowe's tragedies, and acted in the contemporary 
versions of Shakespeare's plays. In 1705 she followed Betterton 
to the Haymarket, where she found a serious competitor in 
Mrs Oldfield, then first coming into public favour. The story 
runs that it was left for the audience to determine which was the 
better comedy actress, the test being the part of Mrs Brittle 
in Betterton's Amorous Widow, which was played alternately 
by the two rivals on successive nights. When the popular vote 
was given in favour of Mrs Oldfield, Mrs Bracegirdle quitted 
the stage, making only one reappearance at Betterton's benefit 
in 1709. Her private life was the subject of much discussion. 
Colley Cibber remarks that she had the merit of " not being 
unguarded in her private character," while Macaulay does not 
hesitate to call her " a cold, vain and interested coquette, who 
perfectly understood how much the influence of her charms 
was increased by the fame of a severity which cost her nothing." 
She was certainly the object of the adoration of many men, 



BRACELET 



359 



■and she was the innocent cause of the killing of the actor William 
Mountfort (q.v.), whom Captain Hill and Lord Mohun regarded 
as a rival for her affections. During her lifetime she was sus- 
pected of being secretly married to Congreve, whose mistress 
she is also said to have been. He was at least always her intimate 
friend, and left her a legacy. Rightly or wrongly, her reputation 
for virtue was remarkably high, and Lord Halifax headed a 
subscription list of 800 guineas, presented to her as a tribute to 
her virtue. Her charity to the poor in Clare Market and around 
Drury Lane was conspicuous, " insomuch that she would not 
pass that neighbourhood without the thankful acclamations 
of people of all degrees." She died in 1748, and was buried in 
the cloisters of Westminster Abbey. 

See Genest, History of the Stage; Colley Cibber, Apology (edited 
by Bellchambers) ; Egerton, Life of Anne Oldfield; Downes, Roscius 
Anglicanus. 

BRACELET, or Armlet, a personal ornament for the arm or 
wrist, made of different materials, according to the fashion of 
the age and the rank of the wearer. The word is the French 
bracelet, a diminutive of bracel, from brac(c)kiale, formed from 
the Latin bracchium, the arm, on which it was usually worn. 
By the Romans it was called armilla, brachiale, occabus; and 
in the middle ages bauga, armispatha. 

In the Bible there are three different words which the 
authorized version renders by " bracelet." These are — (1) rnyss 
'es'adah, which occurs in Num. xxxi. 50, 2 Sam. i. 10, and which 
being used with reference to men only, may be taken to be the 
armlet; (2) tbs samid, which is found in Gen. xxiv. 22, Num. xxxi. 
50, Ezek. xvi. 1 1 ; — where these two words occur together (as in 
Num. xxxi. 50) the first is rendered by " chain," and the second 
by " bracelet "; (3) tme sheroth, which occurs only in Isa. iii. 19. 
The first probably meant armlets worn by men; the second, 
bracelets worn by women and sometimes by men; and the 
third a peculiar bracelet of chain-work worn only by women. 




tfrom La Grande Encyclopedic. 

Fig. 1. — Egyptian Bracelet, Louvre. 

In 2 Sam. i. 10 the first word denotes the royal ornament which 
the Amalekite took from the arm of the dead Saul, and brought 
with the other regalia to David. There is little question that 
this was sueh a distinguishing band of jewelled metal as we 
still find worn as a mark of royalty from the Tigris to the 
Ganges. The Egyptian kings are represented with armlets, 
which were also worn by the Egyptian women. These, 
however, are not jewelled, but of plain or enamelled metal, 
as was in all likelihood the case among 
the Hebrews. 

In modern times the most celebrated 
armlets are those which form part of the 
regalia of the Persian kings and formerly 

belonged tO the Mogul emperors of India, From La Grande Encyclopedic 

being part of the spoil carried to Persia 
from Delhi by Nadir Shah in 1739. These ornaments are 
of dazzling splendour, and the jewels in them are of such 
large size and immense value that the pair have been 
reckoned to be worth a million sterling. The principal stone 
of the right armlet is famous in the East under the name of the 
Darya-i-nur, " sea (or river) of light." It weighs 186 carats, 



and is considered the diamond of finest lustre in the world. 
The principal jewel of the left armlet, although of somewhat 
inferior size (146 carats) and value, is renowned as the Taj-e-mah, 
"crown of the moon." The imperial armlets, generally set 
with jewels, may also be observed in most of the portraits of 
the Indian emperors. 

Bracelets have at all times been much in use among barbaric 
nations, and the women frequently wear several on the same 
arm. The finer kinds are of mother-of-pearl, fine gold or silver; 
others of less value are made of plated steel, horn, brass, copper, 
beads, &c. Chinese bracelets are sometimes cut out of single 
pieces of jade. 

This species of personal ornament has been exceedingly common 
in Europe from prehistoric times onward. The bracelets of the 
Bronze Age were of either gold or bronze, silver being then 
unknown. In shape they were oval and penannular with 
expanding or trumpet-shaped ends, having an opening between 
them of about half an inch to enable them to be easily slipped 
over the wrist. Those of gold were generally plain, hammered 
rods, bent to the requisite shape, but those of bronze were often 
chased with decorative designs. Some forms of spiral armlets 
of bronze, peculiar to Germany and Scandinavia, covered the 
whole fore-arm, and were doubtless intended as much for defence 
against a sword-stroke as for ornament. Among the nations 
of classical antiquity, bracelets were worn by both sexes of 
the Etruscans; by Women only among the Greeks, except in 
orientalized communities. Among the Romans they were worn 
by women only as a rule, but they are also recorded to have been 
used during the empire by nouveaux riches, and by some of the 
emperors. It should also be mentioned that bracelets were 
conferred as a military decoration in the field. 

The bracelets of the Greeks are of two leading types, 
both of which were also familiar to the Assyrians. The one 
class were in the 
form of coiled 
spirals, usually in 
the form of snakes, 
a term which Pol- 
lux gives as a syn- 
onym for bracelet. 
The other class 
were stiff pen- 
annular hoops, 
capable of being 
slightly opened. In 
such examples the 
terminals are finely 
finished as rams' 
heads, lions' heads, 
or (as in theaccom- 
panying figure 
from a bracelet _ T r , _, ... 

- _, „ . From La Grande Encyclopedia. 

tound at K.ul- FlG 2 ._ Greek Bracelet, Hermitage. 

oba) as enamelled 

sphinxes. In late Etruscan art the bracelet may be formed of 

consecutive panels, as often in modern jewelry. 

The spiral forms were common in the Iron Age of northern 
Europe, while silver bracelets of great elegance, formed of plaited 
and intertwisted strands of silver wire, and plain penannular 





Fig. 3. — Etruscan Bracelet, Louvre, 
hoops, round or lozenge-shaped in section and tapering to the ex- 
tremities, became common towards the close of the pagan period. 
The late Celtic period in Britain was characterized by serpent- 
shaped bracelets and massive armlets, with projecting ornaments 
of solid bronze and perforations filled with enamel. In the 
middle ages bracelets were much less commonly used in Europe, 



3 6 ° 



BRACHIOPODA 



but the custom has continued to prevail among Eastern nations 
to the present time, and many of the types that were common 
in Europe in prehistoric times are still worn in central Asia. 

A treatise, DeArmillis Veterum, by Thomas Bartholinus, was 
published at Amsterdam in 1676. 

BRACHIOPODA, an important and well-defined but extremely 
isolated class of invertebrates. The group may be defined as 
follows: Sessile solitary Coelomata with bivalved shells usually 
of unequal size and arranged dorso-ventrally. The head is 
produced into ciliated arms bearing tentacles. They reproduce 
sexually, and with doubtful exceptions are of separate sexes. 

The name Brachiopod (fipaxiuv, an arm, and irovs, iroSos, a 
foot) was proposed for the class by F. Cuvier in 1805, and by 
A. M. C. Dumeril in 1809, and has since been very extensively 
adopted. The division of the group into Ecardines (Inarticulata), 




Figs. i-ii. — Various forms of Brachiopoda. 

1. Magellania [Waldheimia] 7. 

cranium. A, ventral, B, 
dorsal valve. 8. 

2. Rhynchonella (Hemithyris) 9. 

psittacea. 
3 and 4. Thecidea. 10. 

5. Spirifer. Dorsal valve, 11. 

showing calcareous spiral 
coils. 

6. Orthis calligramma. 



A, 



Leptaena transversalis. 
ventral, B, dorsal valve. 

Productus horridus. 

Lingula pyramidata, (after 
Morse). 

Discinisca lamettosa. 

Crania anomala. Interior of 
dorsal valve, showing mus- 
cular impressions and labial 
appendages. 



with no hinge to the shell and with an alimentary canal open at 
both ends, and Testicardines (Articulata) , with a hinge between 
the dorsal and ventral valves and with no anus, was proposed 
by Owen and has been adopted by nearly all authors. In a 
later scheme based on bur increased knowledge of fossil forms, 
the Brachiopoda are divided into four primary groups (orders). 
This is given at the end of the article, but it must not be forgotten 
that the existing forms with an anus (Ecardines) differ markedly 
from the aproctous members of the group T (Testicardines). 

The soft body of the Brachiopod is in all cases protected by a 
shell composed of two distinct valves; these valves are always, 
except in cases of malformation, equal-sided, but not equivalved. 
The valves are, consequently, essentially symmetrical, which is 
not the case with the Lamellibranchiata, — so much so, that 
certain Brachiopod shells were named Lampades, or lamp shells, 
by some early naturalists; but while such may bear a kind of 



resemblance to an antique Etruscan lamp, by far the larger 
number in no way resemble one. The shell is likewise most 
beautiful in its endless shapes and variations. In some species 
it is thin, semi-transparent and glassy, in others massive. Genets 
ally the shell is from a quarter of an inch to about 4 in. in size,, 
but in certain species it attains nearly a foot in breadth by some., 
thing less in length, as is the case with Productus giganteus. 
The valves are also in some species very unequal in their respective 
thickness, as may be seen in Productus (Daviesiella) 1 llangollensis, 
Davidsonia verneuilii, &c, and while the space allotted to the 
animal is very great in many species, as in Terebratula sphaeroi- 
dalis, it is very small in others belonging to Strophomena, Leptaena, 
Chonetes, &c. The ventral valve is usually the thickest, and in 
some forms is six or seven times as great as the opposite one. 
The outer surface of many of the species presents likewise the 
most exquisite sculpture, heightened by brilliant shades, or spots 
of green, red, yellow and bluish black. Traces of the original 
colour have also been preserved in some of the fossil forms; 
radiating bands of a reddish tint have been often seen in well- 
preserved examples of Terebratula (Dielasma) hastata, T, (Die- 
lasma) sacculus, T. communis, T. biplicata, and of several others. 
Some specimens of T. cornea are of a beautiful pale pink colour 
when first removed from their matrix, and E. Deslongchamps 
has described the tint of several Jurassic species. 

The valves are distinguished as dorsal and ventral. The ventral 
valve is usually the larger, and in many genera, such as Tere- 
bratula and Rhynchonella, has a prominent beak or umbo, 
with a circular or otherwise shaped foramen at or near its 
extremity, partly bounded by one or two plates, termed a. 
deltidium. Through the foramen passes a peduncle, by which 
the animal is in many species attached to submarine objects 
during at least a portion of its existence. Other forms show no 
indication of ever having been attached, while some that had 
been moored by means of a peduncle during the early portion of 
their existence have become detached at a more advanced stage 
of life, the opening becoming gradually cicatrized, as is so often 
seen in Leptaena rhomboidalis, Orthisina anomala, &c. Lastly, 
some species adhere to submarine objects by a larger or smaller 
portion of their ventral valve, as is the case with many forms of 
Crania, Thecidium, Davidsonia, &c. Some Cranias are always 
attached by the whole surface of their lower or ventral valve, 
which models itself and fills up all the projections or depressions 
existing on either the rock, shell or coral to which it adhered. 
These irregularities are likewise, at times, reproduced on the 
upper or dorsal valve. Some species of Strophalosia and Pro- 
ductus seem also to have been moored during life to the sandy 
or muddy bottoms on which they lived, by the means of 
tubular spines often of considerable length. The interior of 
the shell varies very much according to families and genera. 
On the inner surface of both valves several well-defined muscular, 
vascular and ovarian impressions are observable; they form 
either indentations of greater or less size and depth, or occur as 
variously shaped projections. In the T rimer ellidae, for example, 
some of the muscles are attached to a massive or vaulted platform 
situated in the medio-longitudinal region of the pbsterior half 
or umbonal portion of both valves. In addition to these, there 
exists in the interionof the dorsal valve of some genera a variously 
modified, thin, calcified, ribbon-shaped skeleton for the support 
of the ciliated arms, and the form of this ribbon serves as one of 
the chief generic characters of both recent and extinct forms. 
This brachial skeleton is more developed in some genera than 
in others. In certain forms, as in Terebratula and Terebratulina, 
it is short and simple, and attached to a small divided hinge- 
plate, the two riband-shaped lamina being bent upwards in the 
middle (fig. 15). The cardinal process is prominent, and on each 
side of the hinge-plate are situated the dental sockets; the loop 
in Terebratulina becomes annular in the adult by the union of 
its crural processes (fig. 16). In Magellania [Waldheimia] it 
is elongated and reflected; the hinge-plate large, with four 
depressions, under which originates a median septum, which 
extends more or less into the interior of the shell (figs. 13 and 14). 
. 1 Subgenera are indicated by round, synonyms by square brackets. 



BRACHIOPODA 



361 



In Terebratdla the loop is attached to the hinge-plate and to the 
septum (fig. 17). In Megerlia it is three times attached, first to 
the hinge-plate, and then to the septum by processes from the 
diverging and reflected positions of the loop. In Magas the 
brachial skeleton is .composed of an elevated longitudinal sep- 
tum reaching from one valve to the other, to which are affixed 
two pairs of calcareous lamellae, the lower ones riband-shaped; 
attached first to the hinge-plate, they afterwards proceed by a 
gentle curve near to the anterior portion of the septum, to the 
sides of which they are affixed; the second pair originate on both 
sides of the upper edge of the septum, extending in the form of 
two triangular anchor-shaped lamellae (fig. 18). In Bouchardia 
the septum only is furnished with two short anchor-shaped 
lamellae. Many more modifications are observable in different 
groups of which the great family Terebratulidae is composed. 
In Thecidium (figs. 3, 4) the interior of the dorsal valve is variously 
furrowed to receive the lophophore folded in two or more lobes. 




Figs. 12-18. 

Magellania [Waldheimia] flavescens. Interior of ventral valve, 
/.foramen; d, deltidium; t, teeth; a, adductor impressions 
( = occlusors, Hancock); c, divaricator (= cardinal muscles, 
King, = muscles diducteurs principaux, Gratiolet) ; c', accessory 
divaricators (muscles diducteurs accessoires, Gratiolet) ; b, 
ventral adjuster (= ventral peduncular muscles, or muscles du 
pedoncule paire superieure, Gratiolet) ; b', peduncular muscle. 

Magellania [Waldheimia\ flavescens. Interior of dorsal valve. 
c, c', cardinal process; b', b', hinge-plate; s, dental sockets; 
I, loop; a, crura; a, a', adductor impressions; c, accessory 
divaricator; b, peduncle muscles; s.s, septum. 

Magellania [Waldheimia] flavescens. Longitudinal section of 
valves. A, ventral, B, dorsal valves; /, loop; q, crura; ss, 
septum; c, cardinal process. 

Terebratula (Liothyris) vitrea. Interior of dorsal valve. /, loop ; 
b, hinge-plate; c, cardinal process. 

16. Loop of Terebratulina caput serpentis. 

17. Longitudinal section of Terebratella dorsata. (References as in 

fig. 1 4-) 

18. Longitudinal section of Magas pumilus. 

In the family Spiriferidae there are two conical spires directed 
outwards, and nearly filling the cavity of the shell (fig. 5); 
while in A try pa the broad spirally coiled lamellae are vertical, 
and directed toward the centre of the dorsal valve. In the 



13 



14. 



15 




Rhynchonellidae there are two short slender curved laminae, 
while in many genera and even families, such as the Productidae, 
Slrophomenidae, Lingtdidae, Discinidae, &c, there exists no 
calcified support for the labial appendages. The ventral valve 
in many of the genera is provided with two curved hinge-teeth, 
which fit into corresponding sockets in the opposite valve, so 
that the valves cannot be separated without breaking one of the 
teeth. 

Each valve of the shell is lined by a mantle which contains pro- 
longations of the body cavity. The outer surfaces of the mantle 
secrete- the shell, which is of the nature of a cuticle impregnated 
by calcareous salts. These often have the form of prisms of calcite 
surrounded by a cuti- 
cular mesh work; the 
whole is nourished and 
kept alive by processes, 
which in Crania are 
branched ; these per- 
forate the shell and 
permit the access of the 
coelomic fluid through- 
out its substance. These 
canals are closed ex- 
ternally and are absent 
in ' Rhynchonella, where 
the amount of calca- 
reous deposit is small. 
In Lingida the shell is 
composed of alternate 
layers of chitin and of 
phosphate of lime. The 
free edges of the mantle 
often bear chitinous 
bristles or setae which 
project beyond the shell. 
As in the case of the 
adult is not a direct 

the larva. The young Brachiopod in all 
protected by an embryonic shell called the 
which sometimes persists in 
the umbones of the adult 
shells but is more usually 
worn off. In all species it 
has the same shape, a shape 
which has been retained in 
the adult by the Lower 
Cambrian genus Iphidea. 

The body of the Brachiopod 
usually occupies about the 
posterior half of the space 
within the shell. The an- 
terior half of this space is 
lined by the inner wall of 
the mantle and is called the 
mantle cavity. This cavity 
lodges the arms, which are 
curved and coiled in differ- 
ent ways in different genera. 
The water which bears the 
oxygen for respiration and 
the minute organisms upon 
which the Brachiopod feeds is 
swept into the mantle cavity 
by the action of the cilia 
which cover the arms, and 
the eggs and excreta pass out 
into the same cavity. The 
mouth lies in the centre of 
the anterior wall of the 
body. Its two lips fusing 
together at the corners of the mouth are prolonged into the so- 
called arms. These arms, which together form the lophophore, 



Fig. 19. — Magellania [Waldheimia] 
flavescens. Interior of dorsal valve, to 
show the position of the labial ap- 
pendages, v, Mouth. (A portion of the 
fringe of cirri is removed to show the 
brachial membrane and a portion of the 
spiral extremities of the arms.) 

Lamellibranchiata, the shell of the 
derivative of the youngest shell of 
its species is 
" protegulum," 




Fig. 20. — Magellania [Wald 
heimia] flavescens. Longitudinal 
section with a portion of the 
animal. 

d, h, Brachial appendages. 
a, Adductor. 

c, c', Divaricator muscles, 
s, Septum. 
v, Mouth. 
2, Extremity of alimentary tube. 

The peduncular muscles have 
been purposely omitted. 



362 



BRACHIOPODA 




may be, as in Cisiella, applied flat to the inner surface of the 
dorsal mantle fold, but more usually they are raised free from 
the body like a pair of moustaches, and as they are usually far 
too long to lie straight in the mantle cavity, they are folded or 
coiled up. The brachial skeleton which in many cases supports 
the arms has been mentioned above. 

A transverse section through the arm (fig. 22) shows that it 
consists of a stout base, composed of a very hyaline connective 
tissue not uncommon in the tissues of the Brachiopoda, which 
is traversed by certain canals whose nature is considered below 
under the section {The Body Cavity) devoted to the coelom. 
Anteriorly this base supports a gurrie or gutter, the pre-oral 
rim of which is formed by a simple lip, but the post-oral rim is 
composed of a closely set row of tentacles. These may number 

some thousands, and they 
are usually bent over and 
tend to form a closed 
cylinder of the gutter. 
Each of these tentacles 
(fig. 22) is hollow, and it 
contains a diverticulum 
from the coelom, a branch 
of the vascular system, 
a nerve and some muscle- 
fibres. Externally on fwo 
sides and on the inner 
surface the tentacles are 
ciliated, and the cilia 
are continued across the 
gutter to the lip and even 
on the outer surface of 
the latter. These cilia 
pass on any diatoms and 
other minute organism 
which come within their 
range of action to the 
capacious oval mouth, 
which appears as a mere 
deepening of the gutter 
in the middle line. In 
Terebratulina, Rhyn- 
chonella, Lingida, and 
possibly other genera, 
the arms can be unrolled 
and protruded ' from the 
opened shell; in this case 
the tentacles also 

„ . ,. r .v , r,. t. u straighten themselves and 

Fig. 21. — A diagram of the left halt , . . ,, „,„<.„. 

of an Argiope (M?gathyris) , which has wave about m the water. 
been bisected in the median plane. The Body Cavity. — The 

I. The ventral valve. various internal organs cf 

The dorsal valve. the brachiopod body, the 

The pedicle. alimentary canal and liver, 

The mouth. the excretory organs, the 

Lip which overhangs the mouth heart, numerous muscles 
and runs all round thelophophore. and the reproductive 
Tentacles. organs, are enclosed in a 

Ovary in dorsal valve. cavity called the body 

8. Liver diverticula. cavity, and since this cavity 

9. Occlusor muscle— its double origin (i.) is derived from the 

is shown. archicoel and is from the 

10. Internal opening of left nephridium. first surrounded by mero- 

11. External opening of the same. blast, (ii.) communicates 

12. Ventral adjustor. ■ with the exterior through 

13. Divaricator muscle. the nephridia or excretory 

14. Sub-oesophageal nerve ganglion. organs, and (iii.) gives rise 

15. The heart. by the proliferation of the 

16. Dorsal adjustor muscle. cells which line it to _ the 

ova and spermatoza, it is of 
the nature of a true coelom. The coelom then is a spacious chamber 
surrounding the alimentary canal, and is continued dorsally and ven- 
trally into the sinuses of the mantle (fig. 21). Some of the endothelial 
cells lining the coelom are ciliated, the cilia keeping the corpusculated 
fluid contents in movement. Others of the endothelial cells show a 
great tendency to form muscle fibres. Besides this main coelomic 
cavity there are certain other spaces which F. Blochmann regards 
as coelomic, but it must be rememtaered that his interpretation rests 



2. 
3- 
4- 
5- 

6. 
7- 



largely on histological grounds, and at present embryological con- 
firmation is wanting. These spaces are as follows: — (i.) the great 
arm-sinus; (ii.) the small arm-sinus together with the central sinus 
and the peri-oesophageal sinus, and in Discinisca and Lingula, and, 
to a less extent, in Crania, the lip-sinus; (iii.) certain portions of the 
general body cavity which in Crania are separated off and contain 
muscles, &c. ; (iv.) the cavity of the stalk w"hen such exists. The 
great arm-sinus of each side of the lophophore lies beneath the fold 
or lip which together with the tentacles forms the ciliated groove 
in which the mouth opens. These sinuses are completely shut off 
from all other cavities, they do not open into the main coelomic 
space nor into the small arm-sinus, nor does the right sinus com- 
municate with the left. The small arm-sinus runs along the arms 
of the lophophore at the base of the tentacles, and gives off a blind 
diverticulum into each of these. This diverticulum contains the 
blood-vessel and muscle-fibres (fig. 22). In the region of the mouth 
where the two halves of the small arm-sinus approach one another 
they open into a central sinus lying beneath the oesophagus and 
partly walled in by the two halves of the ventral mesentery. This 
sinus is continued round the oesophagus as the periesophageal 
sinus, and thus the whole complex of the small arm-sinus has the 
relations of the so-called vascular system of a Sipunculid. In Crania 
it is completely shut off from the main coelom, but in Lingula it 
communicates freely with this cavity. In Discinisca and Lingula 
there is further a lip-sinus or hollow system of channels which tra- 
verses the supporting tissue 
of the edge of the mantle 
and contains muscle-fibres. 
It opens into the peri- 
oesophageal sinus. It is 
better developed and more 
spacious in Lingula than 
in Discinisca. In Crania, 
where only indications of the 
lip-sinus occur, there are two 
other closed spaces. The 
posterior occlusor muscles 
lie in a special closed 
space which Blochmann also 
regards as coelomic. The 
posterior end of the intestine 
is similarly surrounded by 
a closed coelomic space 
known as the peri-anal sinus 
in which the rectum lies 
freely, unsupported by 
mesenteries. All these 
spaces contain a similar 
coagulable fluid with sparse 
corpuscles, and all are lined 
by ciliated cells. There is 
further a great tendency for 
the endothelial cells to form 
muscles, and this is especi- 
ally pronounced in the small 
arm-sinus, where a con- 
spicuous muscle is built up. 
The mantle-sinuses which 
form the chief spaces in the Fig. 22. — Diagrammatic section 
mantle are diverticula of the through an arm of the lophophore of 
main coelomic cavity. In Crania. Magnified ; after Blochmann. 
Discinisca they are provided l The jj 

with a muscular valve placed ^ The ba g e of a tentac l e bisected in 

the middle line. 
Great arm-sinus. 
Smallarm-sinus,containingmuscle- 

fibres. 
Tentacular canal. 
External tentacular muscle. 
Tentacular blood-vessel arising 
from the cut arm-vessel in the 
small arm-sinus. 

8. Chief arm-nerve. 

9. Secondary arm-nerve. 
10. Under arm-nerve. 

iniHci^H^.^v ■"-•' - - and dorsally directed oesophagus. 

The latter enlarges into a spherical stomach into which open the 
broad ducts of the so-called liver. The stomach then passes 
into an intestine, which in the Testicardines (Articulata) is short, 
finger-shaped and closed, and in the Ecardines (Inarticulata) is 
longer, turned back upon its first course, and ends in an anus. In 
Lingula and Discina the anus lies to the right in the mantle-cavity, 
but in Crania it opens medianly into a posterior extension ot the 
same. Apart from the asymmetry of the intestine caused by the 
lateral position of the anus in the two genera just named, Brachio- 
pods are bilaterally symmetrical animals. 

The liver consists of a right and left half, each opening by a broad 
duct into the stomach. Each half consists of many lobes which 
may branch, and the whole takes up a considerable proportion of 




at their point of origin. They 
contain the same fluid as the 
general coelom. The stalk 
is an extension of the ven- 
tral body-wall, and contains 
a portion of the coelom 
which, in Discinisca and 
Lingula, remains in com- 
munication with the general 
body cavity. 

The Alimentary Canal — 
The mouth, which is quite 
devoid of armature, leads 
imperceptibly into a short 



BRACHIOPODA 



3 6 3 



the space in the body cavity. The food passes into these lobes, 
which may be found crowded with diatoms, and without doubt a 
large part of the digestion is carried on inside the liver. The stomach, 
oesophagus and intestine are ciliated on their inner surface. The 
intestine is slung by a median dorsal and ventral mesentery which 
divides the body cavity into two symmetrically shaped halves; 
it is " stayed " by two transverse septa, the anterior or gastro- 
parietal band running from the stomach to the body wall and the 
posterior or ileoparietal band running from the intestine to the body 
wall. None of these septa is complete, and the various parts of 
the central body cavity freely communicate with one another. In 
Rhynchonella, where there are two pairs of kidneys, the internal 
opening of the anterior pair is supported by the gastroparietal band 
and that of the posterior pair by the ileoparietal band. The latter 
pair alone persists in all other genera. 

The kidneys or nephridia open internally by wide funnel-shaped 
nephridiostomes and externally by small pores on each side of the 
mouth near the base of the arms. Each is short, gently curved and 
devoid of convolutions. They are lined by cells charged with a yellow 
or brown pigment, and besides their excretory functions they act 
as ducts through which the reproductive cells leave the body. 

Circulatory System. — The structures formerly regarded as pseudo- 
hearts have been shown by Huxley to be nephridia ; the true heart 
was described and figured by A. Hancock, but has in many cases 
escaped the observation of later zoologists. F. Blochmann in 1884, 
however, observed this organ in the living animal in species of the 
following genera: — Terebratulina, Magellania [Waldheimia], Rhyn- 
chonella, Megathyris {Argiope), Lingula and Crania (fig. 21). It 
consists of a definite contractile sac or sacs lying on the dorsal side 
of the alimentary canal near the oesophagus, and in preparations 
of Terebratulina made by quickly removing the viscera and examin- 
ing them in sea- water under a microscope, he was able to count the 

pulsations, which followed one 
another at intervals of 30-40 
seconds. 

A vessel — the dorsal vessel 
— runs forward from the heart 
along the dorsal surface of 
the oesophagus. This vessel 
is nothing but a split between 
the right and left folds of the 
dc mesentery, and its cavity is 
thus a remnant of the blas- 
tocoel. A similar primitive 
arrangement is thought by F. 
Blochmann to obtain in the 
genital arteries. Anteriorly the 
dorsal vessel splits into a right 
Fig. 23. — Rhynchonella (Hemi- and a left half, which enter the 
thyris) psittacea. Interior of dorsal small arm-sinus, and, running 
valve, s, Sockets; b, dental plates; along it, give off a blind branch 
V, mouth; de, labial appendage in to each tentacle (fig. 21). The 
its natural position; d, appendage right and left halves are con- 
extended or unrolled. nected ventrally to the oeso- 
phagus by a short vessel which 
supplies these tentacles in the immediate neighbourhood of the mouth. 
There is thus a vascular ring around the oesophagus. The heart gives 
off posteriorly a second median vessel which divides almost at once 
into a right and a left half, each of which again divides into two 
vessels which run to the dorsal and ventral mantles respectively. 
The dorsal branch sends a blind twig into each of the diverticula 
of the dorsal mantle-sinus, the ventral branch supplies the nephridia 
and neighbouring parts before reaching the ventral lobe of the mantle. 
Both dorsal and ventral branches supply the generative organs. 

The blood is a coagulable fluid. Whether it contains corpuscles 
is not yet determined, but if so they must be few in number. It is 
a remarkable fact that in Discinisca, although the vessels to the 
lophophore are arranged as in other Brachiopods, no trace of a heart 
or of the posterior vessels has as yet been discovered. 

Muscles. — The number and position of the muscles differ materi- 
ally in the two great divisions into which the Brachiopoda have been 
grouped, and to some extent also in the different genera of which 
each division is composed. Unfortunately almost every anatomist 
who has written on the muscles of the Brachiopoda has proposed 
different names for each muscle, and the confusion thence arising 
is much to be regretted. In the Testicr.rdines, of which the genus 
Terebratula may be taken as an example, five or six pairs of muscles 
are stated by A. Hancock, Gratiolet and others to be connected 
with the opening and closing of the valves, or with their attachment 
to or movements upon the peduncle. First of all, the adductors 
or occlusors consist of two muscles, which, bifurcating near the 
centre of the shell cavity, produce a large quadruple impression 
on the internal surface of the small valve (fig. 13, o, a'), and a single 
divided one towards the centre of the large or ventral valve (fig. 12, 
a). The function of this pair of muscles is the closing of the valves. 
Two other pairs have been termed divaricators by Hancock, or 
cardinal muscles (" muscles diducteurs " of Gratiolet), and have 
for function the opening of the valves. The divaricators proper are 
stated by Hancock to arise from the ventral valve, one on each 
side, a little in advance of and close to the adductors, and after 




rapidly diminishing in size become attached to the cardinal process, 
a space or prominence between the sockets in the dorsal valve. 
The accessory divaricators are, according to the same authority, a 
pair of small muscles which have their ends attached to the ventral 
valve, one on each side of the median line, a little behind the united 
basis of the adductors, and again to the extreme point of the cardinal 
process. Two pairs of muscles, apparently connected with the 
peduncle and its limited movements, have been minutely described 
by Hancock as having one of their extremities attached to this organ. 
The doi wl adjustors are fixed to the ventral surface of the peduncle, 
and are again inserted into the hinge-plate in the smaller valve. 
The vemral adjustors are considered to pass from the inner extremity 




Fig. 24. — Magellania [Waldheimia] flavescens. Diagram showing 
the muscular system. (After Hancock.) 

M, Ventral, Z, Extremity of intestine, b, Ventral adjustors. 

N, Dorsal valve, a, Adductor. V ', Peduncular muscles. 

/, Loop. c, Divaricators. J"", Dorsal adjustors. 

V, Mouth. c', Accessory divaricators. P, Peduncle. 

of the peduncle, and to become attached by one pair of their ex- 
tremities to the ventral valve, one on each side and a little behind 
the expanded base of the divaricators. The function of these muscles, 
according to the same authority, is not only that of erecting the shell ; 
they serve also to attach the peduncle to the shell, and thus effect 
the steadying of it upon the peduncle. By alternate contracting 
they can cause a slight rotation of the animal in its stalk. 

Such is the general arrangement of the shell muscles in the divi- 
sion composing the articulated Brachiopoda, making allowance for 
certain unimportant modifications observable in the animals com- 
posing the different families and genera thereof. Owing to the strong 
and tight interlocking of the valves by the means of curved teeth 





Figs. 25, 26. Lingula anatina. 



25, Interior of ventral valve. 

26, Interior of dorsal valve. 

g, Umbonal muscular impres- 
sions (open valves). 

h, Central muscles (close valves). 

i, Transmedial or sliding muscles. 

b, Parietal band. 



/, Lateral muscles (j, an- 
teriors; k, middles; /, 
outsiders), enabling the 
valves to move forward 
and backward on each 
other. 



(After King.) 

and sockets, many species of Brachiopoda could open their valves 
but slightly. In some species, such as Thecidea, the animal could 
raise its dorsal valve at right angles to the plane of the ventral one 

(fig- 4)- 

In the Ecardines, of which Lingula and Discina may be quoted 
as examples, the myology is much more complicated. Of the shell 



3 6 4 



BRACHIOPODA 



or valvular muscles W. King makes out five pairs and an odd one, 
and individualizes their respective functions as follows : — Three pairs 
are lateral, having their members limited to the sides of the shell; 
one pair are transmedians, each member passing across the middle 
of the reverse side of the shell, while the odd muscle occupies the 
umbonal cavity. The central and umbonal muscles effect the direct 
opening and closing of the shell, the laterals enable the valves to 
move forward and backward on each other, and the transmedians 
allow the similar extremities (the rostral) of the valves to turn from 
each other to the right or the left on an axis subcentrically situated, 
that is, the medio-transverse region of the dorsal valve. It was long 
a matter in discussion whether the animal could displace its valves 
sideways when about to open its shell, but this has been actually 
observed by Professors K. Semper and E. S. Morse, who saw the 
animal perform the operation. They mention that it is never done 
suddenly or by jerks, as the valves are at first always pushed to one 
side several times and back again on each other, at the same time 
opening gradually in the transverse direction till they rest opposite 
to one another and widely apart. Those who have not seen the 
animal in life, or who did not believe in the possibility of the valves 
crossing each other with a slight obliquity, would not consent to 

appropriating any of its muscles 
to that purpose, and consequently 
attributed to all the lateral muscles 
the simple function of keeping 
the valves in an opposite posi- 
tion, or holding them adjusted. 
We have not only the observa- 
tions of Semper and Morse, but 
the anatomical investigations of 
King, to confirm the sliding 
action or lateral divarication of 
the valves of Lingula. 

In the Testicardines, where no 
such sliding action of the valves 
was necessary or possible, no 
muscles for such an object were 
required, consequently none took 
rise from the lateral portions of 
the valves as in Lingula; but 
in an extinct group, the Trime- 
rellidae, which seems to be some- 
what intermediate in character 
between the Ecardines and Testi- 
cardines, have been found cer- 
tain scars, which appear to 
have been produced by rudi- 
mentary lateral muscles, but it is 
doubtful (considering the shells 
are furnished with teeth, though 
but rudely developed) whether 
such muscles enabled the valves, 
as in Lingula, to move forward 
and backward upon each other. 
Crania in life opens its valves 
by moving upon the straight 
hinge, without sliding the valve. 

The nervous system of Brachio- 

Diagram 'showTnlThe "muscular P ods . ha ?>. as a rule >. maintained 
system. (After Hancock.) The its Primitive connexion with the 
letters indicate the muscles as external epithelium. In a few 
in figs. 25 and 26. P lal r? s * has sunk lnt ° the con- 

_!? , ... nective-tissue supporting layer 

A, Dorsal, a, Alimentary bene ath the ectoderm, but the 

B, Ventral valve. tube. chief ceritres still remain in the 
p, Peduncle. z, Anal aper- ecto derm, and the fibrils form- 
e, Heart. ture. j n g tne nerves are for the most 
part at the base of the ectodermal cells. Above the oesophagus 
is a thin commissure which passes laterally into the chief arm- 
nerve. This latter includes in its course numerous ganglion cells, 
and forms, according to F. Blochmann, the immensely long drawn out 
supra-oesophageal ganglion. The chief arm-nerve traverses the lopho- 
phore, being situated between the great arm-sinus and the base of the 
lip (figs. 22 and 28) ; it gives off a branch to each tentacle, and these 
all anastomose at the base of the tentacles with the second nerve 
of the arm, the so-called secondary .irm-nerve. Like the chief arm- 
nerve, this strand runs through the lophophore, parallel indeed 
with the former except near the middle line, where it passes ventrally 
to the oesophagus. The lophophore is supplied by yet a third nerve, 
the under arm-nerve, which is less clearly defined than the others, 
and resembles a moderate aggregation of the nerve fibrils, which seem 
everywhere to underlie the ectoderm, and which in a few cases are 
gathered up into nerves. The under arm-nerve, which lies between 
the small arm-sinus and the surface, supplies nerves to the muscles of 
both arm-sinuses (figs. 22 and 28). Medianly, it has its origin in the 
sub-oesophageal ganglion, which, like the supra-oesophageal, is 
drawn out laterally, though not to the same extent. In the middle 
line the sub-oesophageal nerve mass is small; the ganglion is in 
fact drawn out into two halves placed on either side of the body. 
From each of these sub-oesophageal ganglia numerous nerves arise. 




Fig. 27. — Lingula analina. 



Passing from the middle line outwards they are— (i.) the median 
pallial nerve to the middle of the dorsal mantle; (ii.) numerous 
small nerves — the circum-oesophageal commissures — which pass 
round the oesophagus to the chief arm-nerve or supra-oesophageal 
ganglion; (iii.) the under arm-nerve to the lophophore and its 
muscles; (iv.) the lateral pallial nerve to the sides of the dorsal 
mantle. Laterally, the sub-oesophageal ganglia give off (v.) nerves 
to the ventral mantle, and finally they supply (vi.) branches to the 
various muscles. There is a special marginal nerve running round 
the edge of the mantle, but the connexion of this with the rest of 
the nervous system is not clear; probably it is merely another 
concentration of the diffused sub-ectodermal nervous fibrils. 

The above account applies more particularly to Crania, but in the 
main it is applicable to the other Inarticulata which have been in- 
vestigated. In Discinisca and Lingula, however, the sub-oesophageal 
ganglion is not drawn out, but lies medianly; it gives off two 
posteriorly directed nerves to the stalk, which in Lingula unite and 
form a substantial nerve. Sense organs are unknown in the adult. 
The larval forms are provided with eye-spots, but no very specialized 
sense organs are found in the adult. 

The histology of Brachiopods presents some peculiar and many 
primitive features. As a rule the cells are minute, and this has 
especially stood in the way of embryological research. The plexus 
of nerve-fibrils which underlie the ectoderm and are in places 
gathered up into nerves, and the great development of connective 
tissue, are worthy of notice. Much of the latter takes the form of 
hyaline supporting tissue, 
embedded in which are 
scattered cells and fibres. 
The lophophore and stalk 
are largely composed of this 
tissue. The ectodermal cells 
are large, ciliated, and 
amongst the ciliated cells 
glandular cells are scattered. 
The chitinous chaetae have 
their origin in special ecto- 
dermal pits, at the base of 
which is one large cell which 
is thought to secrete the '*■ 
chaeta, as in Chaetopods. 
These pits are not isolated, 
but are connected by an 
ectodermal ridge, which 
grows in at the margin of 
the mantle and forms a con- 
tinuous band somewhat re- 
sembling the ' ectodermal 
primordium of vertebrate 
teeth. 

The ovary and testes are 
heaped-up masses of red or 
yellow cells due to a pro- 
liferation of the cells lining 
the coelom. There are four 
of such masses, two dorsal 
and two ventral, and as a 
rule they extend between 
the outer and inner layer of 
the mantle lining the shells. 
The ova and the spermatozoa 
dehisce into the body cavity 
and pass to the exterior 
through the nephridia. Fer- 
tilization takes place out- 
side ,the body, and in 
some species the early stages 
of development take place 
in a brood-pouch which is 
essentially a more or less 
deep depression of the body- 
wall median in Thecidea, 
while in Cistella (? Argiope) 
there is one such pouch on 
each side, just below the 
base of the arms, and into 
these the nephridia open. 
The developing ova are 
attached by little stalks to 




Fig. 28. — Diagram of nervous 
system of Crania; from the dorsal 
side. The nerves running to the 
dorsal parts are white, with black 
edges; those running to the ventral 
parts are solid black. Magnified. (After 
Blochmann.) 

1. Oesophagus. 

2. Supra-oesophageal commissure. 

3. Circum-oesophageal commissures. 

4. Under arm-nerve. 

5. Great arm-sinus. 

6. Small arm-sinus. 

7. Tentacle. 

8. Lip of lophophore. 

9. Infra-oesophageal commissure. 

10. Chief arm-nerve. 

11. Secondary arm-nerve. 

12. Nerves to tentacles. 
Sub-oesophageal ganglion. 
Dorsal lateral nerve. 

15. Sub-oesophageal portion of the 

secondary arm-nerve. 

16. Median pallial nerve of dorsal 

lobe of mantle. 

17. Anterior occlusor muscle. 

18. Posterior occlusor muscle. 

19. Obliquus superior muscle. 

20. Levator brachii muscle. 



13- 
14. 



the walls of these pouches. 
In spite of some assertions to the contrary, all the Brachiopods 
which have been carefully investigated have been found to be male 
or female. Hermaphrodite forms are unknown. 

Embryology. — With the exception of Yatsu's article on the develop- 
ment of Lingula (J. Coll. Sci., Japan, xvii., 1901-1903) and E. G. 
Conklin's on " Terebratulina septentrionalis " (P. Amer. Phil. Soc. 
xli., 1902), little real advance has been made in our knowledge of 
the embryology of the Brachiopoda within recent years. Kovalev- 
sky's researches (Izv. Obshch. Moskov. xiv., 1874) on Megaihyris 
{Argiope) and Yatsu's just mentioned are the most complete as 



BRACHIOPODA 



365 



regards the earlier stages. Segmentation is complete, a gastrula I lophophore has begun to appear as an outgrowth of the dorsal 
is formed, the blastopore closes, the archcnteron gives off two mantle lobe. The protegulum has been found in members of almost 
coelomic sacs which, as far as is known, are unaffected by the super- | all the families of Brachiopod, and it is thought to occur throughout 

the group. It resembles the shell of the Cambrian 
-•■ — - -« genus Iphidea [Paterina], and the Phylembryo is 

frequently referred to as the Paterina stage. In some 
orders the Phylembryo is succeeded by an Obolella 
stage with a nearly circular outline, but this is not 
universal. The larva now assumes specific characters 
and is practically adult. 

Classification. — Beecher's division of the Brachiopoda 
into four orders is based largely on the character of 
the aperture through which the stalk or pedicle leaves 
the shell. To appreciate his diagnoses it is necessary 
to understand certain terms, which unfortunately are 
not used in the same sense by all authors. The tri- 
angular pedicle-opening seen in Orthis, &c, has been 
named by James Hall and J. M. Clarke the delthyrium. 
In some less primitive genera, e.g. Terebratula, that 
type of opening is found in the young stages only ; later 
it becomes partly closed by two plates which grow out 
from the sides of the delthyrium. These plates are 
secreted by the ventral lobe of the mantle, and were 
named by von Buch in 1834 the " deltidium." The 
form of the deltidium varies in different genera. The 
two plates may meet in the middle line, and leave only 
a small oval opening near the centre for the pedicle, 
as in Rhynchonella ; or they may meet only near the 
base of the delthyrium forming the lower boundary of 
the circular pedicle-opening, as in Terebratula; or the 
right plate may remain quite distinct from the left 
plate, as in Terebratella. The pro-deltidium, a term introduced 
by Hall and Clarke, signifies a small embryonic plate originating 
on the dorsal side of the body. It subsequently becomes attached 
to the ventral valve, and 

_ A 






1. Anterior segment. 

2. Second or mantle- 

forming segment. 



5. Setae. 

6. Nerve mass (?). 

7. Alimentary canal 



A B C 

Fig. 29. — Three larvae stages of Megathyris (Argiope). A, Larva which has 
just left brood-pouch; B, longitudinal section through a somewhat later stage ; 
C, the fully formed embryo just before fixing — the neo-embryo of Beecher. 
Highly magnified. 

3. Third or stalk-forming 
segment. 

4. Eye-spots. 
8. Muscles. 

ficial segmentation of the body that divides the larva into three 
segments. The walls of these sacs give rise at an early stage to 
muscles which enable the parts of the larva to move actively on one 
another (fig. 29, B). About this stage the larvae leave the brood- 
pouch, which is a lateral or median cavity in the body of the female, 
and lead a free swimming life in the ocean. The anterior segment 
broadens and becomes umbrella-shaped; it has a powerful row of 
cilia round the rim and smaller cilia on the general surface. By the 
aid of these cilia the larva swims actively, but owing to its minute 
size it covers very little distance, and this probably accounts for the 
fact that where brachiopods occur there are, as a rule, a good many 
in one spot. The head bears four eye-spots, and it is continually 
testing the ground (fig. 29, A, C). The second segment grows down- 
wards like a skirt surrounding the third segment, which is destined 
to form the stalk. It bears at its rim four bundles of very pronounced 
chaetae. After a certain time the larva fixes itself by its stalk to 
some stone or rock, and the skirt-like second segment turns forward 
over the head and forms the mantle. What goes on within the 
mantle is unknown, but presumably the head is absorbed. The 
chaetae drop off, and the lophophore is believed to arise from 
thickenings which appear in the dorsal mantle lobe. The Plankton 
Expedition brought back, and H. Simroth (Ergeb. Plankton Ex- 
pedition, ii., 1897) has described, a few larval brachiopods of undeter- 
mined genera, two of which at least were pelagic, or at any rate taken 

far from the coast. These 




larvae, which resemble 

those described by Fritz 

Miiller (Arch. Naturg., 

1861-1862), have their 

mantle turned over their 

head and the larval shell 

well developed. No stalk 

has been seen by Simroth 

or Fritz Miiller, but in 

other respects the larva 

resembles the stages in the 

development of Megathyris 

and Terebratulina which 

immediately precede fixa- 

Fig. 30.— Stages in the fixing and tion. The cirri or tentacles, 

metamorphosis of Terebratulina. Highly of . which tnref ; or four 

magnified. (From Morse.) Pajrs are present, are cap- 

" able of being protruded, 

A, Larva (neo-embryo) just come to an( j the minute larva 
rest. swims by means of the 

B, C, D, Stages showing the turning c ili ar y ac tion they produce, 
forward of the second or mantle seg- It can retract the tentacles, 
ment. shut its shell, and sink to 

E, Completion of this. the bottom. 

F, Young Brachiopod. C. E. E. Beecher (Amer. 
1, 2, 3, The first, second and third jour. Sci. ser. 3, xli. and 

segments. xliv.) has classified with 

appropriate names the various stages through which Brachio- 
pod larvae pass. The last stage, that in which the folds of the 
second segment are already reflected over the first, he calls the 
Typembryo. Either before or just after turning, the mantle develops 
a larval shell termed the protegulum, and when this is completed 
the larva is termed the Phylembryo. By this time the eyes have 
disappeared, the four bundles of chaetae have dropped off, and the 



develops into the pseudo- 
deltidium, in the Neotre- 
mata and the Protremata. 
The pseudo-deltidium (so 
named by Bronn in 1862) 
is a single plate which 
grows from the apex of 
the delthyrium down- 
wards, and may com- 
pletely close the 
aperture. The pseudo- 
deltidium is sometimes 
reabsorbed in the adult. 
In the Telotremata 
neither pro-deltidium nor 
pseudo-deltidium is 
known. In the Atremata 
the pro-deltidium does 
not become fixed to the 
ventral valve, and does 
not develop into a pseudo- 
deltidium. The American 




Fig. 31. — Shell of larval Brachiopod. 

Phylembryo stage. (From Simroth.) 
I, Protegulum; 2, permanent shell. 

use of the term deltidium for the structure which Europeans call 
the pseudo-deltidium makes for confusion. The development 
of the brachial supports has been studied by Friele, Fischer and 
Oehlert. A summary of the results is given by Beecher {Trans. 
Connect. Acad, ix., 1893 ; reprinted in Studies in Evolution, 1901). 

The orders Atremata and Neotremata are frequently grouped 
together, as the sub-class Inarticulata or Ecardines — the Treten- 
terata of Davidson — and the orders Protremata and Telotremata, 
as the Articulata or Testicardines — 
the Clistenterata of Davidson. The ? 

following scheme of classification is 
based on Beecher's and Schubert's. 
Recent families are printed in italic 
type. 
Class I. Ecardines (Inarticulata}4 - 

ORDER I. Atremata (Beecher).— 
Inarticulate Brachiopoda, with the 
pedicle passing out between the um- 
bones, the opening being shared by 
both valves. Pro-deltidium attached 
to dorsal valves. FAMILIES.— 
Paterinidae, Obolidae, Trime- 
rellidae, llngulellidae, llngu- 
lidae, llgulasmatidae. 

ORDER II. Neotremata (Beecher).— 
More or less circular, cone-shaped, 
inarticulate Brachiopoda. The pedicle 
passes out at right angles to the plane 
of junction of the valves of the shell ; 
the opening is confined to the ventral valve, and may take the form 
of a slit, or may be closed by the development of a special plate 
called the listrium, or by a pseudo-deltidium. Pro-deltidium attached 




Fig. 32.- — Diagram of the 
pedicle-opening of Rhyn- 
chonella. Magnified. 

1. Umbo of ventral valve. 

2. Deltidium. 

3. Margin of delthyrium. 

4. Pedicle-opening. 

5. Dorsal valve. 



3 66 



BRACHISTOCHRONE— BRACKLESHAM BEDS 



to ventral valve. FAMILIES.— Acrotretidae, Siphonotretidae, 
Trematidae, Discinwae, Craniidae. 

Class II. Testicardines (Articulata) 

ORDER HI. Protremata (Beecher). — Articulate Brachiopoda, 
with pedicle-opening restricted to ventral valve, and either open 
at the hinge line or more or less completely closed by a pseudo-del- 
tidium, which may disappear in adult. The pro-deltidium originat- 
ing on the dorsal surface later becomes anchylosed with the ventral 
valve. FAMILIES.— Kutorginidae, Eichwaldiidae, Billing- 

SELLIDAE,STROPHOMENIDAE,rff£C/Dm?4£,PRODUCTIDAE,RlCHTH0- 

fenidae, Orthidae, Clitambonitidae, Syntrophiidae, Poram- 
bonitidae, pentameridae. 

ORDER IV. Telotremata (Beecher).— Articulate Brachiopoda, 
with the pedicle-opening, confined in later life to the ventral valve, 
and placed at the umbo or beneath it. Deltidium present, but no 
pro-deltidium. Lophophore supported by calcareous loops, &c. 
FAMILIES.— Protorhynchidae, Rhynceonellidae, Centro- 

NELLIDAE.rfiifEBitirtfi/rME.STRINGOCEPHALIDAE.MEGALANTERI- 
DAE, TEREBRATELLIDAE, ATRYPIDAE, SPIRIFERIDAE, AtHYRIDAE. 

Affinities.— Little light has been thrown on the affinities of the 
Brachiopoda by recent research, though speculation has not been 
wanting. Brachiopods have been at various times placed with the 
Mollusca, the Chaetopoda, the Chaetognatha, the Phoronidea, the 
Polyzoa, the Hemichordata, and the Urochordata. None of these 
alliances has borne close scrutiny. The suggestion to place Brachio- 
pods with the Polyzoa, Phoronis, Rhabdopleura and Cephalodiscus, 
in the Phylum Podaxonia made in Ency. Brit. (vol. xix, ninth edition, 
pp. 440-441) has not met with acceptance, and until we have a fuller 
account of the embryology of some one form, preferably an In- 
articulate, it is wiser to regard the group as a very isolated one. 
It may, however, be pointed out that Brachiopods seem to belong 
to that class of animal which commences life as a larva with three 
segments, and that tri-segmented larvae have been found now in 
several of the larger groups. . 

Distribution. — Brachiopods first appear in the Lower Cambrian, 
and reached their highest development in the Silurian, from which 
upwards of 2000 species are known, and were nearly as numerous 
in the Devonian period; at present they are represented by some 
140 recent species. The following have been found in the British 
area, as defined by A. M. Norman, Terebratulina caput-serpenhs 
L., Terebratula (Gwynia) capsula Jeff., Magellania (Macandrevia) 
cranium Miill.,ikf. septigera hoven,ferebratella spitzbergenensis Dav., 
Megathyris decollate, Chemn., Cistella cistellula S. Wood, Cryptopora 
gnomon Jeff., Rhynchonella (Hemithyris) psittacea Gmel., Crania 
anomala Mull., and Discinisca atlantica King. About one-half the 
120 existing species are found above the 100-fathoms line. Below 
150 fathoms they are rare, but a few such as Terebratulina wyvillei are 
found down to 2000 fathoms. Lingula is essentially a very shallow 
water form. As a rule the genera of the northern hemisphere differ 
from those of the southern. A large number of specimens of a 
species are usually found together, since their only mode of spreading 
is during the ciliated larval stage, which although it swims vigorously 
can only cover a few millimetres an hour; still it may be carried 
some little distance by currents. 

Undue stress is often laid on the fact that Lingula has come down 
to us apparently unchanged since Cambrian times, whilst Crania, 
and forms very closely resembling Discina and Rhynchonella^ are 
found from the Ordovician strata onwards. The former statement 
is, however, true of animals from other classes at least as highly 
organized as Brachiopods, e.g. tfie Gasteropod Capulus, whilst most 
of the invertebrate classes were represented in the Ordovician by 
forms which do not differ from their existing representatives in any 
important respect. . 

A full bibliography of Brachiopoda (recent and fossil) is to be 
found in Davidson's Monograph of British Fossil Brachiopods, 
Pal. Soc. Mon. vi., 1886. The Monograph on Recent Brachiopoda, 
by the same author, Tr. Linn. Soc. London, Zool. ser. li. vol. iv., 
1886-1888, must on no account be omitted. (A. E. S.) 

BRACHISTOCHRONE (from the Gr. /3pax«n-os, shortest, 
and xpovos, time), a term invented by John Bernoulli in 1694 
to denote the curve along which a body passes from one fixed 
point to another in the shortest time. When the directive force 
is constant, the curve is a cycloid (q.v.) ; under other conditions, 
spirals and other curves are described (see Mechanics). 

BRACHYCEPHALIC (Gr. for short-headed), a term invented 
by Andreas Retzius to denote those skulls of which the width 
from side to side was little less than the length from front to 
back, their ratio being as 80 to 100, as in those of the Mongolian 
type. Thus taking the length as 100, if the width exceeds 80, 
the skull is to be classed as brachycephalic. The prevailing form 
of the head of civilized races is brachycephalic. It is supposed 
that a brachycephalic race inhabited Europe before the Celts. 
Among those peoples whose heads show marked brachycephaly 



are the Indo-Chinese, the Savoyards, Croatians, Bavarians, 
Lapps, Burmese, Armenians and Peruvians. (See Craniometry.) 
BRACHYLOGUS (from Gr. iSpaxw, short, and X670S, word), 
title applied in the middle of the 16th century to a work con- 
taining a systematic exposition of the Roman law, which some 
writers have assigned to the reign of the emperor Justinian, 
and others have treated as an apocryphal work of the 16th 
century. The earliest extant edition of this work' was published 
at Lyons in 1549, under the title of Corpus Legum per modum 
Institutionum; and the title 'Brachylogus totius Juris Chilis 
appears for the first time in an edition published at Lyons in 
1553. The origin of the work may be referred with great 
probability to the 12th century. There is internal evidence 
that it was composed subsequently to the reign of Louis le 
Debonnaire (778-840), as it contains a Lombard law of that 
king's, which forbids the testimony of a clerk to be received 
against a layman. On the other hand its style and reasoning 
is far superior to that of the law writers of the 10th and nth 
centuries; while the circumstance that the method of its author 
has not been in the slightest degree influenced by the school of 
the Gloss-writers (Glossatores) leads fairly to the conclusion 
that he wrote before that school became dominant at Bologna. 
Savigny, who traced the history of the Brachylogus With great 
care,' is disposed to think that it is the work of Irnerius himself 
(Geschichte des rom. Rechts im Mittelalter). Its value is chiefly 
historical, as it furnishes evidence that a knowledge of Justinian's 
legislation was always maintained in northern Italy. The author 
of the work has adopted the Institutes of Justinian as the basis 
of it, and draws largely on the Digest, the Code and the Novels; 
while certain passages, evidently taken from the Senlentiae 
Receptae of Julius Paulus, imply that the author was also 
acquainted with the Visigothic code of Roman law compiled 
by order of Alaric II. 

An edition by E. Bocking was published at Berlin in 1829, under 
the title of Corpus Legum sive Brachylogus Juris Civilis. See also 
H. Fitting, Uber die Heimath und das Alter des sogenannten Brachy- 
logus (Berlin, 1880). 

BRACKET, jn architecture and carpentering, a projecting 
feature either in wood or metal for holding things together or 
supporting a shelf. The same feature in stone is called a " con- 
sole " (q.v.). In furniture it is a small ornamental shelf for a 
wall or a corner, to bear knick-knacks, china or other bric-a-brac. 
The word has been referred to " brace," clamp, Lat. bracchium, 
arm, but the earliest form " bragget " (1580) points to the true 
derivation from the Fr. braguette, or Span, bragueta (Lat. bracae, 
breeches), used both of the front part of a pair of breeches and 
of the architectural feature. The sense development is not clear, 
but it has no doubt been influenced by the supposed connexion 
with " brace." 

BRACKET-FUNGI. The term " bracket " has been given 
to those hard, woody fungi that grow on trees or timber in 
the form of semicircular brackets. They belong to the order 
Polyporeae, distinguished by the layer of tubes or pores on 
the under surface within which the spores are borne. The 
mycelium, or vegetable part of the fungus, burrows in the tissues 
of the tree, and often destroys it; the "bracket" represents 
the fruiting stage, and produces innumerable spores which gain 
entrance to other trees by some wound or cut surface; hence 
the need of careful forestry. Many of these woody fungi persist 
for several years, and a new layer of pores is superposed on 
the previous season's growth. 

BRACKLESHAM BEDS, in geology, a series of clays and 
marls, with sandy and lignitic beds, in the Middle Eocene of 
the Hampshire Basin, England. They are well developed in 
the Isle of Wight and on the mainland opposite; and receive 
their name from their occurrence at Bracklesham in Sussex. 
The thickness of the deposit is from 100 to 400 ft. Fossil mollusca 
are abundant, and fossil fish are to be found, as well as the 
Palaeophis, a sea-snake. Nummulites and other foraminifera 
also occur. The Bracklesham Beds lie between the Barton Clay 
above and the Bournemouth Beds, Lower Bagshot, below. 
In the London Basin these beds are represented only by thki 



BRACKLEY 



3 6 7 



sandy clays In the Middle Bagshot group. In the Paris Basin 
the " Calcaire grossier " lies upon the same geological horizon. 

See F. Dixon, Geology of Sussex (new ed., 1878); F. E. Edwards 
and S. V. Wood, " Monograph of Eocene Mollusca," Palaeonto- 
graphical Soc. vol. i. (1847-1877); " Geology of the Isle of Wight," 
Mem. Geol. Survey (2nd ed., 1889); C. Reid, " The Geology of the 
Country around Southampton," Mem. Geol. Survey (1902). 

BRACKLEY, THOMAS EGERTON, Viscount (c. 1540-1617), 
English lord chancellor, was a natural son of Sir Richard Egerton 
of Ridley, Cheshire. The exact date of his birth is unrecorded, 
but, according to Wood, 1 when he became a commoner at Brase- 
nose College.Oxford, in 1556, he was about seventeen. He entered 
Lincoln's Inn in 1559, and was called to the bar in 1572, being 
chosen a governor of the society in 1580, Lent reader in 1582, 
and treasurer in 1 588. He early obtained legal renown and a large 
practice, and tradition relates that his skilful conduct of a case 
against the crown gained the notice of Elizabeth, who is reported 
to have declared: " In my troth he shall never plead against me 
again." Accordingly, on the 26th of June 1581, he was made 
solicitor-general. He represented Cheshire in the parliaments 
of 1585 and 1586, but in his official capacity he often attended 
in the House of Lords. On the 3rd of March 1589 the Commons 
desired that he should return to their house, the Lords refusing 
on the ground that he was called by the queen's writ to attend in 
the Lords before his election by the House of Commons. 2 He took 
part in the trial of Mary, queen of Scots, in 1586, and advised that 
in her indictment she should only be styled " commonly called 
queen of Scots," to avoid scruples about judging a sovereign. 
He conducted several other state prosecutions. On the 2nd of 
June 1592 he was appointed attorney-general, and was knighted 
and made chamberlain of Chester in 1593. On the 10th of April 
1594 he became master of the rolls, and on the 6th of May 1596 
lord keeper of the great seal and a privy councillor, remaining, 
however, a commoner as Sir Thomas Egerton, and presiding in 
the Lords as such during the whole reign of Elizabeth. He kept 
in addition the mastership of the rolls, the whole work of the 
chancery during this period falling on his shoulders and sometimes 
causing inconvenience to suitors. 3 His promotion was welcomed 
from all quarters. " I think no man," wrote a contemporary to 
Essex, " ever came to this dignity with more applause than this 
worthy gentleman." 4 

Egerton became one of the queen's most trusted advisers and 
one of the greatest and most striking figures at her court. He was 
a leading member of the numerous special commissions, including 
the ecclesiastical commission, and was the queen's interpreter 
in her communications to parliament. In 1 598 he was employed 
as a commissioner for negotiating with the Dutch, obtaining 
great credit by the treaty then effected, and in 1600 in the same 
capacity with Denmark. In 1 597, in consequence of his unlawful 
marriage with his second wife, in a private house without banns, 
the lord keeper incurred a sentence of excommunication, and 
was obliged to obtain absolution from the bishop of London. 6 
He was a firm friend of the noble but erratic and unfortunate 
Essex. He sought to moderate his violence and rashness, and 
after the scene in the council in July 1598, when the queen struck 
Essex and bade him go and be hanged, he endeavoured to recon- 
cile him to the queen in an admirable letter which has often been 
printed. 6 On the arrival of Essex in London without leave from 
Ireland, and his consequent disgrace, he supported the queen's 
just authority, avoiding at the same time any undue severity to 
the offender. Essex was committed to his custody in York House 
from the 1st of October 1599 till the 5th of July 1600, when the 
lord keeper used his influence to recover for him the queen's 
favour and gave him kindly warnings concerning the necessity 
for caution in his conduct. On the 5th of June 1600 he presided 
over the court held at his house, which deprived Essex of his 
offices except that of master of the horse, treating him with 

1 Athenae Oxon. (Bliss), ii. 197. 

2 D'Ewes's Parliaments of Elizabeth, 441, 442. 

3 Cal. of St. Pap., Dom., 1601-1603, p. 191. 

4 Birch's Mem. of Queen Elizabeth, i. 479. 
6 Hist. MSS. Comm. nth Rep. p. 24. 

6 T. Birch's Mem. of Queen Elizabeth, ii. 384. 



leniency, not pressing the charge of treason but only that of 
disobedience, and interrupting him with kind intentions when he 
attempted to justify himself. After the trial he tried in vain to 
bring Essex to a sense of duty. On the 8th of February 1601, 
the day fixed for the rebellion, the lord keeper with other officers 
of state visited Essex at Essex House to demand the reason of 
the tumultuous assemblage. His efforts to persuad'e Essex to 
speak with him privately and explain his " griefs," and to refrain 
from violence, and his appeal to the company to depart peacefully 
on their allegiance, were ineffectual, and he was imprisoned by 
Essex for six hours, the mob calling out to kill him and to throw 
the great seal out of the window. Subsequently he abandoned 
all hope of saving Essex, and took an active part in his trial. 
On the 13 th of February he made a speech in the Star Chamber, 
exposing the wickedness of the rebellion, and of the plot of 
Thomas Lea to surprise Elizabeth at her chamber door. 7 In 
July 1602, a few months before her death, Elizabeth visited the 
lord keeper at his house at Harefield in Middlesex, and he was 
one of those present during her last hours who received her 
faltering intimation as to her successor. 

On the accession of James I., Sir Thomas Egerton was re- 
appointed lord keeper, resigning the mastership of the rolls in 
May 1603, and the chamberlainship of Chester in August. On 
the 21st of July he was created Baron Ellesmere, and on the 
24th lord chancellor. His support of the king's prerogative was 
too faithful and undiscriminating. He approved of the harsh 
penalty inflicted upon Oliver St John in i6r5 for denying the 
legality of benevolences, and desired that his sentencing of the 
prisoner "might be his last work to conclude his services." 8 
In May 16 13 he caused the committal of Whitelocke to the Fleet 
for questioning the authority of the earl marshal's court. In 
1604 he came into collision with the House of Commons. Sir 
Francis Goodwin, an outlaw, having been elected for Bucking- 
hamshire contrary to the king's proclamation, the chancellor 
cancelled the return when made according to custom into 
chancery, and issued writs for a new election. The Commons, 
however, considering their privileges violated, restored Goodwin 
to his seat, and though the matter was in the present instance 
compromised by the choice of a third party, they secured for 
the future the right of judging in their own elections. He was 
at one with James in desiring to effect the union between 
England and Scotland, and served on the commission in 1604; 
and the English merchants who opposed the union and com- 
munity of trade with the Scots were " roundly shaken by him." 
In 1608, in the great case of the Post Nati, he decided, with the 
assistance of the fourteen judges, that those born after the 
accession of James I. to the throne of England were English 
subjects and capable of holding lands in England; and he 
compared the two dissentient judges to the apostle Thomas, 
whose doubts only confirmed the faith of the rest. He did not, 
however, always show obedience to the king's wishes. He op- 
posed the latter's Spanish policy, and in July 16 15, in spite of 
James's most peremptory commands and threats, refused to put 
the great seal to the pardon of Somerset. In May 1616 he 
officiated as high steward in the trial of the latter and his countess 
for the murder of Overbury. He was a rigid churchman, hostile 
to both the Puritans and the Roman Catholics. He fully ap- 
proved of the king's unfriendly attitude towards the former, 
adopted at the Hampton Court conference in 1604, and declared, 
in admiration of James's theological reasoning on this occasion, 
that he had never understood before the meaning of the legal 
maxim, Rex est mixta persona cum sacerdote. In 1605 he opposed 
the petition for the restitution of deprived Puritan ministers, 
and obtained an opinion from the judges that the petition was 
illegal. He supported the party of Abbot against Laud at 
Oxford, and represented to the king the unfitness of 'the latter 
to be president of St John's College. In 1605 he directed the 
judges to enforce the penal laws against the Roman Catholics. 

His vigorous and active public career closed with a great 
victory gained over the common law and his formidable 

7 Cal. of St. Pap., Dom., 1598-1601, pp. 554, 583. 

8 State Trials, ii. 909. 



3 68 



BRACKLEY 



antagonist, Sir Edward Coke. The chancellor's court of equity 
had originated in the necessity for a tribunal to decide cases not 
served by the common law, and to relax and correct the rigidity 
and insufficiency of the latter's procedure. The two jurisdictions 
had remained bitter rivals, the common-law bar complaining 
of the arbitrary and unrestricted powers of the chancellor, and 
the equity lawyers censuring and ridiculing the failures of 
justice in the courts of common law. The disputes between the 
courts, concerning which the king had already in 16 15 remon- 
strated with the chancellor and Sir Edward Coke, 1 the lord 
chief justice, came to a crisis in 1616, when .the court of chancery 
granted relief against judgments at common law in the cases of 
Heath v. Rydley and Courtney v. Gr anvil. This relief was declared 
by Coke and other judges sitting with him to be illegal, and a 
counter-attack was made by a praemunire, brought against the 
parties concerned in the suit in chancery. The grand jury, 
however, refused to bring in a true bill against them, in spite 
of Coke's threats and assurances that the chancellor was dead, 
and the dispute was referred to the king himself, who after 
consulting his counsel and on Bacon's advice decided in favour 
of equity. The chancellor's triumph was a great one, and from 
this time the equitable jurisdiction of the court of chancery was 
unquestioned. In June 1616 he supported the king in his 
dispute with and dismissal of Coke in the case of the commendams, 
agreeing with Bacon that it was the judge's duty to communicate 
with the king, before giving judgments in which his interests 
were concerned, and in November warned the new lord chief 
justice against imitating the errors of his predecessor and 
especially his love of "popularity." 2 Writing in 1609 to 
Salisbury, the chancellor had described Coke (who had long 
been a thorn in his flesh) as a " frantic, turbulent and idle 
broken brayned fellow," apologizing for so often troubling 
Salisbury on this subject, "no fit exercise for a chancellor and a 
treasurer." 3 He now summoned Coke before him and com- 
municated to him the king's dissatisfaction with his Reports, 
desiring, however, to be spared further service in his disgracing. 
After several petitions for leave to retire through failing health, 
he at last, on the 3rd of March 1617, delivered up to James the 
' great seal, which he had held continuously for the unprecedented 
term of nearly twenty-one years. On the 7th of November 1616 
he had been created Viscount Brackley, and his death took 
place on the 15th of March 1617. Half an hour before his 
decease James sent Bacon, then his successor as lord keeper, 
with the gift of an earldom, and the presidentship of the council 
with a pension of £3000 a year, which the dying man declined 
as earthly vanities with which he had no more concern. He was 
buried at Dodleston in Cheshire. 

As Lord Chancellor Ellesmere he is a striking figure in the 
long line of illustrious English judges. No instance of excessive 
or improper use of his jurisdiction is recorded, and the famous 
case which precipitated the contest between the courts was a 
clear travesty of justice, undoubtedly fit for the chancellor's 
intervention. He refused to answer any communications from 
suitors in his court, 4 and it was doubtless to Ellesmere (as 
weeding out the " enormous sin " of judicial corruption) 6 that 
John Donne, who was his secretary, addressed his fifth satire. 
He gained Camden's admiration, who records an anagram on his 
name, " Gestat Honorem." Bacon, whose merit he had early 
recognized, and whose claims to the office of solicitor-general 
he had unavailingly supported both in 1594 and 1606, calls him 
" a true sage, a salvia in the garden of the state," and speaks 
with gratitude of his " fatherly kindness." Ben Jonson, among 
the poets, extolled in an epigram his " wing'd judgements," 
" purest hands," and constancy. Though endowed with con- 
siderable oratorical gifts he followed the true judicial tradition 
and affected to despise eloquence as " not decorum for judges, 
that ought to respect the Matter and not the Humours of the 

1 Cat. St. Pap., Dom., 1611-1618, p. 381. 

2 Cat. St. Pap., Dom., 1611-1618, p. 407. 

3 Lansdowne MS. 91, f. 41. 

* Hist. MSS. Comm. app. pt. vii. p. 156. 
6 Life of Donne, by E. Gosse, i. 43. 



Hearers." 6 Like others of his day he hoped to see a codification 
of the laws, 7 and appears to have had greater faith in judge-made 
law than in statutes of the realm, advising the parliament 
(October 27, 1601) " that laws in force might be revised and 
explained and no new laws made," and describing the Statute 
of Wills passed in Henry VIII. 's reign as the " ruin of ancient 
families " and " the nurse of forgeries." In the thirty-eighth 
year of Elizabeth he drew up rules for procedure in the Star 
Chamber, 8 restricting the fees, and in the eighth of James L 
ordinances for remedying abuses in the court of chancery. In 
1609 he published his judgment in the case of the Post Nati, 
which appears to be the only certain work of his authorship. 
The following have been ascribed to him: — The Privileges and 
Prerogatives of the High Court of Chancery (1641); Certain 
Observations concerning the Office of the Lord Chancellor (1651) 
— denied by Lord Chancellor Hardwicke in A Discourse of the 
Judicial Authority of the Master of the Rolls (1728) to be Lord 
Ellesmere's work; Observations on Lord Coke's Reports, ed. by 
G. Paul (about 17 10), the only evidence of his authorship being 
apparently that the MS. was in his handwriting; four MSS., 
bequeathed to his chaplain, Bishop Williams, viz. The Pre- 
rogative Royal, Privileges of Parliament, Proceedings in Chancery 
and The Power of the Star Chamber; Notes and Observations on 
Magna Charta, &°c, Sept. 1615 (Harl. 4265, f. 35), and An Abridg- 
ment of Lord Coke's Reports (see MS. note by F. Hargrave in his 
copy of Certain Observations concerning the Office of Lord Chancellor, 
Brit. Mus. 510 a 5, also Life of Egerton, p. 80, note T, catalogue 
of Harleian collection, and Walpole's Royal and Noble Authors, 
1806, ii. 170). 

He was thrice married. By his first wife, Elizabeth, daughter 
of Thomas Ravenscroft of Bretton, Flintshire, he had two sons 
and a daughter. The elder son, Thomas, predeceased him, 
leaving three daughters. The younger, John, succeeded his 
father as 2nd Viscount Brackley, was created earl of Bridge- 
water, and, marrying Lady Frances Stanley (daughter of his 
father's third wife, widow of the 5th earl of Derby), was the 
ancestor of the earls and dukes of Bridgewater (q.v.), whose male 
line became extinct in 1829. In 1846 the titles of Ellesmere and 
Brackley were revived in the person of the 1st earl of Ellesmere 
(q.v.), descended from Lady Louisa Egerton, daughter and 
co-heir of the 1st duke of Bridgewater. 

No adequate life of Lord Chancellor Ellesmere has been written, 
for which, however, materials exist in the Bridgewater MSS., very 
scantily calendared in Hist. MSS. Comm. nth Rep. p. 24, and 
app. pt. vii. p. 126. A small selection, with the omission, however, 
of personal and family matters intended for a separate projected 
Life which was never published, was edited by J. P. Collier for the 
Camden Society in 1840. 

BRACKLEY, a market town and municipal borough in the 
southern parliamentary division of Northamptonshire, England, 
59 m. N.W. by W. from London by the Great Central railway; 
served also by a branch of the London & North- Western railway. 
Pop. (1901) 2467. The church of St Peter, the body of which 
is Decorated and Perpendicular, has a beautiful Early English 
tower. Magdalen College school was founded in 1447 by William 
of Waynflete, bishop of Winchester, bearing the name of his 
great college at Oxford. Of a previous foundation of the 12th 
century, called the Hospital of St John, the transitional Norman 
and Early English chapel remains. Brewing is carried on. 
The borough is under a mayor, 4 aldermen and 12 councillors.. 
Area, 3489 acres. 

Brackley (Brachelai, Brackele) was held in 1086 by Earl 
Alberie, from whom it passed to the earl of Leicester and thence 
to the families of De Quinci and Holand. Brilliant tournaments 
were held in 1249 and 1267, and others were prohibited in 1222 
and 1244. The market, formerly held on Sunday, was changed 
in 1 2 18 to Wednesday, and in answer to a writ of Quo Warranto 
Maud de Holand claimed in 1330 that her family had held a fair 
on St Andrew's day from time immemorial. In 1553 Mary 
granted two fairs to the earl of Derby. By charter of 1686 

6 Judgment on the Post Nati. 

7 Speech to the parliament, 24th of October 1597. 

8 Harleian MS. 2310, f. i. ; Gardiner's Hist, of England, ix 56. 



BRACQUEMOND— BRADFORD, JOHN 



369 



James II. incorporated the town under a mayor, 6 aldermen, 
and 26 burgesses, granted three new fairs and confirmed the 
old fair and market. In 1 708 Anne granted four fairs to the earl 
of Bridgewater, and in 1886 the borough had a new charter of 
incorporation under a mayor, 4 aldermen and 12 councillors 
under the Municipal Corporations Act of 1882. Camden {Brit. 
p. 430) says that Brackley was formerly a famous staple for 
wool. It first sent members to parliament in 1 547, and continued 
to send two representatives till disfranchised by the Reform 
Act of 1832. The town formerly had a considerable woollen 
and lace-making trade. 

BRACQUEMOND, FELIX (1833- ), French painter and 
etcher, was born in Paris. He was trained in early youth as a 
trade lithographer, until Guichard, a pupil of Ingres, took him 
to his studio. His portrait of his grandmother, painted by him 
at the age of nineteen, attracted Theophile Gautier's attention 
at the Salon. He applied himself to engraving and etching about 
1853, and played a leading and brilliant part in the revival of 
the etcher's art in France. Altogether he has produced over 
eight hundred plates, comprising portraits, landscapes, scenes 
of contemporary life, and bird-studies, besides numerous inter- 
pretations of other artists' paintings, especially those of Meis- 
sonier, Gustave Moreau and Corot. After having been attached 
to the Sevres porcelain factory in 1870, he accepted a post as art 
manager of the Paris atelier of the firm of Haviland of Limoges. 
He was connected by a link of firm friendship with Manet, 
Whistler, and all the other fighters in the impressionist cause, 
and received all the honours that await the successful artist in 
France, including the grade of officer of the Legion of Honour in 
1889. 

BRACTON, HENRY DE (d. 1268), English judge and writer 
on English law. His real name was Bratton, and in all prob- 
ability he derived it either from Bratton Fleming or from 
Bratton Clovelly, both of them villages in Devonshire. It is 
only after his death that his name appears as " Bracton." He 
seems to have entered the king's service as a clerk under the 
patronage of William Raleigh, who after long service as a royal 
justice died bishop of Winchester in 1250. Bracton begins to 
appear as a justice in 1245, and from 1248 until his death in 1268 
he was steadily employed as a justice of assize in the south- 
western counties, especially Somerset, Devon and Cornwall. 
During the earlier part of this period he was also sitting as a 
judge in the king's central court, and was there hearing those 
pleas which "followed the king"; in other words, he was a 
member of that section of the central tribunal which was soon 
to be distinguished as the king's bench. From this position 
he retired or was dismissed in or about the year 1257, shortly 
before the meeting of the Mad Parliament at Oxford in 1258. 
Whether his disappearance is to be connected with the political 
events of this turbulent time is uncertain. He continued to take 
the assizes in the south-west, and in 1267 he was a member of 
a commission of prelates, barons and judges appointed to hear 
the complaints of the disinherited partisans of Simon de Montf ort. 
In 1259 he became rector of Combe-in-Teignhead, in 1261 rector 
of Barnstaple, in 1264 archdeacon of Barnstaple, and, having 
resigned the /archdeaconry, chancellor of Exeter cathedral; 
he also held a prebend in the collegiate church at Bosham. 
Already in 1245 he enjoyed a dispensation enabling him to 
hold three ecclesiastical benefices. He died in 1268 and was 
buried in the nave of Exeter cathedral, and a chantry for his 
soul was endowed out of the revenues of the manor of Thorverton. 

His fame is due to a treatise on the laws and customs of 
England which is sufficiently described elsewhere (see English 
Law) . The main part of it seems to have been compiled between 
1250 and 1256; but apparently it is an unfinished work. This 
may be due to the fact that when he ceased to be a member 
ef the king's central court Bracton was ordered to surrender 
certain judicial records which he had been using as raw material. 
Even though it be unfinished his book is incomparably the best 
work produced by any English lawyer in the middle ages. 

The treatise was published in 1569 by Richard Tottel. This 
text was reprinted in 1640. An edition (1878-1883) with English 



translation was included in the Rolls Series. Manuscript copies are 
numerous, and a critical edition is a desideratum. See Bracton's 
Note-Book (ed. Maitland, 1887); Bracton and Abo (Selden Society, 
1895). (F. W. M.) 

BRADAWL (from " brad," a flat nail, and " awl," a piercing 
tool), a small tool used for boring holes (see Tool). 

BRADDOCK, EDWARD (i69s?-i7ss), British general, was 
born in Perthshire, Scotland, about 1695. He was the son of 
Major-General Edward Braddock (d. 1725), and joined the 
Coldstream Guards in 17 10. In 1747 as a lieutenant-colonel 
he served under the prince of Orange in Holland during the siege 
of Bergen-op-Zoom. In 1753 he was given the colonelcy of the 
14th foot, and in 1754 he became a major-general. Being ap- 
pointed shortly afterwards to command against the French in 
America, he landed in Virginia in February 1755. After some 
months of preparation, in which he was hampered by adminis- 
trative confusion and want of resources, he took the field with 
a picked column, in which George Washington served as a 
volunteer officer, intended to attack Fort Duquesne (Pittsburg, 
Pa.). The column crossed the Monongahela river on the 9th of 
July and almost immediately afterwards fell into an ambuscade 
of French and Indians. The troops were completely surprised 
and routed, and Braddock, rallying his men time after time, 
fell at last mortally wounded. He was carried off the field 
with difficulty, and died on the 13th. He was buried at Great 
Meadows, where the remnant of the column halted on its retreat 
to reorganize. (See Seven Years' War.) 

BRADDOCK, a borough of Allegheny county, Pennsylvania, 
U.S.A., on the Monongahela river, 10 m. S.E. of Pittsburg. 
Pop. (1890) 8561; (1900) 15,654, of whom 5111 were foreign- 
born; (1910 census) 19,357. Braddock is served by the Penn- 
sylvania, the Baltimore & Ohio, and the Pittsburg & Lake 
Erie railways. Its chief industry is the manufacture of steel — 
especially steel rails; among its other manufactures are pig- 
iron, wire rods, wire nails, wire bale ties, lead pipe, brass and 
electric signs, cement and plaster. In 1905 the value of the 
borough's factory products was $4,199,079. Braddock has a 
Carnegie library. Kennywood Park, near by, is a popular 
resort. The municipality owns and operates the water-works. 
Braddock was named in honour of the English general Edward 
Braddock, who in 1755 met defeat and death near the site of 
the present borough at the hands of a force of French and 
Indians. The borough was first settled at the close of the 18th 
century, and was incorporated in 1867. 

BRADDON, MARY ELIZABETH (1837- ), English 
novelist, daughter of Henry Braddon, solicitor, of Skirdon 
Lodge, Cornwall, and sister of Sir Edward Braddon, prime 
minister of Tasmania, was born in London in 1837. She began at 
an early age to contribute to periodicals, and in 1861 produced 
her first novel, The Trail of the Serpent. In the same year 
appeared Garibaldi, accompanied by Olivia, and other poems, 
chiefly narrative, a volume of extremely spirited verse, deserving 
more notice than it has received. In 1862 her reputation as a 
novelist was made by a favourable review in The Times cf Lady 
Audley's Secret. Aurora Floyd, a novel with a strong affinity 
to Madame Bovary, followed, and achieved equal success. Its 
immediate successors, Eleanor's Victory, John Marchmont's 
Legacy, Henry Dunbar, remain with her former works the best- 
known of her novels, but all her numerous books have found a 
large and appreciative public. They give, indeed, the great body 
of readers of fiction exactly what they require; melodramatic 
in plot and character, conventional in their views of life, they are 
yet distinguished by constructive skill and opulence of invention. 
For a considerable time Miss Braddon conducted Belgravia, 
in which several of her novels appeared. In 1874 she married 
Mr John Maxwell, publisher, her son, W. B. Maxwell, after- 
wards becoming known as a clever novelist and newspaper corre- 
spondent. 

BRADFORD, JOHN (i5io?-isss), English Protestant martyr, 
was born at Manchester in the early part of the reign of Henry 
VIII., and educated at the local grammar school. Being a good 
penman and accountant, he became secretary to Sir John 



BRADFORD, WILLIAM— BRADFORD 



37° 

Harrington, paymaster of the English forces in France. Brad- 
ford at this time was gay and thoughtless, and to support 
his extravagance he seems to have appropriated some of the 
money entrusted to him; but he afterwards made full restitution. 
In April 1547 he took chambers in the Inner Temple, and began 
to study law; but finding divinity more congenial, he removed, 
in the following year, to St Catharine's Hall, Cambridge, where 
he studied with such assiduity that in little more than a year 
he was admitted by special grace to the degree of master of arts, 
and was soon after made fellow of Pembroke Hall, the fellowship 
being " worth seven pound a year." One of his pupils was John 
Whitgift. Bishop Ridley, who in 1550 was translated to the 
see of London, sent for him and appointed him his chaplain. 
In 1553 he was also made chaplain to Edward VI., and became 
one of the ...est popular preachers in the kingdom, earning high 
praise from John Knox. Soon after the accession of Mary he 
was arrested on a charge of sedition, and confined in the Tower 
and the king's bench prison for a year and a half. During this 
time he wrote several epistles which were dispersed in various 
parts of the kingdom. He was at last brought to trial (January 
1554/5) before the court in which Bishop Gardiner sat as 
chief, and, refusing to retract his principles, was condemned 
as a heretic and burnt, with John Leaf, in Smithfield on the 1st 

of July 1555- 

His writings, which consist chiefly of sermons, meditations, tracts, 
letters and prayers, were edited by A. Townsend for the Parker 
Society (2 vols. 8vo, Cambridge, 1848-1853). 

BRADFORD, WILLIAM (1590-1657), American colonial 
governor and historian, was born in Austerfield, Yorkshire, 
England, probably in March 1590. He became somewhat 
estranged from his family, which was one of considerable im- 
portance in the locality, when in early youth he joined the 
Puritan sect known as Separatists, and united in membership 
with the congregation at Scrooby. He prepared in 1607, with 
other members of the church, to migrate to Holland, but the 
plan was discovered and several of the leaders, among them 
Bradford, were imprisoned. In the year following, however, 
he joined the English colony at Amsterdam, where he learned 
the trade of silk weaving. He subsequently sold his Yorkshire 
property and embarked in business on his own account at Leiden, 
where the English refugees had removed. He became an active 
advocate of the proposed emigration to America, was one of the 
party that sailed in the " Mayflower " in September 1620, and 
was one of the signers of the compact on shipboard in Cape 
Cod Bay. After the death of Governor John Carver in April 
162 1, Bradford was elected governor of Plymouth Colony, and 
served as such, with the exception of five years (1633,1634, 
1636, 1638 and 1644) until shortly before his death. After 1624, 
at Bradford's suggestion, a board of five and later seven assist- 
ants was chosen annually to share the executive responsibility. 
Bradford's rule was firm and judicious, and to his guidance more 
than to that of any other man the prosperity of the Plymouth 
Colony was due. His tact and kindness in dealing with the 
Indians helped to relieve the colony from the conflicts with 
which almost every other settlement was afflicted. In 1630 
the council for New England granted to " William Bradford, 
his heires, associatts, and assignes," a new patent enlarging the 
original grant of territory made to the Plymouth settlers. This 
patent Bradford in the name of the trustees made over to the 
body corporate of the colony in 1641. Bradford died in Plymouth 
on the 9th of May 1657. He was the author of a very important 
historical work, the History of Plimouth Plantation (until 1646), 
first published in the Proceedings of the Massachusetts Historical 
Society for 1856, and later by the state of Massachusetts (Boston, 
1898), and in facsimile, with an introduction by John A. Doyle, 
in 1896. The manuscript disappeared from Boston during the 
War of Independence, was discovered in the Fulham library, 
London, in 1855, and was returned by the bishop of London to the 
state of Massachusetts in 1897. This work has been of inestim- 
able value to writers on the history of the Pilgrims, and was 
freely used, in manuscript, by Morton, Hubbard, Mather, Prince 
and Hutchinson. Bradford was also undoubtedly part author, 



with Edward Winslow, of the " Diary of Occurrences " published 
in Mourts' Relation, edited by Dr Ii. M. Dexter (Boston, 1865). 
He also wrote a series of Dialogues, on church government, 
published in the Massachusetts Historical Society's Publications 
(1870.) 

For Bradford's ancestry and early life see Joseph Hunter, Collec- 
tions concerning the Founders of New Plymouth, in Massachusetts 
Historical Society's Collections (Boston, 1852): also the quaint 
sketch in Cotton Mather's Magnolia (London, 1702), and a chapter 
in Williston Walker's Ten New England Leaders (New York, 1901). 

BRADFORD, WILLIAM (1663-1752), American colonial ' 
printer, was born in Leicestershire, England, on the 20th of May 
1663. He learned the printer's trade in London with Andrew 
Sowle, and in 1682 emigrated with William Penn to Pennsylvania, 
where in 1685 he introduced the "art and mystery" of printing 
into the Middle Colonies. His first imprint was an almanac, 
Kalendarium Pennsilvaniense or America's Messenger (1685). 
At the outset he was ordered " not to print anything but what 
shall have lycence from ye council," and in 1692, the colony then 
being torn by schism, he issued a tract for the minority sect of 
Friends, whereupon his press was seized and he was arrested. 
He was released, however, and his press was restored on his 
appeal to Governor Benjamin Fletcher. In 1690, with William 
Rittenhouse (1644-1708) and others, he established in Roxboro, 
Pennsylvania, now a part of Philadelphia, the first paper mill 
in America. In the spring of 1693 he removed to New York, 
where he was appointed royal printer for the colony, a position 
which he held for more than fifty years; and on the 8th of 
November 1725 he issued the first number of the New York 
Gazette, the first paper established in New York and from 1725 
to 1733 the only paper in the colony. Bradford died in New 
York on the 23rd of May 1752. 

His son, Andrew Sowle Bradford (1686-1742), removed 
from New York to Philadelphia in 1712, and there on the 22nd 
of December 1719 issued the first number of the American 
Weekly Mercury, the first newspaper in the Middle Colonies. 
Benjamin Franklin, for a time a compositor in the office, char- 
acterized the paper as " a paltry thing, in no way interesting "; 
but it was continued for many years and was edited by Bradford 
until his death. 

The latter's nephew, William Bradford (1722-1791), 
established in December 1742 the Pennsylvania Journal and 
Weekly Advertiser, which was for sixty years under his control 
or that of his son, and which in 1 7 74- 1 7 7 s bore the oft-reproduced 
device of a divided serpent with the motto " Unite or Die." 
He served in the War of American Independence, rising to the 
rank of colonel. ■ His son, William Bradford (i7SS- I 795), 
also served in the War of Independence, and afterwards was 
attorney-general of Pennsylvania (1791), a judge of the supreme 
court of the state, and in 1 794-1 795 attorney-general of the 
United States. 

BRADFORD, WILLIAM (1827-1892), American marine 
painter, was born at New Bedford, Massachusetts. He was a 
Quaker, and was self-taught, painting the ships and the marine 
views he saw along the coast of Massachusetts, Labrador and 
Nova Scotia; he went on several Arctic expeditions with Dr 
Hayes, and was the first American painter to portray the frozen 
regions of the north. His pictures attracted much attention by 
reason of their novelty and gorgeous colour effects. His " Steamer 
' Panther ' in Melville Bay, under the Light of the Midnight 
Sun " was exhibited at the Royal Academy in London in 1875. 
Bradford was 1 a member of the National Academy of Design, 
New York, and died in that city on the 25th of April 1892. His 
style was somewhat influenced by Albert van Beest, who worked 
with Bradford at Fairhaven for a time; but Bradford is minute 
and observant of detail where van Beest's aim is general effect. 

BRADFORD, a city, and municipal, county and parliamentary 
borough, in the West Riding of Yorkshire, England, 192 m. 
N.N.W. of London and 8 m. W. of Leeds. Pop. (1891) 265,728; 
(1901) 279,767. It is served by the Midland and the North 
Eastern railways (Midland station), and by the Great Northern 
and the Lancashire & Yorkshire railways (Exchange station). 
It lies in a small valley opening southward from that of the 



BRADFORD 



371 



Aire, and extends up the hills on either side. Most of the 
principal streets radiate from a centre between the Midland and 
Exchange stations and the town hall. This last is a handsome 
building, opened in 1873, surmounted by a bell tower. The 
exterior is ornamented with statues of English monarchs. The 
council-chamber contains excellent wood-carving. The extension 
of the building was undertaken in 1905. The parish church of 
St Peter is Perpendicular, dating from 1485, and occupies the 
site of a Norman church. Its most noteworthy feature is the 
fine original roof of oak. There was no other church in the town 
until 181 5, but modern churches and chapels are numerous. 
Among educational institutions, the grammar school existed 
in the 16th century, and in 1663 received a charter of incorpora- 
tion from Charles II. It occupies a building erected in 1873, 
and is largely endowed, possessing several scholarships founded 
by prominent citizens. The technical college, under the corpora- 
tion since 1899, was opened in 1882,. A mechanics' institute 
was founded in 1832, and in 1871 the handsome mechanics' 
hall, close to the town hall, was opened. Other establishments 
are the Airedale College of students for the Independent ministry, 
and the United Independent College (1888). The general 
infirmary is the principal of numerous charitable institutions. 
The most noteworthy public buildings beside the town hall are 
St George's hall (1853), used for concerts and public meetings, 
the exchange (1867), extensive market buildings, and two 
court-houses. The Cartwright memorial hall, principally the 
gift of Lord Masham, opened in 1904 and containing an art 
gallery and museum, commemorates Dr Edmund Cartwright 
(1743-1823) as the inventor of the power-loom and the combing- 
machine. The hall stands in Lister Park, and was opened 
immediately before, and used in connexion with, the industrial 
exhibition held here in 1904. The Temperance hall is of interest 
inasmuch as the first hall of this character in England was 
erected at Bradford in 1837. Some of the great warehouses 
are of considerable architectural merit. Statues commemorate 
several of those who have been foremost in the development of 
the city, such as Sir Titus Salt, Mr S. C. Lister (Lord Masham), 
and W. E. Forster. Of several parks the largest are Lister, Peel, 
and Bowling parks, each exceeding fifty acres. In the last is an 
ancient and picturesque mansion, which formerly belonged to 
the Bowling or Boiling family. A large acreage of high-lying 
moorland near the city is maintained by the corporation as a 
public recreation ground. 

As a commercial centre Bradford is advantageously placed 
with regard to both railway communication and connexion 
with the Humber and with Liverpool by canal, and through 
the presence in its immediate vicinity of valuable deposits 
of coal and iron. The principal textile manufactures in order 
of importance are worsted, employing some 36,000 hands, 
females considerably outnumbering males; woollens, employing 
some 8000, silk and cotton. The corporation maintains a con- 
ditioning-hall for testing textile materials. A new hall was 
opened in 1902. Engineering and iron works (as at Bowling and 
Low Moor) are extensive; and the freestone of the neighbourhood 
is largely quarried, and in Bradford itself its use is general for 
building. It blackens easily under the influence of smoke, and 
the town has consequently a somewhat gloomy appearance. 
The trade of Bradford, according to an official estimate, advanced 
between 1836 and 1884 from a total of five to at least thirty-five 
millions sterling, and from not more than six to at least fifty 
staple articles. The annual turn-over in the staple trade is 
estimated at about one hundred millions sterling. 

Bradford was created a city in 1897. The parliamentary 
borough returned two members from 1832 until 1885, when it 
was divided into three divisions, each returning one member. 
The county borough was created in 1888. Its boundaries in- 
clude the suburbs, formerly separate urban districts, of Eccles- 
hill, Idle and others. The corporation consists of a lord mayor 
(this dignity was conferred in 1907), 21 aldermen, and 63 
councillors. One feature of municipal activity in Bradford 
deserves special notice — there is a municipal railway, opened 
is 1907, extending from Pateley Bridge to Lofthouse (6 m.) 



and serving the Nidd valley, the district from which the main 
water-supply of the city is obtained. Area of the city, 22,879 
acres. 

Bradford, which is mentioned as having belonged before 
1066, with several other manors in Yorkshire, to one Gamel, 
appears to have been almost destroyed during the conquest 
of the north of England and was still waste in 1086. By that 
time it had been granted to Ilbert de Lacy, in whose family it 
continued until 13 n. The inquisition taken after the death 
of Henry de Lacy, earl of Lincoln, in that year gives several 
interesting facts about the manor; the earl had there a hall or 
manor-house, a fulling mill, a market every Sunday, and a fair 
on the feast of St Andrew. There were also certain burgesses 
holding twenty-eight burgages. Alice, only daughter and 
heiress of Henry de Lacy, married Thomas Plantagenet, earl of 
Lancaster, and on the attainder of her husband she and Joan, 
widow of Henry, were obliged to release their rights in the manor 
to the king. The earl of Lancaster's attainder being reversed 
in 1327, Bradford, with his other property, was restored to his 
brother and heir, Henry Plantagenet, but again passed to the 
crown on the accession of Henry IV., through the marriage of 
John of Gaunt with Blanche, one of the daughters and heirs of 
Henry Plantagenet. Bradford was evidently a borough by pre-r 
scription and was not incorporated until 1847. Previous to that 
date the chief officer in the town had been the chief constable, who 
was appointed annually at the court leet of the manor. Before 
the 19th century Bradford was never represented in parliament, 
but in 1832 it was created a parliamentary borough returning 
two members. A weekly market on Thursdays was granted 
to Edward de Lacy in 12 51 and confirmed in 1294 to Henry de 
Lacy, earl of Lincoln, with the additional grant of a fair on the eve 
and day of St Peter ad Vincula and three days following. In 
1 48 1 Edward IV. granted to certain feoffees in whom he had 
vested his manor of Bradford a market on Thursday every 
week and two yearly fairs, one on the feast of the De- 
position of St William of York and two days preceding, the 
other on the feast of St Peter in Cathedra and two days 
preceding. 

From the mention of a fulling mill in 13 n it is possible that 
woollen manufacture had been begun at that time. By the reign 
of Henry VIII. it had become an important industry and added 
much to the status of the town. Towards the end of the 17 th 
and beginning of the 18th century the woollen trade decreased 
and worsted manufacture began to take its place. Leland 
in his Itinerary says that Bradford is "a praty quik Market 
Toune. It standith much by clothing." In 1773 a piece hall 
was erected and for many years served as a market-place for 
the manufacturers and merchants of the district. On the 
introduction of steam-power and machinery the worsted trade 
advanced with great rapidity. The first mill in Bradford was 
built in 1798; there were 20 mills in the town in 1820, 34 in 1833, 
and 70 in 1841; and at the present time there are over 300, of 
much greater magnitude than the earlier factories. In 1836 Mr 
(afterwards Sir) Titus Salt developed the alpaca manufacture 
in the town; mohair was shortly afterwards introduced; and 
the great works at Saltaire were opened (see Shipley). Later, 
Mr S. C. Lister (Lord Masham) introduced the silk and velvet 
manufacture, having invented a process of manipulating silk 
waste, whereby what was previously treated as refuse is made 
into goods that will compete with those manufactured from 
the perfect cocoon. 

See John James, History of Bradford (1844, new and enlarged 
ed., 1866); A. Holroyd, Collectanea Bradfordiana (1873); Victoria 
County History — Yorkshire. 

BRADFORD, a city of McKean county, Pennsylvania, U.S.A., 
near the N. border of the state, about 80 m. E. by S. of Erie. 
Pop. (1890) 10,514; (1900) 15,029, of whom 2211 were foreign- 
born; (1910 census) ^,544. It is served by the Pennsylvania,, 
the Erie, and the Buffalo, Rochester & Pittsburg railways, and 
is connected with Olean, New York, by an electric line. Bradford 
is situated 1427 ft. above sea-level in the valley of the Tuna, 
and is shut in by hills on either side. Since 1876 it has been on^ 



372 



BRADFORD CLAY— BRADLAUGH 



of the most important oil centres of the state, and it has been 
connected by pipe lines with cities along the Atlantic coast; 
petroleum refining is an important industry. Among the city's 
manufactures are boilers, machines, glass, chemicals, terra 
cotta, brick, iron pipes and couplings, gas engines, cutlery and 
silk. The place was first settled about 1827; in 1838 it was laid 
out as a town and named Littleton; in 1858 the present name, 
in honour of William Bradford (1755-1795), was substituted; 
and Bradford was incorporated as a borough in 1873, and was 
chartered as a city in 1879. Kendall borough was annexed 
to Bradford in 1893. 

BRADFORD CLAY, in geology, a thin, rather inconstant bed 
of clay or marl situated in England at the base of the Forest 
Marble, the two together constituting the Bradfordian group 
in the Bathonian series of Jurassic rocks. The term " Bradford 
Clay " appears to have been first used by J. de. C. Sowerby in 
1823 (Mineral Conchology, vol. v.) as an alternative for W. Smith's 
" Clay on Upper Oolite." The clay came into notice late in the 
1 8th century on account of the local abundance of the crinoid 
Apiocrinus Parkinsoni. It takes its name from Bradford-on- 
Avon in Wiltshire, whence it is traceable southward to the 
Dorset coast and northward towards Cirencester. It may be 
regarded as a local phase of the basement beds of the Forest 
Marble, from which it cannot be separated upon either strati- 
graphical or palaeontological grounds. It is seldom more than 
10 ft. thick, and it contains as a rule a few irregular layers of 
limestone and calcareous sandstone. The lowest layer is often 
highly fossiliferous; some of the common forms being Area 
minuta, Ostrea gregaria, Waldheimia digona, Terebratula coarctata, 
Cidaris bradfordensis, &c. 

See H. B. Woodward, " Jurassic Rocks of Britain," Mem. Geol. 
Survey, vol. iv. (1904). 

BRADFORD-ON-AVON, a market town in the Westbury 
parliamentary division of Wiltshire, England, on the rivers 
Avon and Kennet, and the Kennet & Avon Canal, 98 m. W. 
by S. of London by the Great Western railway. Pop. of urban 
district (1901) 4514. Its houses, all built of grey stone, rise in 
picturesque disorder up the steep sides of the Avon valley, 
here crossed by an ancient bridge of nine arches, with a chapel 
in the centre. Among many places of worship may be mentioned 
the restored parish church of Holy Trinity, which dates from the 
12 th century and contains some interesting monuments and 
brasses; and the Perpendicular Hermitage or Tory chapel, 
with a 15th or 16th century chantry-house. But most notable 
is the Saxon church of St Lawrence, the foundation of which is 
generally attributed, according to William of Malmesbury (n 2 5), 
to St Aldhelm, early in the 8th century. It consists of a chancel, 
nave and porch, in such unchanged condition that E. A. Freeman 
considered it " the most perfect surviving church of its kind 
in England, if not in Europe." It has more lately, however, 
been held that the present building is not Aldhelm's, but a 
restoration, dating from about 975, and attributable to the 
influence of Dunstan, archbishop of Canterbury. Kingston 
House, long the seat of the dukes of Kingston, is a beautiful 
example of early 17th-century domestic architecture. The local 
industries include the manufacture of rubber goods, brewing, 
quarrying and iron-founding. 

Bradford (Bradauford, Bradeford) was the site of a battle in 652 
between Kenwal and his kinsman Cuthred. A monastery existed 
here in the 8th century, of which St Aldhelm was abbot at the time 
of his being made bishop of Sherborne in A. D. 705. In 1001 ^Ethelred 
gave this monastery and the town of Bradford to the nunnery of 
Shaftesbury, in order that the nuns might have a safe refuge against 
the insults of the Danes. No mention of the monastery occurs after 
the Conquest, but the nunnery of Shaftesbury retained the lordship 
of the manor until the dissolution in the reign of Henry VIII. 
In a synod held here in 954, Dunstan was elected bishop of Win- 
chester. Bradford appears as a borough in the Domesday survey, 
and is there assessed at 42 hides. No charter of incorporation is 
recorded, however, and after returning two members to the parlia- 
ment of 1295 the town does not appear to have enjoyed any of the 
privileges of a borough. The market is of ancient origin, and was 
formerly held on Monday; in the survey the tolls are assessed at 
£5 shillings. Bradford was at one time the centre of the clothing 
industry in the west of England, and was especially famous for its 



broadcloths and mixtures, the waters of the Avon being especially 
favourable to the production of good colours and superior dyes. 
The industry declined in the 1 8th century, and in 1740 we find the 
woollen merchants of Bradford petitioning for an act of parliament 
to improve their trade and so re-establish their credit in foreign 
markets. 

BRADLAUGH, CHARLES (1833-1891), English free-thinker 
and politician, was born at Hoxton, London, on the 26th of 
September 1833. His father was a poor solicitor's clerk, who also 
had a small business as a law stationer, and his mother had been 
a nursemaid. At twelve years old he became office-boy to his 
father's employer, and at fourteen wharf-clerk and cashier to 
a coal merchant in the City Road. He had been baptized and 
brought up in the Church of England, but he now came into con- 
tact with a group of free-thinkers who were disciples of Richard 
Carlile. He was hastily labelled an " atheist," and was turned 
out of his situation. Thus driven into the arms of the secularists, 
he managed to earn a living by odd jobs, and became further 
immersed in the study of free-thought. At the end of 1850 he 
enlisted as a soldier, but 01,1853 was bought out with money pro- 
vided by his mother. He then found employment as a lawyer's 
clerk, and gradually became known as a free-thought lecturer, 
under the name of " Iconoclast." From i860 he conducted the 
National Reformer for several years, and displayed much resource 
in legal defence when the paper was prosecuted by the govern- 
ment on account of its alleged blasphemy and sedition in 1868- 
1869. Bradlaugh became notorious as a leading "infidel," 
and was supported by the sympathy of those who were enthusi- 
asts at that time for liberty of speech and thought. He was a 
constant figure in the law courts; and his competence to take 
the oath was continually being called in question, while his 
atheism and republican opinions were adduced as reasons why 
no jury should give damages for attacks on his character. In 
1874 he became acquainted with Mrs Annie Besant (b. 1847), 
who afterwards became famous for her gifts as a lecturer on 
socialism and theosophy. She began by writing for the National 
Reformer and soon became co-editor. In 1876 the Bristol 
publisher of an American pamphlet on the population question, 
called Fruits of Philosophy, was indicted for selling a work full 
of indecent physiological details, and, pleading guilty, was lightly 
sentenced; but Bradlaugh and Mrs Besant took the matter up, 
in order to vindicate their ideas of liberty, and aggressively 
republished and ' circulated the pamphlet. The prosecution 
which resulted created considerable scandal. They were con- 
victed and sentenced to a heavy fine and imprisonment, but the 
sentence was stayed and the indictment ultimately quashed on 
a technical point. The affair, however, had several side issues 
in the courts- and led to much prejudice against the defendants, 
the distinction being ignored between a protest against the sup- 
pression of opinion and the championship of the particular 
opinions in question. Mrs Besant's close alliance with Bradlaugh 
eventually terminated in 1886, when she drifted from secularism, 
first into socialistic and labour agitation and then into theosophy 
as a pupil of Mme Blavatsky. Bradlaugh himself took up 
politics with increasing fervour. He had been unsuccessful in 
standing for Northampton in 1868, but in 1880 he was returned 
by that constituency to parliament as an advanced Radical. 
A long and sensational parliamentary struggle now began. 
He claimed to be allowed to affirm under the Parliamentary 
Oaths Act, and the rejection of this pretension, and the refusal 
to allow him to take the oath on his professing his willingness 
to do so, terminated in Bradlaugh's victory in 1886. But this 
result was not obtained without protracted scenes in the House, 
in which Lord Randolph Churchill took a leading part. When the 
long struggle was over, the public had gradually got used to 
Bradlaugh, and his transparent honesty and courageous contempt 
for mere popularity gained him increasing respect. Experience 
of public life in the House of Commons appeared to give him a 
more balanced view of things; and before he died, on the 30th 
of January 1891, the progress of events was such that it was 
beginning to be said of him that he was in a fair way to end as 
a Conservative. Hard, arrogant and dogmatic, with a powerful 
physique and a real gift for popular oratory, he was a natural 



BRADLEY— BRADSHAW 



373 



leader in causes which had society against them, but his sincerity 
was as unquestionable as his combativeness. 

His Life was written, from a sympathetic point of view, with 
much interesting detail as to the history of secularism, by his 
daughter, Mrs Bradlaugh Bonner, and J. M. Robertson (1894). 

BRADLEY, GEORGE GRANVILLE (1821-1903), English 
divine and scholar, was born on the nth of December 1821, his 
father, Charles Bradley, being at that time vicar of Glasbury, 
Brecon. He was educated at Rugby under Thomas Arnold, 
and at University College, Oxford, of which he became a fellow 
in 1844. He was an assistant master at Rugby from 1846 to 
1858, when he succeeded G. E. L. Cotton as headmaster at 
Marlborough. In 1870 he was elected master of his old college 
at Oxford, and in August 1881 he was made dean of Westminster 
in succession to A. P. Stanley, whose pupil and intimate friend 
he had been, and whose biographer he became. Besides his 
Recollections of A. P. Stanley (1883) and Life of Dean Stanley 
(1892), he published Aids to writing Latin Prose Composition and 
Lectures on Job (1884) and Ecclesiastes (1885). He took part in 
the coronation of Edward VII., resigned the deanery in 1902, 
and died on the 13 th of March 1903. 

Dean Bradley's family produced various other members 
distinguished in literature. His half-brother, Andrew Cecil 
Bradley (b. 1851), fellow of Balliol, Oxford, became professor 
of modern literature and history (1881) at University College, 
Liverpool, and in 1889 regius professor of English language and 
literature at Glasgow University; and he was professor of 
poetry at Oxford (1901-1906). Of Dean Bradley's own children 
the most distinguished in literature were his son, Arthur 
Granville Bradley (b. 1850), author of various historical and 
topographical works; and especially his daughter, Mrs Margaret 
Louisa Woods (b. 1856), wife of the Rev. Henry George Woods, 
president of Trinity, Oxford (1887-1897), and master of the 
Temple (1904), London. Mrs Woods became well known for 
her accomplished verse (Lyrics and Ballads, 1889), largely 
influenced by Robert Bridges, and for her novels, of which her 
Village Tragedy (1887) was the earliest and strongest. 

BRADLEY, JAMES (1693-1762), English astronomer, was 
born at Sherborne in Gloucestershire in March 1693. He 
entered Balliol College, Oxford, on the 15th of March 1711, and 
took degrees of B.A. and M.A. in 1714 and 1717 respectively. 
His early observations were made at the rectory of Wanstead 
in Essex, under the tutelage of his uncle, the Rev. James Pound 
(1669-1724), himself a skilled astronomer, and he was elected a 
fellow of the Royal Society on the 6th of November 17 18. He 
took orders on his presentation to the vicarage of Bridstow 
in the following year, and a small sinecure living in Wales 
was besides procured for him by his friend Samuel Molyneux 
(1689-1728). He, however, resigned his ecclesiastical preferments 
in 172 1, on his appointment to the Savilian professorship of 
astronomy at Oxford, while as reader on experimental philosophy 
(1729-1760) he delivered 79 courses of lectures in the Ashmolean 
museum. His memorable discovery of the aberration of light 
(see Aberration) was communicated to the Royal Society in 
January 1729 (Phil. Trans, xxxv. 637). The observations 
upon which it was founded were made at Molyneux's house on 
Kew Green. He refrained from announcing the supplementary 
detection of nutation (q.v.) until the 14th of February 1748 
(Phil. Trans, xlv. 1), when he had tested its reality by minute 
observations during an entire revolution (18 -6 years) of the 
moon's nodes. He had meantime (in 1742) been appointed to 
succeed Edmund Halley as astronomer royal; his enhanced 
reputation enabled him to apply successfully for an instrumental 
outfit at a cost of £1000; and with an 8-foot quadrant completed 
for him in 1750 by John Bird (1709-17 76), he accumulated at 
Greenwich in ten years materials of inestimable value for the 
reform of astronomy. A crown pension of £250 a year was 
conferred upon him in 1752. He retired in broken health, nine 
years later, to Chalford in Gloucestershire, and there died on 
the 13th of July 1762. The printing of his observations was 
delayed by disputes about their ownership; but they were 
finally issued from the Clarendon Press, Oxford, in two folio 



volumes (1798, 1805). The insight and industry of F. W. Bessel 
were, however, needed for the development of their fundamental 
importance. 

Rigaud's Memoir prefixed to Miscellaneous Works and Corre- 
spondence of James Bradley, D.D. (Oxford, 1832), is practically 
exhaustive. Other sources of information are: New and General 
Biographical Dictionary, xii. 54 (1767); Biog. Brit. (Kippis) ; 
Fouchy's " Eloge," Paris Memoirs (1762), p. 231 (Histoire); 
Delambre's Hist, de I'astronomie au i8 me siecle, p. 413. 

BRADSHAW, GEORGE (1801-1853), English printer and 
publisher, was born at Windsor Bridge, Pendleton, Lancashire, 
on the 29th of July 1801. On leaving school he was apprenticed 
to an engraver at Manchester, eventually setting up on his own 
account in that city as an engraver and printer — principally of 
maps. His name was already known as the publisher of Brad- 
skaw's Maps of Inland Navigation, when in 1839, soon after the 
introduction of railways, he published, at sixpence, Bradshaw's 
Railway Time Tables, the title being changed in 1840 to Brad- 
shaw's Railway Companion, and the price raised to one shilling. 
A new volume was issued at occasional intervals, a supplementary 
monthly time-sheet serving to keep the book up to date. In 
December 1841, acting on a suggestion made by his London 
agent, Mr W. J. Adams, Bradshaw reduced the price of his 
time-tables to the original sixpence, and began to issue them 
monthly under the title Bradshaw's Monthly Railway Guide. 
In June 1847 was issued the first number of Bradshaw's Con- 
tinental Railway Guide, giving the time-tables of the Continental 
railways just as Bradshaw's Monthly Railway Guide gave the 
time-tables of the railways of the United Kingdom. Bradshaw, 
who was a well-known member of the Society of Friends, and 
gave considerable time to philanthropic work, died in 1853. 

BRADSHAW, HENRY (c. 1450-1513), English poet, was born 
at Chester. In his boyhood he was received into the Benedictine 
monastery of St Werburgh, and after studying with other novices 
of his order at Gloucester (afterwards Worcester) College, Oxford, 
he returned to his monastery at Chester. He wrote a Latin 
treatise De anliquitate et magnificentia Urbis Cestriae, which is 
lost, and a life of the patron saint of his monastery in English 
seven-lined stanza. This work was completed in the year of its 
author's death, 1513, mentioned in " A balade to the auctour " 
printed at the close of the work. A second ballad describes him 
as " Harry Braddeshaa, of Chestre abbey monke." Bradshaw 
disclaims the merit of originality and quotes the authorities 
from which he translates — Bede, William of Malmesbury, 
Giraldus Cambrensis, Alfred of Beverley, Henry of Huntingdon, 
Ranulph Higden, and especially the " Passionary " or life of the 
saint preserved in the monastery. The poem, therefore, which 
is defined by its editor, Dr Carl Horstmann, as a "legendary epic," 
is rather a compilation than a translation. It contains a good deal 
of history beside the actual life of the saint. St Werburgh was 
the daughter of Wulfere, king of Mercia, and Bradshaw gives a 
description of the kingdom of Mercia, with a full account of its 
royal house. He relates the history of St Ermenilde and St 
Sexburge, mother and grandmother of Werburgh, who were 
successively abbesses of Ely. He does not neglect the miraculous 
elements of the story, but he is more attracted by historical 
fact than legend, and the second book narrates the Danish in- 
vasion of 875, and describes the history and antiquities of Chester, 
from its foundation by the legendary giant Leon Gaur, from which 
he derives the British name of Caerleon, down to the great 
fire which devastated the city in 1180, but was suddenly ex- 
tinguished when the shrine of St Werburgh was carried in pro- 
cession through the streets. The Holy Lyfe and History of 
saynt Werburge very frutefull for all Christen people to rede (printed 
by Richard Pynson, 1521) has been very variously estimated. 
Thomas Warton, who deals with Bradshaw at some length, 1 
quotes as the most splendid passage of the poem the description 
of the feast preceding Werburgh's entry into the religious life. 
He considered Bradshaw's versification " infinitely inferior to 
Lydgate's worst manner." Dr Horstmann, on the other hand, 
finds in the poem " original genius, of a truly epic tone, with a 

1 History of English Poetry (ed. W. C. Hazlitt, 1871; iii. op. 140- 
H9)- 



374- 



BRADSHAW— BRADWARDINE 



native simplicity of feeling which sometimes reminds the reader 
of Homer." Most readers will probably adopt a view between 
these extremes. Bradshaw expresses the humblest opinion of 
his own abilities, and he certainly had no delicate ear for rhythm. 
His sincerity is abundantly evident, and his piety is admitted 
even by John Bale, 1 hostile as he was to monkish writers. 
W. Herbert 2 thought that a Lyfe of Saynt Radegunde, also 
printed by Pynson, was certainly by Bradshaw. The only 
extant copy is in the Britwell library. 

Pynson's edition of the Holy Lyfe is very rare, only five copies 
being known. A reprint copying the original type was edited by 
Mr, Edward Hawkins for the Chetham Society in 1848, and by 
Dr Carl Hortsmann for the Early English Text Society in 1887. 

BRADSHAW, HENRY (1831-1886), British scholar and 
librarian, was born in London on the 2nd of February 183 1, and 
educated at Eton. He became a fellow of King's College, 
Cambridge, and after a short scholastic career in Ireland he ac- 
cepted an appointment in the Cambridge university library as 
an extra assistant. When he found that his official duties 
absorbed all his leisure he resigned his post, but continued to 
give his time to the examination of the MSS. and early printed 
books in the library. There was then no complete catalogue 
of these sections, and Bradshaw soon showed a rare faculty 
for investigations respecting old books and curious MSS. In 
addition to his achievements in black-letter bibliography he 
threw great light on ancient Celtic language and literature by the 
discovery, in 1857, of the Book of Deer, a manuscript copy of 
the Gospel in the Vulgate version, in which were inscribed old 
Gaelic charters. This was published by the Spalding Club in 
1869. Bradshaw also discovered some Celtic glosses on the MS. 
of a metrical paraphrase of the Gospels by Juvencus. He made 
another find in the Cambridge library of considerable philological 
and historical importance. Cromwell's envoy, Sir Samuel 
Morland (1625-1695), had brought back from Piedmont MSS. 
containing the earliest known Waldensian records, consisting 
of translations from the Bible, religious treatises and poems. 
One of the poems referred the work to the beginning of the nth 
century, though the MSS. did not appear to be of earlier date 
than the 15th century. On this Morland had based his theory 
of the antiquity of the Waldensian doctrine, and, in the absence 
of the MSS., which were supposed to be irretrievably lost, the 
conclusion was accepted. Bradshaw discovered the MSS. in the 
university library, and found in the passage indicated traces of 
erasure. The original date proved to be 1400. Incidentally 
the correct date was of great value in the study of the history of 
the language. He had a share in exposing the frauds of Constan- 
tine Simonides, who had asserted that the Codex Sinaiticus 
brought by Tischendorf from the Greek monastery of Mount 
Sinai was a modern forgery of which he was himself the author. 
Bradshaw exposed the absurdity of these claims in a letter to 
the Guardian (January 26, 1863). In 1866 he made a valuable 
contribution to the history of Scottish literature by the discovery 
of 2200 lines on the siege of Troy incorporated in a MS. of 
Lydgate's Troye Booke, and of the Legends of the Saints, an 
important work of some 40,000 lines. These poems he attributed, 
erroneously, as has since been proved, to Barbour (q.v.). Un- 
fortunately Bradshaw allowed his attention to be distracted by 
a multiplicity of subjects, so that he has not left any literary 
work commensurate with his powers. The strain upon him 
was increased when he was elected (1867) university Librarian, 
and as dean of his college (1857-1865) and praelector (1863-1868) 
he was involved in further routine duties. Besides his brilliant 
isolated discoveries in bibliography, he did much by his untiring 
zeal to improve the standard of library administration. He died 
very suddenly on the 10th of February 1886. His fugitive 
papers on antiquarian subjects were collected and edited by 
Mr F. Jenkinson in 1889. 

An excellent Memoir of Henry Bradshaw, by Mr G. W. Prothero, 
appeared in 1888. See also C. F. Newcombe, Some Aspects of the 
Work of Henry Bradshaw (1905). 

1 Scriptorum Illustrium, cant. ix. No. 17. 

2 Ames, Typographical Antiquities (ed. W. Herbert, 1785; i. 
p. 294). 



BRADSHAW, JOHN (1602-1659), president of the "High 
Court of Justice " which tried Charles I., was the second son of 
Henry Bradshaw, of Marple and Wibersley in Cheshire. He 
was baptized on the 10th of December 1602, was educated at 
Banbury in Cheshire and at Middleton in Lancashire, studied 
subsequently with an attorney at Congleton, was admitted into 
Gray's Inn in 1620, and was called to the bar in 1627, becoming 
a bencher in 1647. He was mayor 'of Congleton in 1637, and later 
high steward or recorder of the borough. According to Milton 
he was assiduous in his legal studies and acquired considerable 
reputation and practice at the bar. On the 21st of September 1643 
he was appointed judge of the sheriff's court in London. In 
October 1644 he was counsel with Prynne in the prosecution of 
Lord Maguire and Hugh Macmahon, implicated in the Irish 
rebellion, in 1645 Ior John Lilburne in his appeal to the Lords 
against the sentence of the Star Chamber, and in 1647 in the 
prosecution of Judge Jenkins. On the 8th of October 1646 he 
had been nominated by the Commons a commissioner of the 
great seal, but his appointment was not confirmed by the Lords. 
In 1647 he was made chief justice of Chester and a judge in Wales, 
and on the 12th of October 1648 he was presented to the degree 
of serjeant-at-law. On the 2nd of January 1649 the Lords 
threw out the ordinance for bringing the king to trial, and the 
small remnant of the House of Commons which survived Pride's 
Purge, consisting of 53 independents, determined to carry out 
the ordinance on their own authority. The leading members 
of the bar, on the parliamentary as well as on the royalist side, 
having refused to participate in proceedings not only illegal 
and unconstitutional, but opposed to the plainest principles of 
equity, Bradshaw was selected to preside, and, after some pro- 
testations of humility and unfitness, accepted the office. The 
king refused to plead before the tribunal, but Bradshaw silenced 
every legal objection and denied to Charles an opportunity to 
speak in his defence. He continued after the king's death to 
conduct, as lord president, the trials of the royalists, including 
the duke of Hamilton, Lord Capel, and Henry Rich, earl of 
Holland, all of whom he condemned to death, his behaviour 
being especially censured in the case of Eusebius Andrews, 
a royalist who had joined a conspiracy against the government. 
He received large rewards for his services. He was appointed 
in 1649 attorney-general of Cheshire and North Wales, and 
chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster, and was given a sum of 
£1000, together with confiscated estates worth £2000 a year. He 
had been nominated a member of the council of state on the 14th 
of February 1649, an d on the 10th of March became president. 
He disapproved strongly of the expulsion of the Long Parliament, 
and on Cromwell's coming subsequently to dismiss the council 
Bradshaw is said, on the authority of Ludlow, to have confronted 
him boldly, and denied his power to dissolve the parliament. 
An ardent republican, he showed himself ever afterwards an 
uncompromising adversary of Cromwell. He was returned for 
Stafford in the parliament of 1654, and spoke strongly against 
vesting power in a single person. He refused to sign the " en- 
gagement " drawn up by Cromwell, and in consequence withdrew 
from parliament and was subsequently suspected of complicity in 
plots against the government. He failed to obtain a seat in 
the parliament of 1656, and in August of the same year Cromwell 
attempted to remove him from the chief-justiceship of Cheshire. 
After the abdication of Richard Cromwell, Bradshaw again 
entered parliament,became a member of the council of state, and 
on the 3rd of June 1659 was appointed a commissioner of the 
great seal. His health, however, was bad, and his last public 
effort was a vehement speech, in the council, when he declared 
his abhorrence of the arrest of Speaker Lenthall. He died on 
the 3i9t of October 1659, andwas buried in Westminster Abbey. 
His body was disinterred at the Restoration, and exposed on a 
gibbet along with those of Cromwell and Ireton. Bradshaw 
married Mary , daughter of Thomas Marbury of Marbury, Cheshire, 
but left no children. 

BRADWARDINE, THOMAS (c. 1290-1349), English arch- 
bishop, called " the Profound Doctor," was born either at Hart- 
field in Sussex or at Chichester. He was educated at Merton 



BRADY— BRAGA 



375 



College, Oxford, where he took the degree of doctor of divinity, 
and acquired the reputation of a profound scholar, a skilful mathe- 
matician and an able divine. He was afterwards raised to the high 
offices of chancellor of the university and professor of divinity. 
From being chancellor of the diocese of London, he became chap- 
lain and confessor to Edward III., whom he attended during his 
wars in France. On his return to England, he was successively 
appointed prebendary of Lincoln, archdeacon of Lincoln (1347), 
and in 1349 archbishop of Canterbury. He died of the plague 
at Lambeth on the 26th of August 1349, forty days after his 
consecration. Chaucer in his Nun's Priest's Tale ranks Brad- 
wardine with St Augustine. His great work is a treatise against 
the Pelagians, entitled De causa Dei contra Pelagium et de virtute 
causarum, edited by Sir Henry Savile (London, 1618). He 
wrote also De Geometric, speculativa (Paris, 1530); De Arithmetica 
practica (Paris, 1502); De Proportionibus (Paris, 1495; Venice, 
1505) ; De Quadratura Circuit (Paris, 149s) ; and an Ars Mentora- 
tiva, Sloane MSS. No. 3974 in the British Museum. 

See Quetif-£chard, Script. Praedic. (1719), i. 744; W. F. Hook, 
Lives of the Archbishops of Canterbury, vol. iv. 

BRADY, NICHOLAS (1659-1726), Anglican divine and poet, 
was born at Bandon, Co. Cork, on the 28th of October 1659. 
He received his education at Westminster school, and at Christ 
Church, Oxford; but he graduated at Trinity College, Dublin. 
He took orders, and in 1688 was made a prebendary of Cork. 
He was a zealous promoter of the Revolution and suffered in 
consequence. When the troubles broke out in Ireland in 1690, 
Brady, by his influence, thrice prevented the burning of the town 
of Bandon, after James II. had given orders for its destruction; 
and the same year he was employed by the people of Bandon 
to lay their grievances before the English parliament. He soon 
afterwards settled in London, where he obtained various pre- 
ferments. At the time of his death, on the 20th of May 1726, 
he held the livings of Clapham and Richmond. Brady's best- 
known work is his metrical version of the Psalms, in which 
Nahum Tate collaborated with him. It was licensed in 1696, 
and largely ousted the old version of T. Sternhold and J. Hopkins. 
He also translated Virgil's Aeneid, and wrote several smaller 
poems and dramas, as well as sermons. 

BRAEKELEER, HENRI JEAN AUGUSTIN DE (1840-1888), 
Belgian painter, was born at Antwerp. He was trained by his 
father, a genre painter, and his uncle, Baron Henri Leys, and 
devoted himself to scenes of everyday Antwerp life. The first 
pictures he exhibited, "The Laundry" (Van Cutsem collection, 
Brussels), and " The Coppersmith's Workshop " (Vleeshovwer 
collection, Antwerp), were shown at the Antwerp exhibition in 
1861. He received the gold medal at Brussels in 1872 for 
" The Geographer " and " The Lesson " (both in the Brussels 
gallery); the gold medal at Vienna in 1873 for " The Painter's 
Studio" and "Grandmother's Birthday"; and the medal 
of honour at the Exposition Universelle at Amsterdam for 
" The Pilot House." Among his more notable works are 
"A Shoemaker" (1862), "A Tailor's Workroom" (1863), 
" A Gardener " (1864, Antwerp gallery), " Interior of a Church " 
(1866), "Interior, Flanders" (1867), "Woman spinning" 
(1869), " Manreading " (1871), " The rue du Serment, Antwerp " 
(1875), "A Copperplate Printer," "The Sailor's Return," 
" The Man at the Window " (Couteaux collection, Brussels), 
'* The Horn-blower " (Couteaux collection), " Man retouching a 
Picture " (Couteaux collection), " The Potters " (Marlier collec- 
tion, Brussels), " Staircase in the Hydraulic House at Antwerp " 
(Marlier collection), and "The Brewer's House at Antwerp" 
(Marlier collection) . The last, better known as " A Man sitting," 
is generally regarded as his masterpiece. As a lithographer 
and etcher, his work resembles that of Henri Leys. Towards the 
end of his life de Braekeleer did some dot painting (pointillisme) , 
in which he achieved admirable effects of light. 

BRAEMAR, a district in S.W. Aberdeenshire, Scotland, 
extending from Ballater in the E. to Glen Dee in the W., a 
distance of 24 m. with a breadth varying from 3 to 6 m. It is 
drained throughout by the river Dee, both banks of which are 
bounded by hills varying from 1000 to nearly 3000 ft. in. height. 



The whole area is distinguished by typical Highland scenery, 
and is a resort alike for sportsmen and tourists. The villages and 
clachans (Gaelic for hamlet) being situated at an altitude of from 
600 to more than 1000 ft. above the sea, the air is everywhere 
pure and bracing. The deer forests comprise the royal forests 
of Balmoral and Ballochbuie, Glen Ey Forest, Mar Forest and 
Invercauld Forest. At various points on either side of the Dee, 
granite castles, mansions and lodges have been built, mostly 
in the Scottish baronial style, and all effectively situated with 
reference to the wooded hills or the river. The chief of these are 
Balmoral and Abergeldie Castles belonging to the crown, Inver- 
cauld House, Braemar Castle, Mar Lodge and Old Mar Lodge. 
Castleton of Braemar • is the foremost of the villages, being 
sometimes styled the capital of the Deeside Highlands. Its 
public buildings include halls erected by the duke of Fife and 
Colonel Farquharson of Invercauld to commemorate the Victorian 
jubilee of 1887. Not far from the spot where the brawling Clunie 
joins the Dee the earl of Mar raised the standard of revolt in 
1 71 5. His seat, Braemar Castle, reputed to be a hunting-lodge 
of Malcolm Canmore, was forfeit along with the estates. The 
new castle built by the purchasers in 1 720 was acquired at a later 
date by Farquharson of Invercauld, who gave government the use 
of it during the pacification of the Highlands after the battle of 
Cullodenin 1746. Population of Crathie and Braemar(i9oi)i4S2. 

BRAG, a very old game of cards, probably evolved from the 
ancient Spanish primero, played by five or six, or more players. 
It is the ancestor of poker. A full pack is used, the cards ranking 
as at whist, with certain exceptions. There are no trumps. Each 
player receives three cards and puts up three stakes. The last 
round is dealt face upwards: the holder of the highest card 
irrespective of suits wins the first stake from all the players. 
In the case of equality the elder hand wins, but the ace of dia- 
monds is always a winning card. For the second stake the players. 
brag or bet against each other, if they hold either a pair, or a 
pair-royal (three cards of the same rank). Pairs and pairs-royal 
take precedence according to the value of the cards composing 
them, but any pair-royal beats any pair. The knave of clubs 
may be counted as any card, e.g. two twos and the knave of clubs 
rank as a pair-royal in twos; two aces and the knave as a pair-, 
royal in aces. Sometimes the knave of diamonds is allowed, 
the same privilege, but is inferior to the club knave; e.g. two 
threes and the club would beat the other two threes and the 
diamond. Players who accept another's brag must cover his. 
bet and offer another. The third stake is won by the player 
whose cards make 31 or are nearest to 31 by their pips, aces 
and court counting ten; but the ace may by arrangement count 
as 1 or n. Players may draw from the stock, losing if < they 
over-draw. If one player wins all three stakes,' he may receive 
the value of another stake, or of two or three stakes, all round, 
as arranged. The deal passes as at whist. Each player 
should have the same number of deals before the game is 
abandoned. 

BRAGA, a city of northern Portugal, formerly included in the 
province of Entre Minho e Douro, situated on the right- bank of 
the small river Deste near its source, and at the head of a railway 
from Oporto. Pop. (1900) 24,202. Braga, which ranks after 
Lisbon and Oporto as the third city of the kingdom, is the 
capital of an administrative district, and an archiepiscopal see. 
Its cathedral, founded in the 12th century, was rebuilt during 
the 1 6th century in the blend of Moorish and florid Gothic styles 
known as Manoellian. It contains several tombs of considerable 
historical interest, some fine woodwork carved in the 15th 
century, and a collection of ancient vestments, plate and other 
objects of art. Among the other churches Santa Cruz is note- 
worthy for its handsome facade, which dates from 1642. There 
are several convents, an archiepiscopal palace, a library, con- 
taining many rare books and manuscripts, an orphan asylum, 
and a large hospital; also the ruins of a theatre, a temple and 
an aqueduct of Roman workmanship, and a great variety of 
minor antiquities of different ages. The principal manufactures 
are firearms, jewelry, cutlery, cloth and felt hats. Large cattle 
fairs are held in June and September, for cattle-breeding and 



37 6 



BRAGANZA— BRAHAM 



dairy-farming are among the foremost local industries. On a 
hill about 3 m. E. by S. stands the celebrated sanctuary of Bom 
Jesus, or Bom Jesus do Monte, visited at Whitsuntide by many 
thousands of pilgrims, who do public penance as they ascend to 
the shrine; and about 1 m. beyond it is Mount Sameiro (2535 
ft.), crowned by a colossal statue of the Virgin Mary, and com- 
manding a magnificent view of the mountainous country which 
culminates in the Serra do Gerez, on the north-east. 

Braga is the Roman Bracara Augusta, capital of the Callaici 
Bracarii, or Bracarenses, a tribe who occupied what is now Galicia 
and northern Portugal. Early in the 5th century it was taken 
by the Suevi; but about 485 it passed into the hands of the 
Visigothic conquerors of Spain, whose renunciation of the Arian 
and Priscillianist heresies, at two synods held here in the 6th 
century, marks the origin of its ecclesiastical greatness. The 
archbishops of Braga retain the title of primate of Portugal, 
and long claimed supremacy over the Spanish church also; but 
their authority was never accepted throughout Spain. From the 
Moors, who captured Braga early in the 8th century, the city was 
retaken in 1040 by Ferdinand I., king of Castile and Leon; and 
from 1093 to 1 147 it was the residence of the Portuguese court. 

The administrative district of Braga coincides with the central 
part of the province of Entre Minho e Douro (q.v.). Pop. (1900) 
aST,^ - Area, 1040 sq. m. 

BRAGANZA (Braganqa), the capital of an administrative 
district formerly included in the province of Traz-os-Montes, 
Portugal; situated in the north-eastern extremity of the 
kingdom, on a branch of the river Sabor, 8 m. S. of the Spanish 
frontier. Pop. (1900) 5535. Braganza is an episcopal city. 
It consists of a walled upper town, containing the cathedral 
college and hospital, and of a lower or modern town. Large 
tracts of the surrounding country are uncultivated, partly 
because railway communication is lacking and the roads are bad. 
Except farming, the chief local industry is silkworm-rearing 
and the manufacture of silk. The administrative district of 
Braganza coincides with the eastern part of Traz-os-Montes (q.v.). 
Pop. (1900) 185,162; area, 2513 sq. m. 

The city gave its name to the family of Braganza, members of 
which were rulers of Portugal from 1640 to 1853, and emperors 
of Brazil from 1822 to 1889. This family is descended from 
Alphonso (d. 1461), a natural son of John I., king of Portugal 
(d. 1433), who was a natural son of King Peter I., and con- 
sequently belonged to the Portuguese branch of the Capetian 
family. Alphonso was made duke of Braganza in 1442, and in 
1483 his grandson, Duke Ferdinand II., lost his life through 
heading an insurrection against King John II. In spite of this 
Ferdinand's descendants acquired great wealth, and several 
of them held high office under the kings of Portugal. Duke 
John I. (d. 1583) married into the royal family, and when King 
Henry II. died without direct heirs in 1580, he claimed the 
crown of Portugal in opposition to Philip II. of Spain. John, 
however, was unsuccessful, but, when the Portuguese threw off 
the Spanish dominion in 1640, his grandson, John II., duke of 
Braganza, became king as John IV. In 1807, when Napoleon 
declared the throne of Portugal vacant, King John VI. fled to 
Brazil; but he regained his inheritance after the fall of Napoleon 
in 1 8 14, although he did not return to Europe until 182 1, when 
he left his elder son Peter to govern Brazil. In 1822 a revolution 
established the independence of Brazil with Peter as emperor. 
In 1826 Peter became king of Portugal on the death of his 
father; but he at once resigned the crown to his young daughter 
Maria, and appointed his brother Miguel to act as regent. Miguel 
soon declared himself king, but after a stubborn struggle was 
driven from the country in 1833, after which Maria became 
queen. Maria married for her second husband Ferdinand (d. 
1851), son of Francis, duke of Saxe-Coburg; and when she died 
in 1853 the main Portuguese branch of the family became 
extinct. Maria was succeeded by her son Louis I., father of 
Charles I., who ascended the throne of Portugal in 1889. The 
empire of Brazil descended on the death of Peter I. to his son 
Peter II., who was expelled from the country in 1889. When 
Peter died in 1891 this branch of the family also became extinct 



in the male line. His only child, Isabella, married Louis Gaston 
of Orleans, count of Eu. The exiled king, Miguel, founded a 
branch of the family of Braganza which settled in Bavaria, 
and various noble families in Portugal are descended from 
cadets of this house. The title of duke of Braganza is now borne 
by the eldest son of the king of Portugal. 

BRAGG, BRAXTON (1817-1876), American soldier, was born 
in Warren county, North Carolina, on the 22nd of March 1817. 
He graduated at the United States military academy in 1837, 
and as an artillery officer served in the Seminole wars of 1837 
and 1 84 1, and under General Taylor in Mexico. For gallant 
conduct at Fort Brown, Monterey and Buena Vista, he received 
the brevets of captain, major and lieutenant-colonel. He 
resigned from the regular army on the 3rd of January 1856, and 
retired to his plantation in Louisiana. From 1859 to 1861 he 
was commissioner of the board of public works of the state. 
When in 1861 the Civil War began, Bragg was made a brigadier- 
general in the Confederate service, and assigned to command 
at Pensacola. In February 1862, having meanwhile become 
major-general, he took up a command in the Army of the 
Mississippi, and he was present at the battle of Shiloh (April). 
The vacancy created by the death of Sidney Johnston at that 
battle was filled by the promotion of Bragg to full general's 
rank, and he succeeded General Beauregard when that officer 
retired from the Western command. In the autumn of 1862 
he led a bold advance from Eastern Tennessee across Kentucky 
to Louisville, but after temporary successes he was forced to 
retire before Buell, and after the battle of Perryville (8th October) 
retired into Tennessee. Though the material results of his 
campaign were considerable, he was bitterly censured, and his 
removal from his command was urged. But the personal favour 
of Jefferson Davis kept him, as it had placed him, at the head of 
the central army, and on the 31st of December 1862 and 2nd of 
January 1863 he fought the indecisive battle of Murfreesboro (or 
Stone river) against Rosecrans, Buell's successor. In the cam- 
paign of 1863 Rosecrans constantly outmanoeuvred the Con- 
federates, and forced them back to the border of Georgia. Bragg, 
however, inflicted a crushing defeat on his opponent at Chicka- 
mauga (September 19-20) and for a time besieged the Union forces , 
in Chattanooga. But enormous forces under Grant were concen- 
trated upon the threatened spot, and the great battle of Chatta- 
nooga (November 23-25) ended in the rout of the Confederates. 
Bragg was now deprived of his command, but President Davis 
made him his military adviser, and in that capacity he served 
during 1864. In the autumn of that year he led an inferior 
force from North Carolina to Georgia to oppose Sherman's 
march. In February 1865 he joined Johnston, and he was 
thus included in the surrender of that officer to Sherman. After 
the war he became chief engineer to the state of Alabama, and 
supervised improvements in Mobile harbour. He died suddenly 
at Galveston, Texas, on the 27th of September 1876. General 
Bragg, in spite of his want of success, was unquestionably a 
brave and skilful officer. But he was a severe martinet, and 
rarely in full accord with the senior officers under his orders, 
the consequent friction often acting unfavourably on the conduct 
of the operations. 

His brother, Thomas Bragg (1810-1872), was governor of 
North Carolina 1855-1859, U.S. senator 1859-1861, and attorney- 
general in the Confederate cabinet from Nov. 1861 to March 1862. 

BRAGI, in Scandinavian mythology, the son of Odin, and god 
of wisdom, poetry and eloquence. At the Scandinavian sacrifi- 
cial feasts a horn consecrated to Bragi was used as a drinking- 
cup by the guests, who then vowed to do some great deed 
which would be worthy of being immortalized in verse. 

BRAHAM, JOHN (c. 1774-1856), English vocalist, was born 
in London about 1774, of Jewish parentage, his real name being 
Abraham. His father and mother died when he was quite young. 
Having received lessons in singing from an Italian artist named 
Leoni, he made his first appearance in public at Covent Garden 
theatre on the 21st of April r.787, when he sang " The soldier 
tired of war's alarms " and " Ma ch'ere arrive." On the break- 
ing of his voice, he had to support himself by teaching the 



BRAHE, P.— BRAHE, T. 



377 



pianoforte. In a few years, however, he recovered his voice, 
which proved to be a tenor of exceptionally pure and 
rich quality. His second debut was made in 1794 at the 
Bath concerts, to the conductor of which, Rauzzini, he was 
indebted for careful training extending over a period of more 
than two years. In 1796 he reappeared in London at Drury 
Lane in Storace's opera of Mahmoud. Such was his success that 
' he obtained an engagement the next year to appear in the Italian 
opera house in Gretry's Azor et Zemire. He also sang in oratorios 
and was engaged for the Three Choir festival at Gloucester. 
With the view of perfecting himself in his art he set out for Italy 
in the autumn of 1797. On the way he gave some concerts at 
Paris, which proved so successful that he was induced to remain 
there for eight months. His career in Italy was one of continuous 
triumph; he appeared in all the principal opera-houses, singing 
in Milan, Genoa, Leghorn and Venice. His compass embraced 
about nineteen notes, his management of the falsetto being 
perfect. In 1801 he returned to his native country, and ap- 
peared once more at Covent Garden in the opera Chains of the 
Heart, by Mazzinghi and Reeve. So great was his popularity that 
an engagement he had made when abroad to return after a year to 
Vienna was renounced, and he remained henceforward in England. 
In 1824 he sang the part of Max in the English version of Weber's 
Der Freischiitz, and he was the original Sir Huon in that com- 
poser's Oberon in 1826. Braham made two unfortunate specula- 
tions on a large scale, one being the purchase of the Colosseum 
in the Regent's Park in 1831 for £40,000, and the other the 
erection of the St James's theatre at a cost of £26,000 in 1836. 
In 1838 he sang the part of William Tell at Drury Lane, and in 
1839 the part of Don Giovanni. His last public appearance 
was at a concert in March 1852. He died on the 17th of February 
1856. There is, perhaps, no other case upon record in which 
a singer of the first rank enjoyed the use of his voice so long; 
between Braham's first and last public appearances considerably 
more than sixty years intervened, during forty of which he held 
the undisputed supremacy alike in opera, oratorio and the 
concert-room. Braham was the composer of a number of vocal 
pieces, which being sung by himself had great temporary 
popularity, though they had little intrinsic merit, and are now 
deservedly forgotton. A partial exception must be made in 
favour of "The Death of Nelson," originally written in 181 1 
as a portion of the opera The American; this still keeps its 
place as a standard popular English song. 

BRAHE, PER, Count (1602-1680), Swedish soldier and states- 
man, was born on the island of Rydboholm, near Stockholm, 
on the 18th of February 1602. He was the grandson of Per 
Brahe (1520-1590), one of Gustavus I.'s senators, created count 
of Visingsborg by Eric XIV., known also as the continuator of 
Peder Svart's chronicle of Gustavus I., and author of Oeconomia 
(1585), a manual for young noblemen. Per Brahe the younger, 
after completing his education by several years' travel abroad, 
became in 1626 chamberlain to Gustavus Adolphus, whose 
lasting friendship he gained. He fought with distinction in 
Prussia during the last three years of the Polish War (1626-1629) 
and also, as colonel of a regiment of horse, in 1630 in Germany. 
After the death of Gustavus Adolphus in 1632 his military 
yielded to his political activity. He had been elected president 
(Landstnarskalk) of the diet of 1629, and in the following year 
was created a senator (Riksr&d). In 1635 he conducted the 
negotiations for an armistice with Poland. In 1637-1640 and 
again in 1648-1654 he was governor-general in Finland, to which 
country he rendered inestimable services by his wise and provi- 
dent rule. He reformed the whole administration, introduced a 
postal system, built ten new towns, improved and developed 
commerce and agriculture, and very greatly promoted education. 
In 1640 he opened the university of Abo, of which he was the 
founder, and first chancellor. After the death of Charles X. 
in 1660, Brahe, as rikskansler or chancellor of Sweden, became 
one of the regents of Sweden for the second time (he had held a 
similar office during the minority of Christina, 1632-1644), and 
during the difficult year 1660 he had entire control of both 
foreign and domestic affairs. He died on the 2nd of September 



1680, at his castle at Visingsborg, where during his lifetime ho 
had held more than regal pomp. 

His brother, Nils Brahe (1604-1632), also served with dis- 
tinction under Gustavus Adolphus. He took part in the siege 
and capture of Riga in 162 1, served with distinction in Poland 
(1626-1627) and assisted in the defence of Stralsund in 1628. 
In 1630 he accompanied Gustavus into Germany, and in 1631 
was appointed colonel of " the yellow regiment," the king's 
world-renowned life-guards, at the head of which he captured 
the castle of Wurzburg on the 8th of October 1631. He took 
part in the long duel between Gustavus and Wallenstein round 
Nuremberg as general of infantry, and commanded the left 
wing at Liitzen (November 6, 1632), where he was the only 
Swedish general officer present. At the very beginning of the 
fight he was mortally wounded. The king regarded Brahe as 
the best general in the Swedish army after Lennart Torstensen. 

A direct descendant of Nils, Magnus Brahe (1790-1844), 
fought in the campaign of 1813-14, under the crown prince 
Bernadotte, with whom, after his accession to the throne as 
Charles XIV., he was in high favour. He became marshal of 
the kingdom, and, especially from 1828 onwards, exercised a 
preponderant influence in public affairs. 

See Martin Veibull, Sveriges Storhetstid, vol. iv. (Stockholm, 1881) ; 
Letters to Axel Oxenstjerna (Swed.) 1832-1851 (Stockholm, 1890); 
Petrus Nordmann, Per Brahe (Helsingfors, 1904). (R. N. B.) 

BRAHE, TYCHO (1 546-1601), Danish astronomer, was born on 
the 14th of December 1546 at the family seat of Knudstrup in 
Scania, then a Danish province. Of noble family, he was early 
adopted by his uncle, Jorgen Brahe, who sent him, in April 1559, 
to study philosophy and rhetoric at Copenhagen. The punctual 
occurrence at the predicted time, August 21st, 1560, of a total 
solar eclipse led him to regard astronomy as " something divine "; 
he purchased the Ephemerides of Johann Stadius (3rd ed., 1570), 
and the works of Ptolemy in Latin, and gained some insight into 
the theory of the planets. Entered as a law-student at the 
university of Leipzig in 1562, he nevertheless secretly prosecuted 
celestial studies, and began continuous observations with a globe, 
a pair of compasses and a " cross-staff." He quitted Leipzig on 
the 17th of May 1565, but his uncle dying a month later, he 
repaired to Wittenberg, and thence to Rostock, where, in 1566, 
he lost his nose in a duel, and substituted an artificial one made 
of a copper alloy. In 1569 he matriculated at Augsburg, and 
devoted himself to chemistry for two years (1570-1572). On his 
return to Denmark, in 1571, he was permitted by his maternal 
uncle, Steno Belle, to instal a laboratory at his castle of 
Herritzvad, near Knudstrup; and there, on the 1 ith of November 
1572, he caught sight of the famous " new star " in Cassiopeia. 
He diligently measured its position, and printed an account of 
his observations in a tract entitled De Novd Stelld (Copenhagen, 
1 5 73) , a facsimile of which was produced in 1901 , as a tercentenary 
tribute to the author's memory. 

Tycho's marriage with a peasant-girl in 1573 somewhat 
strained his family relations. He delivered lectures in Copen- 
hagen by royal command in 1574; and in 1575 travelled 
through Germany to Venice. The execution of his design to 
settle at Basel was, however, anticipated by the munificence of 
Frederick II., king of Denmark, who bestowed upon him for life 
the island of Hveen in the Sound, together with a pension of 500 
thalers, a canonry in the cathedral of Roskilde, and the income 
of an estate in Norway. The first stone of the magnificent ob- 
servatory of Uraniborg was laid on the 8th of August 1576; it 
received the finest procurable instrumental outfit; and was the 
scene, during twenty-one years, of Tycho's labours in systemati- 
cally collecting materials— -the first made available since the 
Alexandrian epoch — for the correction of astronomical theories. 
James VI. of Scotland, afterwards James I. of England, visited 
him at Uraniborg on the 20th of March 1 590. But by that time 
his fortunes were on the wane; for Frederick II. died in 1588, 
and his successor, Christian IV., was less tolerant of Tycho's 
arrogant and insubordinate behaviour. His pension and fief 
having been withdrawn, he sailed for Rostock in June 1597, and 
re-commenced observing before the close of the year, in the castle 



378 



BRAHMAN 



of Wandsbeck near Hamburg. He spent the following winter at 
Wittenberg, and reached Prague in June 1599, well assured of 
favour and protection from the emperor Rudolph II. That 
monarch, accordingly, assigned him the castle of Benatky for 
his residence, with a pension of 3000 florins; his great instru- 
ments were moved thither from Hveen, and Johannes Kepler 
joined him there in January 1600. But this phase of renewed 
prosperity was brief. After eleven days' illness, Tycho Brahe 
died on the 24th of October 1601, at Benatky, and was buried in 
the Teynkirche, Prague. 

Tycho's principal work, entitled Astronomiae Instauratae 
Progymnasmata (2 vols., Prague, 1602-1603) was edited by 
Kepler. The first volume treated of 'the motions of the sun and 
moon, and gave the places of 777 fixed stars (this number was 
increased to 1005 by Kepler in 1627 in£he " Rudolphine Tables ")• 
The second, which had been privately printed at Uraniborg in 
1588 with the heading De Mundi Aetherei recentioribus Phaeno- 
menis, was mainly concerned with the comet of 1577, demon- 
strated by Tycho from its insensible parallax to be no terrestrial 
exhalation, as commonly supposed, but a body traversing 
planetary space. It included, besides, an account of the 
Tychonic plan of the cosmos, in which a via media was sought 
between the Ptolemaic and Copernican systems. The earth 
retained its immobility; but the five planets were made to re- 
volve round the sun, which, with its entire cortege, annually 
circuited the earth, the sphere of the fixed stars performing 
meanwhile, as of old, its all-inclusive diurnal rotation (see 
Astronomy: History). Under the heading Astronomiae In- 
stauratae Mechanica, Tycho published at Wandsbeck, in 1 598, a 
description of his instruments, together with an autobiographical 
account of his career and discoveries, including the memorable 
one of the moon's " variation " (see Moon). The book was 
reprinted at Nuremberg in 1602 (cf. Hasselberg, Vierteljahrs- 
schrift Astr. Ges. xxxix. iii. 180). His Epistolae Astronomicae, 
printed at Uraniborg in 1 596 with a portrait engraved by Geyn of 
Amsterdam in 1 586, were embodied in a complete edition of his 
works issued at Frankfort in 1648. Tycho vastly improved the 
art of astronomical observation. He constructed a table of 
refractions, allowed for instrumental inaccuracies, and eliminated 
by averaging accidental errors. He, moreover, corrected the 
received value of nearly every astronomical quantity; but the 
theoretical purpose towards which his practical reform was 
directed, was foiled by his premature death. 

See J. L. E. Dreyer's Tycho Brahe (Edinburgh, 1890), which gives 
full and authentic information regarding his life and work. Also 
Gassendi's Vita (Paris, 1654) ; Lebensbeschreibung, collected from 
various Danish sources, and translated into German by Philander 
von der Weistritz (Copenhagen and Leipzig, 1756); Tyge Brahe, 
by F. R. Friis (Copenhagen, 1871); Prager Tychoniana, collected 
by Dr F. I. Studnicka (Prague, 1901), a description of the scanty 
Tychonian relics which survived the Thirty Years' War and are still 
preserved at Prague. " (A. M. C.) 

BRAHMAN, a Sanskrit noun-stem which, differently accented, 
yields in the two nominatives BrahmA (neut.) and Brahma (masc), 
the names of two deities which occupy prominent places in the 
orthodox system of Hindu belief. Brahma (n.) is the designation 
generally applied to the Supreme Soul {paramatman), or im- 
personal, all-embracing divine essence, the original source and 
ultimate goal of all that exists; Brahma (m.), on the other hand, 
is only one of the three hypostases of that divinity whose creative 
activity he represents, as distinguished from its preservative and 
destructive aspects, ever apparent in life and nature, and repre- 
sented by the gods Vishnu and Siva respectively. The history of 
the two cognate names reflects in some measure the development 
of Indian religious speculation generally. 

The neuter term brahmi is used in the Rigveda both in the 
abstract sense of " devotion, worship," and in the concrete sense 
of " devotional rite, prayer, hymn." The spirit of Vedic worship 
is pervaded by a devout belief in the efficacy of invocation and 
sacrificial offering. The earnest and well-expressed prayer or 
hymn of praise cannot fail to draw the divine power to the 
worshipper and make it yield to his supplication; whilst offerings, 
so far from being mere acts of devotion calculated to give pleasure 



to the god, constitute the very food and drink which render him 
vigorous and capable of battling with the enemies of his mortal 
friend. It is this intrinsic power of fervent invocation and 
worship which found an early expression in the term brahmd; 
and its independent existence as an active moral principle in 
shaping the destinies of man became recognized in the Vedic 
pantheon in the conception of a god Brihaspati or Brahmanas- 
pati, " lord of prayer or devotion," the divine priest and the 
guardian of the pious worshipper. By a natural extension of the 
original meaning, the term brahmit, in the sense of sacred utter- 
ance, was subsequently likewise applied to the whole body of 
sacred writ, the tri-vidya or " triple lore " of the Veda; whilst it 
also came to be commonly used as the abstract designation of the 
priestly function and the Brahmanical order generally, in the 
same way as the term tshatra, " sway, rule," came to denote the 
aggregate of functions and individuals of the Kshatriyas or 
Rajanyas, the nobility or military class. 

The universal belief in the efficacy of invocation as an indis- 
pensable adjunct to sacrifices and religious rites generally, 
could not fail to engender and maintain in the minds of the 
people feelings of profound esteem and reverence towards those 
who possessed the divine gift of inspired utterance, as well as for 
those who had acquired an intimate knowledge of the approved 
forms of ritual worship. A common designation of the priest is 
brahman (nom. brahma), originally denoting, it would seem, 
" one who prays, a worshipper," perhaps also " the composer 
of a hymn " {brahman, n.) ; and the same term came subsequently 
to be used not only for one of the sacerdotal order generally, 
but also, and more commonly, as the designation of a special 
class of priests who officiated as superintendents during sacrificial 
performances, the complicated nature of which required the 
co-operation of a whole staff of priests, and who accordingly 
were expected to possess a competent knowledge of the entire 
course of ritual procedure, including the correct form and 
mystic import of the sacred texts to be repeated or chanted 
by the several priests. The Brahman priest {brahma) being 
thus the recognized head of the sacerdotal order {brahmti), 
which itself is the visible embodiment of sacred writ and the 
devotional spirit pervading it {brahmS), the complete realization 
of theocratic aspirations required but a single step, which was 
indeed taken in the theosophic speculations of the later Vedic 
poets and the authors of the Brahmanas {q.v.), viz. the recog- 
nition of this abstract notion of the Brahma as the highest 
cosmic principle and its identification with the pantheistic 
conception of an all-pervading, self-existent spiritual substance, 
the primary source of the universe; and subsequently coupled 
therewith the personification of its creative energy in the form 
of Brahma, the divine representative of the earthly priest, who 
was made to take the place of the earlier conception of Prajapati, 
" the lord of creatures " (see Brahmanism). By this means the 
very name of this god expressed the essential oneness of hiS 
nature with that of the divine spirit as whose manifestation he 
was to be considered. In the later Vedic writings, especially 
the Brahmanas, however, Prajapati still maintains throughout 
his position as the paramount personal deity; and Brahma, in 
his divine capacity, is rather identified with Brihaspati, the 
priest of the gods. Moreover, the exact relationship between 
Prajapati and the Brahma (n.) is hardly as yet defined with 
sufficient precision; it is rather one of simple identification: 
in the beginning the Brahma was the All, and Prajapati is the 
Brahma. It is only in the institutes of Manu, where we find the 
system of castes propounded in its complete development, that 
Brahma has his definite place assigned to him in the cosmogony. 
According to this work, the universe, before undiscerned, was 
made discernible in the beginning by the sole, self-existent lord 
Brahma (n.). He, desirous of producing different beings from his 
own self, created the waters by his own thought, and placed in 
them a seed which developed into a golden egg; therein was 
born Brahma (m.), the parent of all the worlds; and thus " that 
which is the undiscrete Cause, eternal, which is and is not, from 
it issued that male who is called in the world Brahma." Having 
dwelt in that egg for a year, that lord spontaneously by his own 



BRAHMANA 



379 



thought split that egg in two; and from the two halves he 
fashioned the heaven and the earth, and in the middle, the sky,and 
the eight regions (the points of the compass), and the perpetual 
place of the waters. This theory of Brahma being born from a 
golden egg is, however, a mere adaptation of the Vedic conception 
of Hiranya-garbha (" golden embryo "), who is represented as 
the supreme god in a hymn of the tenth (and last) book of the 
Rigveda. Another still later myth, which occurs in the epic 
poems, makes Brahma be born from a lotus which grew out of 
the navel of the god Vishnu whilst floating on the primordial 
waters. In artistic representations, Brahma usually appears 
as a bearded man of red colour with four heads crowned with 
a pointed, tiara-like head-dress, and four hands holding his 
sceptre, or a sacrificial spoon, a bundle of leaves representing 
the Veda, a bottle of water of the Ganges, and a string of beads 
or his bow Parivlta. His vehicle (vdhana) is a goose or swan 
(hamsa), whence he is also called Hamsavdhana; and his consort 
is Sarasvati, the goddess of learning. 

One could hardly expect that a colourless deity of this de- 
scription, so completely the product of priestly speculation, could 
ever have found a place in the hearts of the people generally. 
And indeed, whilst in theoretic theology Brahma has retained 
his traditional place and function down to our own days, his 
practical cult has at all times remained extremely limited, the 
only temple dedicated to the worship of this god being found at 
Pushkar (Pokhar) near Ajmir in Rajputana. On the other 
hand, his divine substratum, the impersonal Brahma, the 
world-spirit, the one and only reality, remains to this day the 
ultimate element of the religious belief of intelligent India of 
whatever sect. Being devoid of all attributes, it can be the 
object only of meditation, not of practical devotional rites; 
and philosophy can only attempt to characterize it in general 
and vague terms, as in the favourite formula which makes it 
to be sachchiddnanda, i.e. being (sat), thinking (chit), and bliss 
(dnanda). (J. E.) 

BRAHMANA, the Sanskrit term applied to a body of prose 
writings appended to the collections (samhita) of Vedic texts, 
the meaning and ritual application of which they are intended 
to elucidate, and like them regarded as divinely revealed. From 
a linguistic point of view, these treatises with their appendages, 
the more mystic and recondite Aranyakas and the speculative 
Upanishads, have to be considered as forming the connecting 
link between the Vedic and the classical Sanskrit. The exact 
derivation and meaning of the name is somewhat uncertain. 
Whilst the masculine term brahmana (nom. brahmanas), the 
ordinary Sanskrit designation of a man of the Brahmanical 
caste, is clearly a derivative of brahman (nom. brahmd), a common 
Vedic term for a priest (see Brahman), thus meaning the son 
or descendant of a Brahman, the neuter word brahmana (nom. 
brdhmayam) on the other hand, with which we are her^ concerned, 
admits of two derivations: either it is derived from the same 
word brahman, and would then seem to mean a dictum or observa- 
tion ascribed to, or intended for the use of, a Brahman, or 
superintendent priest; or it- has rather to be referred to the 
neuter noun brahman (nom. brahmd), in the sense of " sacred 
utterance or rite," in which case it might mean a comment on a 
sacred text, or explanation of a devotional rite, calculated to 
bring out its spiritual or mystic significance and its bearing on 
the Brahma, the world-spirit embodied in the sacred writ and 
ritual. This latter definition seems on the whole the more 
probable one, and it certainly would fit exactly the character 
of the writings to which the term relates. It will thus be seen 
that the term brahmanam applies not only to complete treatises 
of an exegetic nature, but also to single comments on particular 
texts or rites of which such a work would be made up. 

The gradual elaboration of the sacrificial ceremonial, as the 
all-sufficient expression of religious devotion, and a constantly 
growing tendency towards theosophic and mystic speculation 
on the significance of every detail of the ritual, could not fail 
to create a demand for explanatory treatises of this kind, which, 
to enhance their practical utility, would naturally deal with the 
special texts and rites assigned in the ceremonial to the several 



classes of officiating priests. At a subsequent period the demand 
for instruction in the sacrificial science called into existence a 
still more practical set of manuals, the so-called Kalpa-sutras, 
or ceremonial rules, detailing, in succinct aphorisms, the approved 
course of sacrificial procedure, without reference to the supposed 
origin or import of the several rites. These manuals are also 
called Srauta-sutras, treating as they do, like the Brahmanas, of 
the Srauta rites — i.e. the rites based on the sruti or revelation — 
requiring at least three sacrificial fires and a number of priests, 
as distinguished from the grihya (domestic) or smarta (traditional) 
rites, supposed to be based on the smriti or tradition, which are 
performed on the house-fire and dealt with in the Grihya-sutras. 

The ritual recognizes four principal priests (ritvij), each of 
whom is assisted by three subordinates: viz. the Brahman 
or superintending priest; the Hotri or reciter of hymns and 
verses; the Udgdtri or chanter; and the Adhvaryu or offerer, 
who looks after the details of the ceremonial, including the 
preparation of the offering-ground, the construction of fire- 
places and altars, the making of oblations and muttering of the 
prescribed formulae. Whilst the two last priests have assigned 
to them special liturgical collections of the texts to be used by 
them, the Sdmaveda-samhitd and Yajurvcda-samhita respec- 
tively, the Hotri has to deal entirely with hymns and verses 
taken from the Rigveda-samhitd, of which they would, however, 
form only a comparatively small portion. As regards the 
Brahman, he would doubtless be chosen from one of those other 
three classes, but would be expected to have made himself 
thoroughly conversant with the texts and ritual details apper- 
taining to all the officiating priests. It is, then, to one or other 
of those three collections of sacred texts and the respective class 
of priests, that the existing Brahmanas attach themselves. At 
a later period, when the Atharvan gained admission to the 
Vedic canon, a special connexion with the Brahman priest was 
sometimes claimed, though with scant success, for this fourth 
collection of hymns and spells, and the comparatively late and 
unimportant Gopatha-brahmana attached to it. 

The Udgatri's duties being mainly confined to the chanting 
of hymns made up of detached groups of verses of the Rigveda, 
as collected in the Samaveda-samhita, the more important 
Brahmanas of this sacerdotal class deal chiefly with the various 
modes of chanting, and the modifications which the verses have 
to undergo in their musical setting. Moreover, the performance 
of chants being almost entirely confined to the Soma-sacrifice, 
it is only a portion, though no doubt the most important portion, 
of the sacrificial ceremonial that enters into the subject matter 
of the Samaveda Brahmanas. 

As regards the Brahmanas of the Rigveda, two of such works 
have been handed down, the Aitareya and the Kaushltaki (or 
Sankhdy ana) -Brahmanas, which have a large amount of their 
material in common. But while the former work (transl. into 
English by M. Haug) is mainly taken up with the Soma-sacrifice, 
the latter has in addition thereto chapters on the other forms of 
sacrifice. Being intended for the Hotri's use, both these works 
treat exclusively of the hymns and verses recited by that priest 
and his assistants, either in the form of connected litanies or 
in detached verses invoking the deities to whom oblations are 
made, or uttered in response to the solemn hymns chanted by 
the Udgatris. 

It is, however, to the Brahmanas and Sutras of the Yajurveda, 
dealing with the ritual of the real offering-priest, the Adhvaryu, 
that we have to turn for a connected view of the sacrificial 
procedure in all its material details. Now, in considering the 
body of writings connected with this Veda, we are at once 
confronted by the fact that there are two different schools, an 
older and a younger one, in which the traditional body of ritual- 
istic matter has been treated in a very different way. For 
while the younger school, the Vdjasaneyins, have made a clear 
severance between the sacred texts or mantras and the exegetic 
discussions thereon — as collected in the Vdjasaneyi-samhila 
and the Satapatha- Brahmana (trans, by J. Eggeling, in Sacred 
Books of the East) respectively — arranged systematically in 
accordance with the ritual divisions, the older school on the 



3 8o 



BRAHMANA 



other hand present their materials in a hopelessly jumbled form; 
for not only is each type of sacrifice not dealt with continuously 
and in orderly fashion, but short textual sections of mantras 
are constantly followed immediately by their dogmatic exegesis; 
the term brcthmaqa thus applying in their case only to these 
detached comments and not to the connected series of them. 
Thus the most prominent subdivision of the older school, the 
Taittiriyas, in their Sarphita, have treated the main portion of 
the ceremonial in this promiscuous fashion, and to add to the 
confusion they have, by way of supplement, put forth a so-called 
Taittiriya-brahmai?a, which, so far from being a real Brahmana, 
merely deals with some additional rites in the same confused 
mixture of sacrificial formulae and dogmatic explanations. 
It is not without reason, therefore, that those two schools, the 
older and the younger, are commonly called the Black (krishita) 
and the White (sukla) Yajus respectively. 

Although the ritualistic discussions of the Brahmanas are for 
the most part of a dry and uninteresting nature to an even 
greater degree than is often the case with exegetic theological 
treatises, these works are nevertheless of considerable import- 
ance both as regards the history of Indian institutions and as 
" the oldest body of Indo-European prose, of a generally free, 
vigorous, simple form, affording valuable glimpses backwards 
at the primitive condition of unfettered Indo-European talk" 
(Whitney). Of especial interest in this respect are the numerous 
myths and legends scattered through these works. From the 
archaic style in which these mythological tales are usually 
composed, as well as from the fact that not a few of them are 
found in Brahmanas of different schools and Vedas, though of|en 
with considerable variations, it seems pretty evident that the 
groundwork of them must go back to times preceding the com- 
position or final redaction of the existing Brahmanas. In the 
case of some of these legends — as those of Sunah-Sepha, and 
the fetching of Soma from heaven — we can even see how they 
have grown out of germs contained in some of the Vedic hymns. 
If the literary style in which the exegetic discussion of the texts 
and rites is carried on in the Brahmanas is, as a rule, of a very 
bald and uninviting nature, it must be borne in mind that these 
treatises are of a strictly professional and esoteric character, 
and in no way lay claim to being considered as literary com- 
positions in any sense of the word. And yet, notwithstanding 
the general emptiness of their ritualistic discussions and mystic 
speculations, " there are passages in the Brahmanas full of 
genuine thought and feeling, and most valuable as pictures of 
life, and as records of early struggles, which have left no trace 
in the literature of other nations " (M. Miiller). 

The chief interest, however, attaching to the Brahmanas is 
doubtless their detailed description of the sacrificial system as 
practised in the later Vedic ages; and the information afforded 
by them in this respect should be all the more welcome to us, 
as the history of religious institutions knows of no other sacri- 
ficial ceremonial with the details of which we are acquainted 
to anything like the same extent. An even more complete and 
minutely detailed view of the sacrificial system is no doubt 
obtained from the ceremonial manuals, the Kalpa-sutras; but 
it is just by the speculative discussions of the Brahmanas — 
the mystic significance and symbolical colouring with which 
they invest single rites — that we gain a real insight into the 
nature and gradual development of this truly stupendous 
system of ritual worship. 

The sacrificial ritual recognizes two kinds of irauta sacrifices, 
viz. haviryajnas (meat-offerings), consisting of oblations (ishli) 
of milk, butter, cereals or flesh, and somayagas or oblations of the 
juice of the soma plant. The setting up, by a householder, of a 
set of three sacrificial fires of his own constitutes the first cere- 
mony of the former class, the Agny-adhana (or (?) Agny-adheya). 
The first of the three fires laid down is the garhapatya, or house- 
holder's fire, so called because, though not taken from his 
ordinary house-fire, but as a rule specially produced by friction, 
it serves for cooking the sacrificial food, and thus, as it were, 
represents the domestic fire. From it the other two fires, the 
anavaniya, or offering fire, and the dakshiqagni, or southern fire, 



used for certain special purposes, are taken. The principal other 
ceremonies of this class are the new and full moon offerings, the 
oblations made at the commencement of the three seasons, the 
offering of first-fruits, the animal sacrifice, and the Agnihotra, or 
daily morning and evening oblation of milk, which, however, is 
also included amongst the grihya, or domestic rites, as having to 
be performed daily on the domestic fire by the householder who 
keeps no regular set of sacrificial fires. 

Of a far more -complicated nature than these offerings are the 
Soma-sacrifices, which, besides the simpler ceremonies of this 
class, such as the Agnishtoma or " Praise of Agni," also include 
great state functions, such as the Rajasilya or consecration of a 
king, and the Asvamedha or horse-sacrifice, which, in addition to 
the sacrificial rites, have a considerable amount of extraneous, 
often highly interesting, ceremonial connected with them, which 
makes them seem to partake largely of the nature of public 
festivals. Whilst the oblations of Soma-juice, made thrice on 
each offering-day, amidst chants and recitations, constitute the 
central' rites of those services, their ritual also requires numerous 
single oblations of the ishti kind, including at least three animal 
offerings, and in some cases the immolation of many hecatombs 
of victims. Moreover, a necessary preliminary to every Soma- 
sacrifice is the construction, in five layers, of a special fire-altar of 
large dimensions, consisting of thousands of bricks, formed and 
baked on the spot, to each, or each group, of which a special 
symbolic meaning is attached. The building of this altar is 
spread over a whole year, during which period the sacrificer has 
to carry about the sacrificial fire in an earthen pan for at least 
some time each day, until it is finally deposited on the completed 
altar to serve as the offering-fire for the Soma oblations. The 
altar itself is constructed in the form of a bird, because Soma was 
supposed to have been brought down from heaven by the metre 
Gayatrl which had assumed the form of an eagle. Whilst the 
Soma-sacrifice has been thus developed by the Brahmanas in 
an extraordinary degree, its essential identity with the Avestan 
Haoma-cult shows that its origin goes back at all events to the 
Indo-Iranian period. 

Among the symbolic conceits in which the authors of the 
Brahmanas so freely indulge, there is one overshadowing all 
others — if indeed they do not all more or less enter into it — 
which may be considered as the sum and substance of these 
speculations, and the esoteric doctrine of the sacrifice, involved 
by the Brahmanical ritualists. This is what may conveniently 
be called the Prajapati theory, by which the " Lord of Creatures," 
the efficient cause of the universe, is identified with both the 
sacrifice'(ya/«a) and the sacrificer (yajamana) . The origin of this 
theory goes back to the later Vedic hymns. In the so-called 
Purusha-sukta (Rigv. x. go) in which the supreme spirit is con- 
ceived of as the person or man (purusha), born in the beginning, 
and consisting of "whatever hath been and whatever shall be," 
the creation of the visible and invisible universe is represented as 
originating from an " all-offered " (holocaust) sacrifice in which 
the Purusha himself forms the offering-material (havis), or, as 
we might say, the victim. In this primeval, or rather timeless 
because ever-proceeding, sacrifice, time itself, in the shape of its 
unit the year, is made to take its part, inasmuch as the three 
seasons — spring, summer and autumn — of which it consists, 
constitute the ghee (clarified butter), the offering-fuel and the 
oblation respectively. These speculations may be said to have 
formed the foundation on which the theory of the sacrifice, as 
propounded in the Brahmanas, has been reared. Prajapati — 
who (probably for practical considerations, as better representing 
the sacrificer, the earthly ruler, or " lord of the creatures ") 
here takes the place of the Purusha, the world-man or all- 
embracing personality — is offered up anew in every sacrifice; 
and inasmuch as the very dismemberment of the lord of 
creatures, which took place at that archtypal sacrifice, was in 
itself the creation of the universe, so every sacrifice is also a 
repetition of that first creative act. Thus the periodical sacrifice 
is nothing else than a microcosmic representation of the ever- 
proceeding destruction and renewal of all cosmic life and matter. 
The ritualistic theologians, however, go an important step 



BRAHMANISM 



38i 



further by identifying Prajapati with the performer, or patron, 
of the sacrifice, the sacrificer; every sacrifice thus becoming 
invested — in addition to its cosmic significance — with the mystic 
power of regenerating the sacrificer by cleansing him of all guilt 
and securing for him a seat in the eternal abodes. 

Whilst forming the central feature of the ritualistic symbolism, 
this triad — Prajapati, sacrifice (oblation, victim), sacrificer — is 
extended in various ways. An important collateral identification 
is that of Prajapati (and the sacrificer) with Agni, the god of fire, 
embodied not only in the offering-fire, but also in the sacred 
Soma-altar, the technical name of which is agni. For this reason 
the altar, as representative of the universe, is built in five layers, 
representing earth, air and heaven, and the intermediate regions; 
and in the centre of the altar-site, below the first layer, on a 
circular gold plate (the sun), a small golden man (purusha) is laid 
down with his face looking upwards. This is Prajapati, and the 
sacrificer, who when regenerated will pass upwards through the 
three worlds to the realms of light, naturally perforated bricks 
being for this purpose placed in the middle of the three principal 
altar-layers. One of the fourteen sections of the Satapatha- 
brahmana, the tenth, called Agni-rahasya or " the mystery of 
Agni (the god and altar)," is entirely devoted to this feature of 
the sacrificial symbolism. Similarly the sacrificer, as the human 
representatiye of the Lord of Creatures, is identified with Soma 
(as the supreme oblation), with Time, and finally with Death: by 
the sacrificer thus becoming Death himself, the fell god ceases to 
have power over him and he is assured of everlasting life. And 
now we get the Supreme Lord in his last aspect; nay, his one 
true and real aspect, in which the sacrificer, on shuffling off this 
mortal coil, will himself come to share — that of pure intellect- 
uality, pure spirituality — he is Mind: such is the ultimate source 
of being, the one Self, the Purusha, the Brahman. As the sum 
total of the wisdom propounded in the mystery of Agni, the 
searcher after truth is exhorted to meditate on that Self, made up 
of intelligence, endowed with a body of spirit, a form of light, 
and of an ethereal nature; holding sway over all the regions and 
pervading this All, being itself speechless and devoid of mental 
states; and by so doing he shall gain the assurance that " even 
as a grain of rice, or the smallest granule of millet, so is the 
golden Purusha in my heart; even as a smokeless light, it is 
greater than the sky, greater than the ether, greater than the 
earth, greater than all existing things; — that Self of the Spirit 
is my Self; on passing away from hence, I shall obtain that 
Self. And, verily, whosoever has this trust, for him there is no 
uncertainty." (J. E.) 

BRAHMANISM, a term commonly used to denote a system of 
religious institutions originated and elaborated by the Brahmans, 
the sacerdotal and, from an early period, the dominant caste of 
the Hindu community (see Brahman). In like manner, as the 
language of the Aryan Hindus has undergone continual processes 
of modification and dialectic division, so their religious belief 
has passed through various stages of development broadly 
distinguished from one another by certain prominent features. 
The earliest phases of religious thought in India of which a clear 
idea can now be formed are exhibited in a body of writings, 
looked upon by later generations in the light of sacred writ, 
under the collective name of Veda (" knowledge ") or Sruti 
(" revelation "). The Hindu scriptures consist of four separate 
collections, or Samhitas, of sacred texts, or mantras, in- 
cluding hymns, incantations and sacrificial forms of prayer, 
viz. the Rich (nom. sing, rik) or Rigveda, the Saman or 
Samaveda, the Yajus or Yajurveda, and the Atharvan or 
Atharvaveda. Each of these four text-books has attached 
to it a body of prose writings, called Brahmanas (see 
Brahman a), intended to explain the ceremonial application of 
the texts and the origin and import of the sacrificial rites for 
which these were supposed to have been composed. Usually 
attached to these works, and in some cases to the Samhitas, 
are two kinds of appendages, the Aranyakas and Upanishads, 
the former of which deal generally with the more recondite 
rites, while the latter are taken up chiefly with speculations on 
the problems of the universe and the religious aims of man — 



subjects often touched upon in the earlier writings, but here 
dealt with in a more mature and systematic way. Two of the 
Samhitas, the Saman and the Yajus, owing their existence to 
purely ritual purposes, and being, besides, the one almost 
entirely, the other partly, composed of verses taken from the 
Rigveda, are only of secondary importance for our present inquiry. 
The hymns of the Rigveda constitute the earliest lyrical effusions 
of the Aryan settlers in India which have been handed down 
to posterity. They are certainly not all equally old; on the 
contrary they evidently represent the literary activity of many 
generations of bards, though their relative age cannot as yet be 
determined with anything like certainty. The tenth (and last) 
book of the collection, however, at any rate has all the character- 
istics of a later appendage, and in language and spirit many of 
its hymns approach very nearly to the level of the contents of 
the Atharvan. Of the latter collection about one-sixth is found 
also in the Rigveda, and especially in the tenth book; the 
larger portion peculiar to it, though including no doubt some 
older pieces, appears to owe its origin to an age not long anterior 
to the composition of the Brahmanas. 

The state of religious thought among the ancient bards, as 
reflected in the hymns of the Rigveda, is that of a worship of the 
grand and striking phenomena of nature regarded in the light 
of personal conscious beings, endowed with a power beyond the 
control of man, though not insensible to his praises and actions. 
It is a nature worship purer than that met with in any other 
polytheistic form of belief we are acquainted with — a mythology 
still comparatively little affected by those systematizing tend- 
encies which, in a less simple and primitive state of thought, 
lead to the construction of a well-ordered pantheon and a regular 
organization of divine government. To the mind of the early 
Vedic worshipper the various departments of the surrounding 
nature are not as yet clearly defined, and the functions which he 
assigns to their divine representatives continually flow into one 
another. Nor has he yet learned to care to determine the 
relative worth and position of the objects of his adoration; 
but the temporary influence of the phenomenon to which he 
addresses his praises bears too strongly upon his mind to allow 
him for the' time to consider the claims of rival powers to which 
at other times he is wont to look up with equal feelings of awe 
and reverence. It is this fmmediateness of impulse under which 
the human mind in its infancy strives to give utterance to its 
emotions that imparts to many of its outpourings the ring of 
monotheistic fervour. 

The generic name given to these impersonations, viz. deva 
("the shining ones"), points to the conclusion, sufficiently 
justified by the nature of the more prominent objects of Vedic 
adoration as well as by common natural occurrences, that it 
was the striking phenomena of light which first and most power- 
fully swayed the Aryan mind. In the primitive worship of the 
manifold phenomena of nature it is not, of course, so much their 
physical aspect that impresses the human heart as the moral and 
intellectual forces which are supposed to move and animate 
them. The attributes and relations of some of the Vedic deities, 
in accordance with the nature of the objects they represent, 
partake in a high degree of this spiritual element; but it is not 
improbable that in an earlier phase of Aryan worship the religious 
conceptions were pervaded by it to a still greater and more 
general extent, and that the Vedic belief, though retaining 
many of the primitive features, has on the whole assumed a 
more sensuous and anthropomorphic character. This latter 
element is especially predominant in the attributes and imagery 
applied by the Vedic poets to Indra, the god of the atmospheric 
region, the favourite figure in their pantheon. 

While the representatives of the prominent departments of 
nature appear to the Vedic bard as co-existing in a state of 
independence of one another, their relation to the mortal wor- 
shipper being the chief subject of his anxiety, a simple method of 
classification was already resorted to at an early time, consisting 
in a triple division of the deities into gods residing in the sky, in 
the air, and on earth. It is not, however, until a later stage, — 
the first clear indication being conveyed in a passage of the 



38'a 



BRAHMANISM 



tenth book of the Rigveda — that this attempt at a polytheistic 
system is followed up by the promotion of one particular god 
to the dignity of chief guardian for each of these three regions. 
On the other hand, a tendency is clearly traceable in some of 
the hymns towards identifying gods whose functions present a 
certain degree of similarity of nature; attempts which would 
seem to show a certain advance of religious reflection, the first 
steps from polytheism towards a comprehension of the unity 
of the divine essence. Another feature of the old Vedic worship 
tended to a similar result. The great problems of the origin and 
existence of man and the universe had early begun to engage 
the Hindu mind; and in celebrating the praises of the gods the 
poet was frequently led by his religious, and not wholly dis- 
interested, zeal to attribute to them cosmical functions of the 
very highest order. At a later stage of thought, chiefly exhibited 
in the tenth book of the Rigveda and in the Alharvaveda, inquiring 
sages could not but perceive the inconsistency of such concessions 
of a supremacy among the divine rulers, and tried to solve the 
problem by conceptions of an independent power, endowed with 
all the attributes of a supreme deity, the creator of the universe, 
including the gods of the pantheon. The names under which 
this monotheistic idea is put forth are mostly of an attributive 
character, and indeed some of them, such as Prajapati (" lord 
of creatures "), Visvakarman (" all-worker "), occur in the earlier 
hymns as mere epithets of particular gods. But to other minds 
this theory of a personal creator left many difficulties unsolved. 
They saw, as the poets of old had seen; that everything around 
them, that man himself, was directed by some inward agent; 
and it needed but one step to perceive the essential sameness of 
these spiritual units, and to recognize their being but so many 
individual manifestations of one universal principle or spiritual 
essence. Thus a pantheistic conception was arrived at. put 
forth under various names, such as Purusha (" soul "), Kama 
("desire"), Brahman (neutr.; nom. sing, brdhma) ("devotion, 
prayer '■'). Metaphysical and theosophic speculations were thus 
fast undermining the simple belief in the old gods, until, at the 
time of the composition of the Brdhmanas and Upanishads, we 
find them in complete possession of the minds of the theologians. 
Whilst the theories crudely suggested in the later hymns are now 
further matured and elaborated, the tendency towards catholicity 
of formula favours the combination of the conflicting monotheistic 
and pantheistic conceptions; this compromise, which makes 
Prajapati, the personal creator of the world, the manifestation 
of the impersonal Brahma, the universal self-existent soul, leads 
to the composite pantheistic system which forms the character- 
istic dogma of the Brahmanical period (see Brahman). 

In the Vedic hymns two classes of society, the royal (or 
military) and the priestly classes, were evidently recognized as 
being raised above the level of the Vis, or bulk of the Aryan 
community. These social grades seem to have been in existence 
even before the separation of the two Asiatic branches of the 
Indo-Germanic race, the Aryans of Iran and India. It is true 
that, although the Athrava, Rathaestdo, and VaUrya of the 
Zend Avesta correspond in position and occupation to the 
Brahman, Rdjan and Vis of the Veda, there is no similarity of 
names between them; but this fact only shows that the common 
vocabulary had not yet definitely fixed on any specific names 
for these classes. Even in the Veda their nomenclature is by no 
means limited to a single designation for each of them. More- 
over, Atharvan occurs not infrequently in the hymns as the 
personification of the priestly profession, as the proto-priest who 
is supposed to have obtained fire from heaven and to have 
instituted the rite of sacrifice; and although ratheshtha (" stand- 
ing on a car ") is not actually found in connexion with the 
Rdjan or Kshatriya, its synonym rathin is in later literature a 
not unusual epithet of men of the military caste. At the time 
of the hymns, and even during the common Indo-Persian 
period, the sacrificial ceremonial had already become sufficiently 
complicated to call for the creation of a certain number of 
distinct priestly offices with special duties attached to them. 
While this shows clearly that the position and occupation of the 
priest were those of a profession, the fact that the terms brdhmana 



and brahmaputra, both denoting " the son of a brahman," are 
used in certain hymns as synonyms of brahman, seems to justify 
the assumption that the profession had already, to a certain 
degree, become hereditary at the time when these hymns were 
composed. There is, however, with the exception of a solitary 
passage in a hymn of the last book, no trace to be found in the 
Rigveda of that rigid division into four castes separated from 
one another by insurmountable barriers, which in later times 
constitutes the distinctive feature of Hindu society. The idea 
of caste is expressed by the Sanskrit term varna, originally 
denoting " colour," thereby implying differences of complexion 
between the several classes. The word occurs in the Veda in the 
latter sense, but it is used there to mark the distinction, not 
between the three classes of the Aryan community, but between 
them on the one hand and a dark-coloured hostile people on the 
other. The latter, called Dasas or Dasyus,_consisted, no doubt, 
of the indigenous tribes, with whom the Aryans had to carry 
on a continual struggle for the possession of the land. The 
partial subjection of these comparatively uncivilized tribes as 
the rule of the superior race was gradually spreading eastward, 
and their submission toa state of serfdom under the name of 
Sudras, added to the Aryan community an element, totally 
separated from it by colour, by habits, by language, and by 
occupation. Moreover, the religious belief of these tribes 
being entirely different from that of the conquering people, the 
pious Aryas, and especially the class habitually engaged in acts 
of worship, could hardly fail to apprehend considerable danger 
to the purity of their own faith from too close and intimate a 
contact between the two races. What more natural, therefore, 
than that measures should have been early devised to limit the 
intercourse between them within as narrow bounds as possible ■? 
In course of time the difference of vocation, and the greater or 
less exposure to the scorching influence of the tropical sky, 
added, no doubt, to a certain admixture of Sudra blood, especially 
in the case of the common people, seem to have produced also 
in the Aryan population different shades of complexion, which 
greatly favoured a tendency to rigid class-restrictions originally 
awakened and continually fed by the lot of the servile race. 
Meanwhile the power of the sacerdotal order having been 
gradually enlarged in proportion to the development of the 
minutiae of sacrificial ceremonial and the increase of sacred lore, 
they began to lay claim to supreme authority in regulating 
and controlling the religious and social life of the people. The 
author of the so-called Purusha-sukta, or hymn of Purusha, 
above referred to, represents the four castes — the Brdhmana, 
Kshatriya, VaiSya and Sudra — as having severally sprung 
respectively from the mouth, the arms, the thighs and the feet 
of Purusha, a primary being, here assumed to be the source of 
the universe. It is very doubtful, however, whether at the 
time when this hymn was composed the relative position of the 
two upper castes could already have been settled in so decided 
a way as this theory might lead one to suppose. There is, on 
the contrary, reason to believe that some time had yet to elapse, 
marked by fierce and bloody struggles for supremacy, of which 
only imperfect ideas can be formed from the legendary and 
frequently biased accounts of later generations, before the 
Kshatriyas finally submitted to the full measure of priestly 
authority. 

The definitive establishment of the Brahmanical hierarchy 
marks the beginning of the Brahmanical period properly so 
called. Though the origin and gradual rise of some of the 
leading institutions of this era can, as has been shown, be 
traced in the earlier writings, the chain of their development 
presents a break at this juncture which no satisfactory materials 
as yet enable us to fill up. A considerable portion of the literature 
of this time has apparently been lost; and several important 
works, the original composition of which has probably to be 
assigned to the early days of Brahmanism, such as the institutes 
of Manu and the two great epics, the Mahdbhdrata and Ramayana, 
in the form in which they have been handed down to us, show 
manifest traces of a more modern redaction. Yet it is sufficiently 
clear from internal evidence that Manu's Code of Laws, though 



BRAHMANISM 



3^3 



merely a metrical recast of older materials, reproduces on the 
whole pretty faithfully the state of Hindu society depicted in 
the sources from which it was compiled. The final overthrow 
of the Kshatriya power was followed by a period of jealous 
legislation on the part of the Brahmans. For a time their chief 
aim would doubtless be to improve their newly gained vantage- 
ground by surrounding everything relating to their order with 
a halo of sanctity calculated to impress the lay community 
with feelings of awe. In the Brahmanas and even in the Purusha 
Hymn, and the Atharvan, divine origin had already been 
ascribed to the Vedic Samhitas, especially to the three older 
collections. The same privilege was now successfully claimed 
for the later Vedic literature, so imbued with Brahmanic aspira- 
tions and pretensions; and the authority implied in the designa- 
tion of Sruti or revelation removed henceforth the whole body of 
sacred writings from the sphere of doubt and criticism. This 
concession neeessarily involved an acknowledgment of the new 
social order as a divine institution. Its stability was, however, 
' rendered still more secure by the elaboration of a system of 
conventional precepts, partly forming the basis of Manu's Code, 
which clearly defined the relative position and the duties of the 
several castes, and determined the penalties to be inflicted on 
any transgressions of the limits assigned to each of them. These 
laws are conceived with no sentimental scruples on the part of 
their authors. On the contrary, the offences committed by 
Brahmans against other castes are treated with remarkable 
clemency, whilst the punishments inflicted for trespasses on the 
rights of higher classes are the more severe and inhuman the 
lower the offender stands in the social scale. 

The three first castes, however unequal to each other in 
privilege and social standing, are yet united by a common bond 
of sacramental rites (samskdras), traditionally connected from 
ancient times with certain incidents and stages in the life of the 
Aryan Hindu, as conception, birth, name-giving, the first taking 
out of the child to see the sun, the first feeding with boiled rice, 
the rites of tonsure and hair-cutting, the youth's investiture 
with the sacrificial thread, and his return home on completing 
his studies, marriage, funeral, &c. The modes of observing 
these family rites are laid down in a class of writings called 
Grihya-siltras, or domestic rules. The most important of these 
observances is the upanayana, or rite of conducting the boy to a 
spiritual teacher. Connected with this act is the investiture 
with the sacred cord, ordinarily worn over the left shoulder and 
under the right arm, and varying in material according to the 
class of the wearer. This ceremony being the preliminary act 
to the youth's initiation into the study of the Veda, the manage- 
ment of the consecrated fire and the knowledge of the rites of 
purification, including the sdvitri, a solemn invocation to Savitri, 
the sun (probl. Saturnus), — as a rule the verse liigv. iii. 62. 10, 
also called gayatri from the metre in which it is composed — which 
has to be repeated every morning and evening before the rise 
and after the setting of that luminary, is supposed to constitute 
the second or spiritual birth of the Arya. It is from their 
participation in this rite that the three upper classes are called 
the twice-born. The ceremony is enjoined to take place some 
time between the eighth and sixteenth year of age in the case 
of a Brahman, between the eleventh and twenty-second year of a 
Kshatriya, and between the twelfth and twenty-fourth year of a 
Vaisya. He who has not been invested with the mark of his 
class within this time is for ever excluded from uttering the 
sacred sdvitri and becomes an outcast, unless he is absolved 
from his sin by a council of Brahmans, and after due performance 
of a purificatory rite resumes the badge of his caste. With one 
not duly initiated no righteous man is allowed to associate or 
to enter into connexions of affinity. The duty of the Sudra 
is to serve the twice-born classes, and above all the Brahmans. 
He is excluded from all sacred knowledge, and if he performs 
sacrificial ceremonies he must do so without using holy mantras. 
No Brahman must recite a Vedic text where a man of the servile 
caste might overhear him, nor must he even teach him the laws 
of expiating sin. The occupations of the Vaisya are those con- 
nected with trade, the cultivation of the land and the breeding 



of cattle; while those of a Kshatriya consist in ruling and 
defending the people, administering justice, and the duties of 
the military profession generally. Both share with the Brahman 
the privilege of reading the Veda, but only so far as it is taught 
and explained to them by their spiritual preceptor. To the 
Brahman belongs the right of teaching and expounding the 
sacred texts, and also that of interpreting and determining the 
law and the rules of caste. Only in exceptional cases, when no 
teacher of the sacerdotal class is within reach, the twice-born 
youth, rather than forego spiritual instruction altogether, may 
reside in the house of a non-Brahmanical preceptor; but 
it is specially enjoined that a pupil, who seeks the path to 
heaven, should not fail, as soon as circumstances permit, 
to resort to a Brahman well versed in the Vedas and their 
appendages. 

Notwithstanding the barriers placed between the four castes, 
the practice of intermarrying appears to have been too prevalent 
in early times to have admitted of measures of so stringent a 
nature as wholly to repress it. To marry a woman of a higher 
caste, and especially of a caste not immediately above one's 
own, is, however, decidedly prohibited, the offspring resulting 
from such a union being excluded from the performance of the 
sr&ddha or obsequies to the ancestors, and thereby rendered 
incapable of inheriting any portion of the parents' property. 
On the other hand, a man is at liberty, according to the rules of 
Manu, to marry a girl of any or each of the castes below his own, 
provided he has besides a wife belonging to his own class, for 
only such a one should perform the duties of personal attendance 
and religious observance devolving upon a married woman. 
As regards the children born from unequal marriages of this 
description, they have the rights and duties of the twfce-born, 
if their mother belong to a twice-born caste, otherwise they, 
like the offspring of the former class of intermarriages, share the 
lot of the Sudra, and are excluded from the investiture and the 
sdvitri. For this last reason the marriage of a twice-born man 
with a Sudra woman is altogether discountenanced by some of 
the later law books. At the time of the code of Manu the inters 
mixture of the classes had already produced a considerable 
number of intermediate or mixed castes, which were carefully 
defined, and each of which had a specific occupation assigned to it 
as its hereditary profession. 

The self-exaltation of the first class was not, it would seem, 
altogether due to priestly arrogance and ambition; but, like a 
prominent feature of the post- Vedic belief, the transmigration 
of souls, it was, if not the necessary, yet at least a natural 
consequence of the pantheistic doctrine. To the Brahmanical 
speculator who saw in the numberless individual existences of 
animate nature but so many manifestations of the one eternal 
spirit, to union with which they were all bound to tend as their 
final goal of supreme bliss, the greater or less imperfection of the 
material forms in which they were embodied naturally presented 
a continuous scale of spiritual units from the lowest degradation 
up to the absolute purity and perfection of the supreme spirit. 
To prevent one's sinking yet lower, and by degrees to raise one's 
self in this universal gradation, or, if possible, to attain the 
ultimate goal immediately from any state of corporeal existence; 
there was but one way — subjection of the senses, purity of life 
and knowledge of the deity. " He " (thus ends the code of Manu) 
" who in his own soul perceives the supreme soul in all beings 
and acquires equanfmity toward them all, attains the highest 
state of bliss." Was it not natural then that the men who, 
if true to their sacred duties, were habitually engaged in what 
was most conducive to these spiritual attainments, that the 
Brahmanical class early learnt to look upon themselves, even as 
a matter of faith, as being foremost among the human species 
in this universal race for final beatitude? The life marked out 
for them by that stern theory of class duties which they them- 
selves had worked out, and which, no doubt, must have been 
practised in early times at least in some degree, was by no means 
one of ease and amenity. It was, on the contrary, singularly 
calculated to promote that complete mortification of the instincts 
of animal nature which they considered as indispensable to the 



3«4 



BRAHMANISM 



final deliverance from samsara, the revolution of bodily and 
personal existence. 

The pious Brahman, longing to attain the summum bonum on 
the dissolution of his frail body, was enjoined to pass through a 
succession of four orders or stages of life, viz. those of brahma- 
charin, or religious student; grihastha (or grihamedhin) , or 
householder; vanavdsin (or vdnaprastha) , or anchorite; and 
sannyasin (or bhikshu), or religious mendicant. Theoretically 
this course of life was open and even recommended to every 
twice-born man, his distinctive class-occupations being in that 
case restricted to the second station, or that of married life. 
Practically, however, those belonging to the Kshatriya and 
Vaisya castes were, no doubt, contented, with few exceptions, 
to go through a term of studentship in order to obtain a certain 
amount of religious instruction before entering into the married 
state, and plying their professional duties. In the case of the 
sacerdotal class, the practice probably was all but universal in 
early times; but gradually a more and more limited proportion 
even of this caste seem to have carried their religious zeal to the 
length of self-mortification involved in the two final stages. 
On the youth having been invested with the badge of his caste, 
he was to reside for some time in the house of some religious 
teacher, well read in the Veda, to be instructed in the knowledge 
of the scriptures and the scientific or theoretic treatises attached 
to them, in the social duties of his caste, and in the complicated 
system of purificatory and sacrificial rites. According to the 
number of Vedas he intended to study, the duration of this 
period of instruction was to be, probably in the case of Brah- 
manical students chiefly, of from twelve to forty-eight years; 
during which time the virtues of modesty, duty, temperance 
and self-control were to be firmly implanted in the youth's 
mind by his unremitting observance of the most minute rules of 
conduct. During all this time the student had to subsist entirely 
on food obtained by begging from house to house; and his 
behaviour towards the preceptor and his family was to be that 
prompted by respectful attachment and implicit obedience. In 
the case of gfrls no investiture takes place, but for them the 
nuptial ceremony is considered as an equivalent to that rite. 
On quitting the teacher's abode, the young man returns to his 
family and takes a wife. To die without leaving legitimate off- 
spring, and especially a son, capable of performing the periodical 
rite of obsequies (srdddha), consisting of offerings of water and 
balls of rice, to himself and his two immediate ancestors, is 
considered a great misfortune by the orthodox Hindu. There 
are three sacred " debts " which a man has to discharge in life, 
viz. that which is due to the gods, and of which he acquits 
himself by daily worship and sacrificial rites; that due to the 
rishis, or ancient sages and inspired seers of the Vedic texts, 
discharged by the daily study of the scripture; and the " final 
debt " which he owes to his manes, and of which he .relieves 
himself by leaving a son. To these three some authorities add 
a fourth, viz. the debt owing to humankind, which demands 
his continually practising kindness and hospitality. Hence the 
necessity of a man's entering into the married state. When the 
bridegroom leads the bride from her father's house to his own 
home, and becomes a griha-pati, or householder, the fire which 
has been used for the marriage ceremony accompanies the 
couple to serve them as their garhapatya, or domestic fire. It 
has to be kept up perpetually, day and night, either by them- 
selves or their children, or, if the man be a teacher, by his pupils. 
If it should at any time become extinguished by neglect or 
otherwise, the guilt incurred thereby must be atoned for by an 
act of expiation. The domestic fire serves the family for prepar- 
ing their food, for making the five necessary daily and other 
occasional offerings, and for performing the sacramental rites 
above alluded to. No food should ever be eaten that has not 
been duly consecrated by a portion of it being offered to the gods, 
the beings and the manes. These three daily offerings are also 
called by the collective name of vaisvadeva, or sacrifice " to all 
the deities." The remaining two are the offering to Brahma, 
i.e. the daily lecture of the scriptures, accompanied by certain 
rites, and that to men, consisting in the entertainment of guests. 



The domestic observances — many of them probably ancient 
Aryan family customs, surrounded by the Hindus with a certain 
amount of adventitious ceremonial — were generally performed 
by the householder himself, with the assistance of his wife. 
There is, however, another class of sacrificial ceremonies of a 
more pretentious and expensive kind, called Srauta rites, or rites 
based on kritu, or revelation, the performance of which, though 
not indispensable, were yet considered obligatory under certain 
circumstances (see Brahmana). They formed a very powerful 
weapon in the hands of the priesthood, and were one of the chief 
sources of their subsistence. However great the religious merit 
accruing from these sacrificial rites, they Were obviously a kind 
of luxury which only rich people could afford to indulge in. 
They constituted, as it were, a tax, voluntary perhaps, yet none 
the less compulsory, levied by the priesthood on the wealthy 
laity. 

When the householder is advanced in years, "Vhen he per- 
ceives his skin become wrinkled and his hair grey, when he sees 
the son of his son," the time is said to have come for him to 
enter the third stage of life. He should now disengage himself 
from all family ties— except that his wife may accompany him, 
if she chooses — and repair to a lonely wood, taking with him his 
sacred fires and the implements required for the daily and 
periodical offerings. Clad in a deer's skin, in a single piece of 
cloth, or in a bark garment, with his hair and nails uncut, the 
hermit is to subsist exclusively on food growing wild in the forest, 
such as roots, green herbs, and wild rice and grain. He must 
not accept gifts from any one, except of what may be absolutely 
necessary to maintain him; but with his own little hoard he 
should, on the contrary, honour, to the best of his ability, those 
who visit his hermitage. His time must be spent in reading the 
metaphysical treatises of the Veda, in making oblations, and in 
undergoing various kinds of privation and austerities, with a view 
to mortifying his passions and producing in his mind an entire 
indifference to worldly objects. Having by these means suc- 
ceeded in overcoming all sensual affections and desires, and in 
acquiring perfect equanimity towards everything around him, 
the hermit has fitted himself for the final and most exalted order, 
that of devotee or religious mendicant. As such he has no further 
need of either mortifications or religious observances; but " with 
the sacrificial fires reposited in his mind," he may devote the 
remainder of his days to meditating on the divinity. Taking up 
his abode at the foot of a tree in total solitude, " with no com- 
panion but his own soul," clad in a coarse garment, he should 
carefully avoid injuring any creature or giving offence to any 
human being that may happen to come near him. Once a day, 
in the evening, " when the charcoal fire is extinguished and the 
smoke no longer issues from the fire-places, when the pestle is 
at rest, when the people have taken their meals and the dishes 
are removed," he should go near the habitations of men, in 
order to beg what little food may suffice to sustain his feeble 
frame. Ever pure of mind he should thus bide his time, " as a 
servant expects his wages," wishing neither for death nor for 
life, until at last his soul is freed from its fetters and absorbed 
in the eternal spirit, the impersonal self-existent Brahma. 

The tendency towards a comprehension of the unity of the 
divine essence had resulted in some minds, as has been remarked 
before, in a kind of monotheistic notion of the origin of the 
universe. In the literature of the Brahmana period we meet 
with this conception as a common element of speculation; 
and so far from its being considered incompatible with the 
existence of a universal spirit, Prajdpati, the personal creator 
of the world, is generally allowed a prominent place in the 
pantheistic theories. Yet the state of theological speculation, 
reflected in these writings, is one of transition. The general 
drift of thought is essentially pantheistic, but it is far from 
being reduced to a regular system, and the ancient form of belief 
still enters largely into it. The attributes of Prajapati, in the 
same way, have in them elements of a purely polytheistic nature, 
and some of the attempts at reconciling this new-fangled deity 
with the traditional belief are somewhat awkward. An ancient 
classification of the gods represented them as being thirty-three 



BRAHMANISM 



385 



in number, eleven in each of the three worlds or regions of nature. 
These regions being associated each with the name of one principal 
deity, this division gave rise at a later time to the notion of a kind 
of triple divine government, consisting of Agni (fire). Indra (sky) 
or Vdyu (wind), and Siirya (sun), as presiding respectively over 
the gods on earth, in the atmosphere, and in the sky. Of this 
Vedic triad mention is frequently made in the Brahmana writings.- 
On the other hand the term prajapati (lord of creatures), which in 
the Rigveda occurs as an epithet of the sun, is also once in the 
Atharvaveda applied jointly to Indra and Agni. In the Brah- 
manas Prajapati is several times mentioned as the thirty -fourth 
god; whilst in one passage he is called the fourth god, and made 
to rule over the three worlds. More frequently, however, the 
writings of this period represent him as the maker of the world 
and the father or creator of the gods. It is clear from this dis- 
cordance of opinion on so important a point of doctrine, that at 
this time no authoritative system of belief had been agreed upon 
by the theologians. Yet there are unmistakable signs of a strong 
tendency towards constructing one, and it is possible that in 
yielding to it the Brahmans may have been partly prompted by 
political considerations. The definite settlement of the caste 
system and the Brahmanical supremacy must probably be as- 
signed to somewhere about the close of the Brahmana period. 
Division in their own ranks was hardly favourable to the aspira- 
tions of the priests at such a time; and the want of a distinct 
formula of belief adapted to the general drift of theological 
speculation, to which they could all rally, was probably felt the 
more acutely, the more determined a resistance the military 
class was likely to oppose to their claims. Side by side with the 
conception of the Brahma, the universal spiritual principle, with 
which speculative thought had already become deeply imbued, 
the notion of a supreme personal being, the author of the material 
creation, had come to be considered by many as a necessary 
complement of the pantheistic doctrine. But, owing perhaps to 
his polytheistic associations and the attributive nature of his 
name, the person of Prajapati seems to have been thought but 
insufficiently adapted to represent this abstract idea. The ex- 
pedient resorted to for solving the difficulty was as ingenious as 
it was characteristic of the Brahmanical aspirations. In the 
same way as the abstract denomination of sacerdotalism, the 
neuter brahmi, had come to express the divine essence, so the old 
designation of the individual priest, the masculine term brahmd, 
was raised to denote the supreme personal deity which was to take 
the place and attributes of the Prajapati of the Brahmanas and 
Upanishads (see Brahman). 

However the new dogma may have answered the purposes of 
speculative minds, it was not one in which the people generally 
were likely to have been much concerned; an abstract, colourless 
deity like Brahma could awake no sympathies in the hearts of 
those accustomed to worship gods of flesh and blood. Indeed, 
ever since the primitive symbolical worship of nature had under- 
gone a process of disintegration under the influence of meta- 
physical speculation, the real belief of the great body of the 
people had probably become more and more distinct from 
that of the priesthood. In different localities the principal 
share of their affection may have been bestowed on one or another 
of the old gods who was thereby raised to the dignity of chief 
deity; or new forms and objects of belief may have sprung up 
with the intellectual growth of the people. In some cases even 
the worship of the indigenous population could hardly have 
remained without exercising some influence in modifying the 
belief of the Aryan race. In this way a number of local deities 
would grow up, more or less distinct in name and characteristics 
from the gods of the Vedic pantheon. There is, indeed, sufficient 
evidence to show that, at a time when, after centuries of theo- 
logical speculations, some little insight into the life and thought 
of the people is afforded by the literature handed down to us, 
such a diversity of worship did exist. Under these circumstances 
the policy which seems to have suggested itself to the priesthood, 
anxious to retain a firm hold on the minds of the people, was 
to recognize and incorporate into their system some of the most 
prominent objects of popular devotion, and thereby to establish 
IV. 13 



a kind of catholic creed for the whole community' subject to 
the Brahmanical law. At the time of the original composition 
of the great epics two such deities, Siva or Mahddeva (" the great 
god ") and Vishtiu, seem to have been already admitted into 
the Brahmanical system, where they have ever since retained 
their place; and from the manner in which they are represented 
in those works, it would, indeed, appear that both, and especially 
the former, enjoyed an extensive worship. As several synonyms 
are attributed to each of them, it is not improbable that in some 
of these we have to recognize special names under which the 
people in different localities worshipped these gods, or deities 
of a similar nature which, by the agency of popular poetry, 
or in some other way, came to be combined with them. The 
places assigned to them in the pantheistic system were co- 
ordinate with that of Brahma; the three deities, Brahma, 
Vishnu and Siva, were to represent a triple impersonation 
of the divinity, as manifesting itself respectively in the creation, 
preservation and destruction of the universe. Siva does not occur 
in the Vedic hymns as the name of a god, but only as an adjective 
in the sense of " kind, auspicious." One of his synonyms, 
however, is the name of a Vedic deity, the attributes and nature 
of which show a good deal of similarity to the post- Vedic god. 
This is Rudra, the god of the roaring storm, usually portrayed, 
in accordance with the element he represents, as a fierce, destruc- 
tive deity, " terrible as a wild beast," whose fearful arrows 
cause death and disease to men and cattle. He is also called 
kapardin (" wearing his hair spirally braided like a shell"), 
a word which in later times became one of the synonyms of 
Siva. The Atharvaveda mentions several other names of the same 
god, some of which appear even placed together, as in one 
passage Bhava, Sarva, Rudra and PaSupati. Possibly some of 
them were the names under which one and the same deity was 
already worshipped in different parts of northern India. This 
was certainly the case in later times, since it is expressly stated 
in one of the later works of the Brahmana period, that Sarva was 
used by the Eastern people and Bhava by a Western tribe. 
It is also worthy of note that in the same work (the Satapatha- 
brahmana), composed at a time when the Vedic triad of Agni, 
Indra- Vayu and Surya was still recognized, attempts are made 
to identify this god of many names with Agni; and that in one 
passage in the Mahabharata it is stated that the Brahmans said 
that Agni was Siva. Although such attempts at an identification 
of the two gods remained isolated, they would at least seem 
to point to the fact that, in adapting their speculations to the 
actual state of popular worship, the Brahmans kept the older 
triad distinctly in view, and by means of it endeavoured to bring 
their new structure into harmony with the ancient Vedic belief. 
It is in his character as destroyer that Siva holds his place in the 
triad, and that he must, no doubt, be identified with the Vedic 
Rudra. Another very important function appears, however, 
to have been early assigned to him, on which much more stress 
is laid in his modern worship — that of destroyer being more 
especially exhibited in his consort — viz. the character of a 
generative power, symbolized in the phallic emblem (lingo) 
and in the sacred bull (Nandi), the favourite attendant of the 
god. This feature being entirely alien from the nature of the 
Vedic god, it has been conjectured with some plausibility, that 
the linga-Vforship was originally prevalent among the non- 
Aryan population, and was thence introduced into the worship 
of Siva. On the other hand, there can, we think, be little doubt 
that Siva, in his generative faculty, is the representative of 
another Vedic god whose nature and attributes go far to account 
for this particular feature of the modern deity, viz. Pushan. 
This god, originally, no doubt, a solar deity, is frequently 
invoked, as the lord of nourishment, to bestow food, wealth 
and other blessings. He is once, jointly with Soma, called the 
progenitor of heaven and earth, and is connected with the 
marriage ceremony, where he is asked to lead the bride to the 
bridegroom and make her prosperous (Sivatama). Moreover, 
he has the epithet kapardin (spirally braided), as have Rudr?~ 
and the later Siva, and is called PaSupa, or guardian of cattle, 
whence the latter derives his name PaSupati. But he is also a 

11 



3 86 



BRAHMANISM 



strong, powerful, and even fierce and destructive god, who, 
with his goad or golden spear, smites the foes of his worshipper, 
and thus in this respect offers at least some points of similarity 
to Rudra, which may have favoured the fusion of the two gods. 
As regards Vishnu, this god occupies already a place in the 
Vedic mythology, though by no means one of such prominence 
as would entitle him to that degree of exaltation implied in his 
character as one of the three hypostases of the divinity. More- 
over, although in his general nature, as a benevolent, genial 
being, the Vedic god corresponds on the whole to the later 
Vishnu, the preserver of the world, the latter exhibits many 
important features for which we look in vain in his prototype, 
and which most likely resulted from sectarian worship or from 
an amalgamation with local deities. In one or two of them, 
such as his names Vasudeva and Vaikuntha, an attempt may 
again be traced to identify Vishnu with Indra, who, as we have 
seen, was one of the Vedic triad of gods. The characteristic 
feature of the elder Vishnu is his measuring the world with 
his three strides, which are explained as denoting either the 
three stations of the sun at the time of rising, culminating and 
setting, or the triple manifestation of the luminous element, 
as the fire on earth, the lightning in the atmosphere and the sun 
in the heavens. 

The male nature of the triad was supposed to require to be 
supplemented by each of the three gods being associated with a 
female energy (Sakti). Thus Vach or Sarasvati, the goddess of 
speech and learning, came to be regarded as the sakti, or consort 
of Brahma; Sri or Lakshmi, "beauty, fortune," as that of 
Vishnu ; and Umd or Parvati, the daughter of Himavat, the god 
of the Himalaya mountain, as that of Siva. On the other hand, 
it is not improbable that Parvati — who has a variety of other 
names, such as Kali ("the black one "), Durga (" the inaccess- 
ible, terrible one "), Maha-devi (" the great goddess ") — enjoyed 
already a somewhat extensive worship of her own, and that there 
may thus have been good reason for assigning to her a prominent 
place in the Brahmanical system. 

A compromise was thus effected between the esoteric doctrine 
of the metaphysician and some of the most prevalent forms of 
popular worship, resulting in what was henceforth to constitute 
the orthodox system of belief of the Brahmanical community. 
Yet the Vedic pantheon could not be altogether discarded, 
forming part and parcel, as it did, of that sacred revelation 
(Sruti), which was looked upon as the divine source of all religious 
and social law (smriii, " tradition "), and being, moreover, the 
foundation of the sacrificial ceremonial on which the priestly 
authority so largely depended. The existence of the old gods is, 
therefore, likewise recognized, but recognized in a very different 
way from that of the triple divinity. For while the triad repre- 
sents the immediate manifestation of the eternal, infinite soul — 
while it constitutes, in fact, the Brahma itself in its active relation 
to mundane and seemingly material occurrences, the old tradi- 
tional gods are of this world, are individual spirits or portions of 
the Brahma like men and other creatures, only higher in degree. 
To them an intermediate sphere, the heaven of Indra (the 
svarloka or svarga), is assigned to which man may raise himself 
by fulfilling the holy ordinances; but they are subject to the same 
laws of being; they, like men, are liable to be born again in 
some lower state, and, therefore, like them, yearn for emancipa- 
tion from the necessity of future individual existence. It is a 
sacred duty of man to worship these superior beings by invoca- 
tions and sacrificial observances, as it is to honour the pitris 
("the fathers"), the spirits of the departed ancestors. The 
spirits of the dead, on being judged by Yama, the Pluto of Hindu 
mythology, are supposed to be either passing through a term of 
enjoyment in a region midway between the earth and the heaven 
of the gods, or undergoing their measure of punishment in the 
nether world, situated somewhere in the southern region, before 
they return to the earth to animate new bodies. In Vedic 
mythology Yama was considered to have been the first mortal 
who died, and " espied the way to " the celestial abodes, and in 
virtue of precedence to have become the ruler of the departed; 
in some passages, however, he is already regarded as the god of 



death. Although the pantheistic system allowed only a sub 
ordinate rank to the old gods, and the actual religious belief of 
the people was probably but little affected by their existence, 
they continued to occupy an important place in the affections of 
the poet, and were still represented as exercising considerable 
influence on the destinies of man. The most prominent of them 
were regarded as the appointed Lokapalas, or guardians of the 
world; and as such they were made to preside over the four 
cardinal and (according to some authorities) the intermediate 
points of the compass. Thus Indra, the chief of the gods, was 
regarded as the regent of the east; Agni, the fire (ignis), was in 
the same way associated with the south-east; Yama with the 
south; Surya, the sun ("HXios), with the south-west; Varuna, 
originally the representative of the all-embracing heaven (Ovpavos) 
or atmosphere, now the god of the ocean, with the west; Vdyu 
(or Pavana), the wind, with the north-west; Kuhera, the god of 
wealth, with the north; and Soma (or Chandra) with the north- 
east. ' In the institutes of Manu the Lokapalas are represented as 
standing in close relation to the ruling king, who is said to be 
composed of particles of these his tutelary deities. The retinue 
of Indra consists chiefly of the Gandharvas (probably etym. 
connected with Kevravpos) , a class of genii, considered in the 
epics as the celestial musicians; and their wives, the Apsaras, 
lovely nymphs, who are frequently employed by the gods to 
make the pious devotee desist from carrying his austere practices 
to an extent that might render him dangerous to their power. 
Ndrada, an ancient sage (probably a personification of the cloud, 
the " water-giver"), is considered as the messenger between the 
gods and men, and as having sprung from the forehead of Brahma. 
The interesting office of the god of love is held by Kamadeva, 
also called Ananga, the bodyless, because, as the myth relates, 
having once tried by the power of his mischievous arrow to make 
Siva fall in love with Parvati, whilst he was engaged in devotional 
practices, the urchin was reduced to ashes by a glance of the 
angry god. Two other mythological figures of some importance 
are considered as sons of Siva and Parvati, viz. Karttikeya or 
Skanda, the leader of the heavenly armies, who was supposed 
to have been fostered by the six Krittikds or Pleiades; and 
GaneSa (" lord of troops "), the elephant-headed god of wisdom, 
and at the same time the leader of the dii minorum gentium. 

Orthodox Brahmanical scholasticism makes the attainment of 
final emancipation (mukti, moksha) dependent on perfect know- 
ledge of the divine essence. This knowledge can only be obtained 
by complete abstraction of the mind from external objects and 
intense meditation on the divinity, which again presupposes 
the total extinction of all sensual instincts by means of austere 
practices (tapas). The chosen few who succeed in gaining 
complete mastery over their senses and a full knowledge of the 
divine nature become absorbed into the universal soul immedi- 
ately on the dissolution of the body. Those devotees, on the 
other hand, who have still a residuum, however slight, of ignor- 
ance and worldliness left in them at the time of their death, 
pass to the world of Brahma, where their souls, invested with 
subtile corporeal frames, await their reunion with the Eternal 
Being. 

The pantheistic doctrine which thus forms the foundation of 
the Brahmanical system of belief found its most complete 
exposition in one of the six orthodox darSanas, or philosophical 
systems, the Vedanta philosophy. These systems are considered 
as orthodox inasmuch as they recognize the Veda as the revealed 
source of religious belief, and never fail to claim the authority 
of the ancient seers for their own teachings, even though — as in 
the case of Kapila, the founder of the materialistic Sankhya 
system — they involve the denial of so essential a dogmatic point 
as the existence of a personal creator of the world. So much, 
indeed, had freedom of speculative thought become a matter of 
established habit and intellectual necessity, that no attempt 
seems ever to have been made by the leading theological party 
to put down such heretical doctrines, so long as the sacred 
character of the privileges of their caste was not openly called 
in question. Yet internal dissensions on such cardinal points of 
belief could not but weaken the authority of the hierarchical 



BRAHMAPUTRA 



387 



body; and as they spread beyond the narrow bounds of the 
Brahmanical schools, it wanted but a man of moral and in- 
tellectual powers, and untrammelled by class prejudices, to 
render them fatal to priestly pretensions. Such a man arose in 
the person of a Sakya prince of Kapilavastu, Gotama, the founder 
of Buddhism (about the 6th century B.C.). Had it only been for 
the philosophical tenets of Buddha, they need scarcely have 
caused, and probably did not cause, any great uneasiness to 
the orthodox theologians. He did, indeed, go one step beyond 
Kapila, by altogether denying the existence of the soul as a 
substance, and admitting only certain intellectual faculties as 
attributes of the body, perishable with it. Yet the conception 
which Buddha substituted for the transmigratory soul, viz. 
that of karma (" work "), as the sum total of the individual's 
good and bad actions, being the determinative element of the 
form of his future existence, might have been treated like any 
other speculative theory, but for the practical conclusions he 
drew from it. Buddha recognized the institution of caste, and 
accounted for the social inequalities attendant thereon as being 
the effects of karma in former existences. But, on the other hand, 
he altogether denied the revealed character of the Veda and the 
efficacy of the Brahmanical ceremonies deduced from it, and 
rejected the claims of the sacerdotal class to be the repositaries 
and divinely appointed teachers of sacred knowledge. That 
Buddha never questioned the truth of the Brahmanical theory of 
transmigration shows that this early product of speculative 
thought had become firmly rooted in the Hindu mind as a tenet 
of belief amounting to moral conviction. To the Hindu philo- 
sopher this doctrine seemed alone to account satisfactorily for the 
apparent essential similarity of the vital element in all animate 
beings, no less than for what elsewhere has led honest and 
logical thinkers to the stern dogma of predestination. The 
belief in eternal bliss or punishment, as the just recompense 
of man's actions during this brief term of human life, which their 
less reflective forefathers had at one time held, appeared to 
them to involve a moral impossibility. The equality of all men, 
which Buddha preached with regard to the final goal, the nirvana, 
or extinction of karma and thereby of all future existence and 
pain, and that goal to be reached, not by the performance of 
penance and sacrificial worship, but by practising virtue, could 
not fail to be acceptable to many people. It would be out of 
place here to dwell on the rapid progress and internal develop- 
ment of the new doctrine. Suffice it to say that, owing no doubt 
greatly to the sympathizing patronage of ruling princes, Buddh- 
ism appears to have been the state religion in most parts of 
India during the early centuries of our era. To what extent it 
became the actual creed of the body of the people it will probably 
be impossible ever to ascertain. One of the chief effects it 
produced on the worship of the old gods was the rapid decline 
of the authority of the orthodox Brahmanical dogma, and a 
considerable development of sectarianism. (See Hinduism.) 

See H. H. Wilson, Essays on the Religion of the Hindus;]. Muir, 
Original Sanskrit Texts; M. Muller, History of Ancient Sanskrit 
Literature; C. Lassen, Indische Alterthumskunde; Elphinstone, 
'History of India, ed. by E. B. Cowell. (J- E.) 

BRAHMAPUTRA, a great river of India, with a total length 
of 1800 m. Its main source is in a great glacier-mass of the 
northernmost chain of the Himalayas, called Kubigangri, about 
82° N., and receives various tributaries including one formerly 
regarded as the true source from the pass of MariamLa (i5,5°° 
ft.), which separates its basin from the eastern affluents of the 
Mansarowar lakes, at least 100 m. south-east of those of the 
Indus. It flows in a south-easterly direction for 170 m., and 
then adheres closely to a nearly easterly course for 500 m. more, 
being at the end of that distance in 29° 10' N. lat. It then bends 
north-east for 150 m. before finally shaping itself southwards 
towards the plains of Assam. Roughly speaking, the river may 
be said so far to run parallel to the main chain of the Himalaya 
at a distance of 100 m. therefrom. Its early beginnings take 
their rise amidst a mighty mass of glaciers which cover the 
northern slopes of the watershed, separating them from the 
sources of the Gogra on the south; and there is evidence that 



two of its great southern tributaries, the Shorta Tsanpo (which 
joins about 150 m. from its source), and the Nyang Chu (the 
river of Shigatse and Gyantse), are both also of glacial origin. 
From the north it receives five great tributaries, namely, the 
Chu Nago, the Chachu Tsanpo and the Charta Tsanpo (alj 
within the first 200 m. of its course), and the Raka Tsanpo ant 
Kyi-chu (or river of Lhasa) below. The Chachu and the Charta 
are large clear streams, evidently draining from the great central, 
lake district. Both of them measure more than 100 yds. in 
width at the point of junction, and they are clearly non-glacial. 
The Raka Tsanpo is a lateral affluent, flowing for 200 m. parallel 
to the main river course and some 20 to 30 m. north of it, draining 
the southern slopes of a high snowy range. It is an important 
feature as affording foothold for the Janglam (the great high 
road of southern Tibet connecting Ladakh with China), which 
is denied by the actual valley of the Brahmaputra. The great 
river itself is known in Tibet by many names, being generally 
called the Nari Chu, Maghang Tsanpo or Yaro Tsanpo, above 
Lhasa; the word "tsanpo" (tsang-po) meaning (according to 
Waddell) the " pure one," and applying to all great rivers. 
Fifty miles from its source the river and the Janglam route touch 
each other, and from that point past Tadum (the first important 
place on its banks) for another 130 m., the road follows more 
or less closely the left bank of the river. Then it diverges north- 
wards into the lateral valley of the Raka, until the Raka joins 
the Brahmaputra below Janglache. The upper reaches are 
nowhere fordable between Tadum and Lhasa, but there is a ferry 
at Likche (opposite Tadum on the southern bank), where wooden 
boats covered with hide effect the necessary connexion between 
the two banks and ensure the passage of the Nepal trade. From 
Janglache (13,800 ft.) to Shigatse the river is navigable, the 
channel being open and wide and the course straight. This is 
probably the most elevated system of navigation in the world. 
From Shigatse, which stands near the mouth of the Nyang Chu, 
to the Kyi-chu, or Lhasa river, there is no direct route, the 
river being unnavigable below Shigatse. The Janglam takes 
a circuitous course southwards to Gyantse and the Yamdok Cho 
before dropping again over the Khambala pass to the ferry at 
Khamba barje near Chushul. Thence the valley of the Kyi-chu 
(itself navigable for small boats for about 30 m.) leads to Lhasa 
northwards. At Chushul there is an iron chain-and-rope suspen- 
sion bridge over the deepest part of the river, but it does not 
completely span the river, and it is too insecure for use. The 
remains of a similar bridge exist at Janglache; but there arc no 
wooden or twig suspension bridges over the Tsanpo. At Tadum 
the river is about one half as wide again as the Ganges at Hardwar 
in December, i.e. about 250 to 300 yds. At Shigatse it flows in 
a wide extended bed with many channels, but contracts again at 
Chushul, where it is no wider than it is at Janglache, i.e. from 
600 to 700 yds. At Chushul (below the Kyi-chu) the discharge 
of the river is computed to be about 35,000 cub. ft. per second, 
or seven times that of the Ganges at Hardwar. 

For about 250 m. below Kyi-chu to a point about 20 m. below 
the great southerly bend (in 94° E. long.) the course of the 
Brahmaputra has been traced by native surveyors. Then it 
is lost amidst the jungle-covered hills of the wild Mishmi and 
Abor tribes to the east of Bhutan for another 100 m., until it is 
again found as the Dihong emerging into the plains of Assam. 
About the intervening reaches of the river very little is known 
except that it drops through 7000 ft. of altitude, and that in 
one place, at least, there exist some very remarkable falls. 
These are placed in 29 40' N. lat., between Kongbu and Pema- 
Koi. Here the river runs in a narrow precipitous defile along 
which no path is practicable. The falls can only be approached 
from below, where a monastery has been erected, the resort 
of countless pilgrims. Their height is estimated at 70 ft., and 
by Tibetan report the hills around are enveloped in perpetual 
mist, and the Sangdong (the " lion's face "), over which the 
waters rush, is demon-haunted and full of mystic import. Up 
to comparatively recent years it was matter for controversy 
whether the Tsanpo formed the upper reaches of the Dihong or 
of the Irrawaddy. From the north-eastern extremity of Assam 



3 88 



BRAHMA SAM AJ 



where, near Sadya, the Lohit, the Dibong and the Dihong 
unite to form the wide placid Brahmaputra of the plains — one 
of the grandest rivers of the world — its south-westerly course 
to the Bay of Bengal is sufficiently well known. It still retains 
the proud distinction of being unbridged, and still the River 
Flotilla Company appoints its steamers at regular intervals to 
visit all the chief ports on its banks as far as Dibrugarh. Here, 
however, a new feature has been introduced in the local railway, 
which extends for some 80 m. to Sadya, with a branch to the 
Buri Dihing river at the foot of the Patkoi range. The Patkoi 
border the plains of Upper Assam to the south-east, and across 
these hills lies the most reasonable probability of railway ex- 
tension to Burma. 

The following are the " lowest level " discharges of the principal 
affluents of the Brahmaputra in Upper Assam, estimated in 
cubic feet per second : — 

Lohit river, 9 m. above Sadya 38,800 

Dibong, I m. above junction with Dihong . . 27,200 
Dihong ,, ,, Dibong . . 55,400 

Subansiri 16,900 

The basins of the Dibong and Subansiri are as yet very imper- 
fectly known. That of the Lohit has been fairly well explored. 
Near Goalpara the discharge of the river in January 1828 was 
computed to be 140,000 cub. ft., or nearly double that of the 
Ganges. The length of the river is 700 m. to the Dihong 
junction, and about 1000 in Tibet and eastern Bhutan, 
above the Dihong. The Brahmaputra, therefore, exceeds the 
Ganges in length by about 400 m. The bed of the great 
river maintains a fairly constant position between its extreme 
banks, but the channels within that bed are so constantly shifting 
as to require close supervision on the part of the navigation 
authorities; so much detritus is carried down as to form a 
perpetually changing series of obstructions to steamer traffic. 

An enormous development of agricultural resources has taken 
place within the Brahmaputra basin of late years, chiefly in 
the direction of tea cultivation, as well as in the production 
of jute and silk. Gold is found in the sands of all its upper 
tributaries, and coal and petroleum are amongst the chief 
mineral products which have been brought into economic 
prominence. During the rains the Brahmaputra floods hundreds 
of square miles of country, reaching a height of 30 to 40 ft. above 
its usual level. This supersedes artificial irrigation, and the 
plains so watered yield abundantly in rice, jute and mustard. 

See Reports of the native explorers of the Indian Survey, edited 
by Montgomery and Harman; Imperial Gazetteer of India (1908); 
Sir T. H. Holdich, India (" Regions of the World " series, 1903); 
Ryder, Geographical Journal, 190s; Rawlings, The Great Plateau 
(1906). (T. H. H.*) 

BRAHMA SAMAJ, a religious association in India which 
owes its origin to (Raja) Ram Mohan Roy, who began teaching 
and writing in Calcutta soon after 1800. The name means 
literally the " Church of the One God," and the word Samaj, 
like the word Church, bears both a local and a universal, or an 
individual and a collective meaning. Impressed with the per- 
versions and corruptions of popular Hinduism, Ram Mohan 
Roy investigated the Hindu Shastras, the Koran and the Bible, 
repudiated the polytheistic worship of the Shastras as false, 
and inculcated the reformed principles of monotheism as found 
in the ancient Upanishads of the Vedas. In 1816 he established 
a society, consisting only of Hindus, in which texts from the 
Vedas were recited and theistic hymns chanted. This, however, 
soon died out through the opposition it received from the Hindu 
community. In 1830 he organized the society known as the 
Brahma Samaj. 

The following extract from the trust-deed of the building 
dedicated to it will show the religious belief and the purposes 
of its founder. The building was intended to be " a place of 
public meeting for all sorts and descriptions of people, without 
distinction, who shall behave and conduct themselves in an 
orderly, sober, religious and devout manner, for the worship 
and adoration of the eternal, unsearchable and immutable Being, 
who is the author and preserver of the universe, but not under 
and by any other name, designation or title, peculiarly used 



for and applied to any particular being or beings by any 
man or set of men whatsoever; and that no graven image, 
statue or sculpture, carving, painting, picture, portrait or the 
likeness of anything shall be admitted within the said messuage, 
building, land, tenements, hereditament and premises; and 
that no sacrifice, offering or oblation of any kind or thing shall 
ever be permitted therein; and that no animal or living creature 
shall within or on the said messuage, &c, be deprived of life 
either for religious purposes or food, and that no eating or drinking 
(except such as shall be necessary by any accident for the pre- 
servation of life), feasting or rioting be permitted therein or 
thereon; and that in conducting the said worship or adoration, 
no object, animate or inanimate, that has been or is or shall 
hereafter become or be recognized as an object of worship by any 
man or set of men, shall be reviled or slightingly or contemptu- 
ously spoken of or alluded to, either in preaching or in the hymns 
or other mode of worship that may be delivered or used in the 
said messuage or building; and that no sermon, preaching, 
discourse, prayer or hymns be delivered, made or used in such 
worship, but such as have a tendency to the contemplation 
of the Author and Preserver of the universe or to the pro- 
motion of charity, morality, piety, benevolence, virtue and the 
strengthening of the bonds of union between men of all religious 
persuasions and creeds." 

The new faith at this period held to the Vedas as its basis. 
Ram Mohan Roy soon after left India for England, and took 
up his residence in Bristol, where he died in 1835. The Brahma 
Samaj maintained a bare existence till 1841, when Babu 
Debendra Nath Tagore, a member of a famous and wealthy 
Calcutta family, devoted himself to it. He gave a printing- 
press to the Samaj, and established a monthly journal called 
the Tattwabodhini Patrika, to which the Bengali language now 
owes much for its strength and elegance. About 1850 some of 
the followers of the new religion discovered that the greater 
part of the Vedas is polytheistic, and a schism took place, — 
the advanced party holding that nature and intuition form 
the basis of faith. Between 1847 and 1858 branch societies 
were formed in different parts of India, especially in Bengal, and 
the new society made rapid progress, for, which it was largely 
indebted to the spread of English education and the work 
of Christian missionaries. In fact the whole Samaj movement 
is as distinct a product of the contest of Hinduism with Christi- 
anity in the 19th century, as the Panth movement was of its 
contest with Islam 300 years earlier. 

The Brahma creed was definitively formulated as follows: — 
(1) The book of nature and intuition supplies the basis of religious 
faith. (2) Although the Brahmas do not consider any book 
written by man the basis of their religion, yet they do accept 
with respect and pleasure any religious truth contained in any 
book. (3) The Brahmas believe that the religious condition of 
man is progressive, like the other departments of his condition 
in this world. (4) They believe that the fundamental doctrines 
of their religion are also the basis of every true religion. (5) They 
believe in the existence of one Supreme God — a God endowed 
with a distinct personality, moral attributes worthy of His 
nature and an intelligence befitting the Governor of the universe, 
and they worship Him alone. They do not believe in any of His 
incarnations. (6) They believe in the immortality and progress- 
ive state of the soul, and declare that there is a state of conscious 
existence succeeding life in this world and supplementary to it 
as respects the action of the universal moral government. (7) 
They believe that repentance is the only way to salvation. They 
do not recognize any other mode of reconcilement to the offended 
but loving Father. (8) They pray for spiritual welfare and believe 
in the efficacy of such prayers. (9) They believe in the provi- 
dential care of the divine Father. (10) They avow that love 
towards Him and the performances of the works which He loves, 
constitute His worship. (11) They recognize the necessity of 
public worship, but do not believe that communion with the 
Father depends upon meeting in any fixed place at any fixed 
time. They maintain that they can adore Him at any time 
and at any place, provided that the time and the place are 



BRAHMS 



389 



calculated to compose and direct the mind towards Him. (12) 
They do not believe in pilgrimages and declare that holiness can 
only be attained by elevating and purifying the mind. (13) They 
put no faith in rites or ceremonies, nor do they believe in penances 
as instrumental in obtaining the grace of God. They declare 
that moral righteousness, the gaining of wisdom, divine con- 
templation, charity and the cultivation of devotional feelings 
are their rites and ceremonies. They further say, govern and 
regulate your feelings, discharge your duties to God and to man, 
and you will gain everlasting blessedness; purify your heart, 
cultivate devotional feelings and you will see Him who is unseen. 
(14) Theoretically there is no distinction of caste among the 
Brahmas. They declare that we are all the children of God, 
and therefore must consider ourselves as brothers and sisters. 

For long the Brahmas did not attempt any social reforms. 
But about 1865 the younger section, headed by Babu Keshub 
Chunder Sen, who joined the Samaj in 1857, tried to carry their 
religious theories into practice by demanding the abandonment 
of the external signs of caste distinction. This, however, the 
older members opposed, declaring such innovations to be prema- 
ture. A schism resulted, Keshub Chunder Sen and his followers 
founding the Progressive Samaj, while the conservative stock 
remained as the Adi (i.e. original) Samaj, their aim being to 
" fulfil " rather than to abrogate the old religion. The vitality of 
the movement, however, had left it, and its inconsistencies, com- 
bined with the lack of strong leadership, landed it in a position 
scarcely distinguishable from orthodox Hinduism. Debendra 
Nath Tagore sought refuge from the difficulty by becoming 
an ascetic. The " Brahma Samaj of India," as Chunder Sen's 
party styled itself, made considerable progress extensively and 
intensively until 1878, when a number of the most prominent 
adherents, led by Anand Mohan Bose, took umbrage at Chunder 
Sen's despotic rule and at his disregard of the society's regula- 
tions concerning child marriage. This led to the formation of the 
Sadharana (Universal) Brahma Samaj, now the most popular 
and progressive of the three sections of the movement and 
conspicuous for its work in the cause of literary culture, social 
reform and female education in India. But even when we add 
all sections of the Brahma Samaj together, the total number of 
adherents is only about 4000, mostly found in Calcutta and its 
neighbourhood. A small community (about 130) in Bombay, 
known as the Prarthna (Prayer) Samaj, was founded in 1867 
through Keshub Chunder's influence; they have a similar creed 
to that of the Brahma Samaj, but have broken less decisively 
with orthodox and ceremonial Hinduism. 

See the articles on Arya, Samaj, Keshub Chunder Sen, Ram 
Mohan Roy. Also John Robson, Hinduism, and Christianity; and 
the Theistic Quarterly Review (the organ of the Society since 1880). 

BRAHMS, JOHANNES (1833-1897), German composer, was 
bom in Hamburg on the 7th of May 1833. He was the son of a 
double-bass player in the Hamburg city theatre and received his 
first musical instruction from his father. After some lessons 
from O. Cossel, he went to Cossel's master, Eduard Marxsen of 
Altona, whose experience and artistic taste directed the young 
man's genius into the highest paths. A couple of public appear- 
ances as a pianist were hardly an interruption to the course of 
his musical studies, and these were continued nearly up to the 
time when Brahms accepted an engagement as accompanist to 
the Hungarian violinist, Remenyi, for a concert tour in 1853. 
At Gottingen there occurred a famous contretemps which had a 
most important though indirect influence on the whole after-life 
of the young player. A piano on which he was to play the 
" Kreutzer " sonata of Beethoven with Remenyi turned out to 
be a semitone below the required pitch; and Brahms played the 
part by heart, transposing it from A to B flat, in such a way that 
the great violinist, Joachim, who was presenl and discerned 
what the feat implied, introduced himself to Brahms, and laid 
the foundation of a life-long friendship. Joachim gave him intro- 
ductions to Liszt at Weimar and to Schumann at Dusseldorf; 
the former hailed him for a time as a member of the advanced 
party in music, on the strength of his E flat minor scherzo, but 
the misapprehension was not of long continuance. The intro- 



duction to Schumann impelled that master, now drawing near 
the tragic close of his career, to write the famous article " Neue 
Bahnen," in which the young Brahms was proclaimed to be the 
great composer of the future, " he who was to come." The 
critical insight in Schumann's article is all the more surprising 
when it is remembered how small was the list of Brahms's works 
at the time. A string quartet, the first pianoforte sonata, the 
scherzo already mentioned, and the earliest group of songs, con- 
taining the dramatic " Liebestreu," are the works which drew 
forth the warm commendations of Schumann. In December 
1853 Brahms gave a concert at Leipzig, as a result of which the 
firms of Breitkopf & Haertel and of Senff undertook to publish 
his compositions. In 1854 he was given the post of choir- 
director and music-master to the prince of Lippe-Detmold, but 
he resigned it after a few years, going first to Hamburg, and 
then to Zurich, where he enjoyed the friendship and artistic 
counsel of Theodor Kirchner. The unfavourable verdict of the 
Leipzig Gewandhaus audience upon his pianoforte concerto in 
D minor op. 15, and several remarkably successful appearances 
in Vienna, where he was appointed director of the Singakademie 
in 1863, were the most important external events of Brahms's 
life, but again he gave up the conductorship after a few months 
of valuable work, and for about three years had no fixed place 
of abode. Concert tours with Joachim or Stockhausen were 
undertaken, and it was not until 1867 that he returned to 
Vienna, or till 1872 that he chose it definitely as his home, his 
longest absence from the Austrian capital being between 
1874 and 1878, when he lived near Heidelberg. From 1871 to 
1874 he conducted the concerts of the " Gesellschaft der Musik- 
freunde," but after the later date he occupied no official position 
of any kind. With the exception of journeys to Italy in the 
spring, or to Switzerland in the summer, he rarely left Vienna. 
He refused to come to England to take the honorary degree of 
Mus.D. offered by the university of Cambridge; the university 
of Breslau made him Ph.D. in 1881; in 1886 he was created a 
knight of the Prussian order Pour le merite, and in 1889 was 
presented with the freedom of his native city. He died in Vienna 
on the 3rd of April 1897. 

The works of Brahms may be summarized as follows: — 
Various sacred compositions for chorus, op. 12, 13, 22, 27, 29, 30, 
37, leading up to op. 45, the " German Requiem " first performed 
at Bremen in 1868, and subsequently completed by a soprano 
solo with chorus; the " Triumphlied " in commemoration of 
the German victories of 1870-71; and some choral songs and 
motets, op. 74, 109 and no. Secular choral works, op. 17, 41, 
42, 44, 50 (" Rinaldo " for tenor solo and male choir), 53 (" Rhap- 
sodic, " alto solo and male choir), 54 (" Schicksalslied "), 62, 82 
(Schiller's Nanie), 89 (" Gesang der Parzen "), 93, 104, 113. 
Concerted vocal works, op. 20, 28, 31, 52 (" Liebeslieder-Walzer ") 
61, 64, 65 (" Neue Liebeslieder "), 75, 92, 103, 112. Solo songs, 
nearly 300. Orchestral works: four symphonies, op. 68, 73, 90 
and 98; two serenades, op. n and 16; two pianoforte concertos, 
op. 15 and 83, one violin concerto, op. 77; concerto for violin and 
violoncello, op. 102; variations on a theme by Haydn, op. 56; 
two overtures, " Academische Festouvertiire," op. 80, and 
" Tragic Overture," op. 81. Chamber music: two sextets, op. 18 
and 36; quintet, piano and strings, op. 34, strings, op. 88 and 111, 
clarinet and strings, op. 115; three string quartets, op. 51 and 
67, three quartets for piano and strings, op. 25, 26 and 60. 
Three trios for piano and strings, op. 8, 87 and 101; trio for 
piano, violin and horn, op. 40; piano, clarinet and violoncello, 
op. 114. Duet sonatas, three for piano and violin, op. 78, 100 
and 108; two for piano and violoncello, op. 38 and 99; two for 
piano and clarinet, op. 120. Pianoforte solos: three sonatas, 
op. 1, 2 and s; scherzo, op. 4; variations, op. 9, 21, 23, 24, 35; 

4 ballads, op. ic • waltzes, op. 39; two rhapsodies, op. 79; 
caprices and intermezzi, op. 76, 116, 117, 118 and 119. 

5 studies and 51 Uebungen without opus-number, and a chorale- 
prelude and fugue for organ, besides four books of Hungarian 
Dances arranged for pianoforte duet. 

Brahms has often been called the last of the great classical 
masters, in a sense wider than that of his place in the long line of 



39° 



BRAHUI 



the great composers of Germany. Though only the most super- 
ficial observers could deny him the possession of qualities which 
distinguish the masters of the romantic school, it is as a classicist 
that he must be ranked among modern musicians. From the 
beginning of his career until its close, his ideas were clothed by 
preference in the forms which had sufficed for Beethoven, and 
the instances in which he departed from structural precedent are 
so rare that they might be disregarded, were they not of such 
high value that they must be considered as the signs of a logical 
development of musical form, and not as indicating a spirit of 
rebellion against existing modes of structure. His practice, more 
frequent in later than in earlier life, of welding together the 
" working-out " and the " recapitulation " sections of his move- 
ments in a closer union than any of his predecessors had 
attempted, is an innovation which cannot fail to have important 
results in the future; and if the skill of younger writers is not 
adequate to such a display of ingenuity as occurs in the finale of 
the fourth symphony, where the " passacaglia " form has been 
used with an effect that is almost bewildering to the ordinary 
listener, that at least stands as a monument of inventiveness 
finely subordinated to the emotional and intellectual purport of 
the thoughts expressed. His themes are always noble, and even 
from the point of view of emotional appeal their deep intensity of 
expression is of a kind which grows upon all who have once been 
awakened to their beauty, or have been at the pains to grasp 
the composer's characteristics of utterance. His vocal music, 
whether for one voice or many, is remarkable for its fidelity to 
natural inflection and accentuation of the words, and for its 
perfect reflection of the poet's mood. His songs, vocal quartets 
and choral works abound in passages that prove him a master of 
effects of sound; and throughout his chamber music, in his treat- 
ment of the piano, of the strings, or of the solo wind instruments 
he employs, there are numberless examples which sufficiently 
show the irrelevance of a charge sometimes brought against his 
music, that it is deficient in a sense of what is called "tone- 
colour." It is perfectly true that the mere acoustic effect of a 
passage was of far less importance to him than its inherent beauty, 
poetic import, or logical fitness in a definite scheme of develop- 
ment; and that often in his orchestral music the casual hearer 
receives an impression of complexity rather than of clearness, 
and is apt to imagine that the " thickness " of instrumentation is 
the result of clumsiness or carelessness. Such instances as the 
introduction to the finale of the first symphony, the close of the 
first movement of the second, what maybe called the epilogue of 
the third, or the whole of the variations on a theme of Haydn, are 
not only marvels of delicate workmanship in regard to structure, 
but are instinct with the sense of the peculiar beauty and charac- 
teristics of each instrument. The " Academic Festival " over- 
ture proves Brahms a master of musical humour, in his treatment 
of the student songs which serve as its themes; and the com- 
panion piece, the " Tragic " overture, reaches a height of sub- 
limity which is in no way lessened because no particular tragedy 
has ever been named in conjunction with the work. 

As with all creative artists of supreme rank, the work of Brahms 
took a considerable time before it was very generally appreciated. 
The change in public opinion is strikingly illustrated in regard to 
the songs, which, once voted ineffective and unvocal, have now 
taken a place in every eminent singer's repertory. The outline in 
his greater works must be grasped with some definiteness before 
the separate ideas can be properly understood in their true 
relation to each other; and while it is his wonderful power of 
handling the recognized classical forms, so as to make them seem 
absolutely new, which stamps him as the greatest musical 
architect since Beethoven, the necessity for realizing in some 
degree what musical form signifies has undoubtedly been a bar to 
the rapid acceptance of his greater works by the uneducated 
lovers of music. These are of course far more easily moved by 
effects of colour than by the subtler beauties of organic structure, 
and Brahms's attitude towards tone-colour was scarcely such as 
would endear him to the large number of musicians in whose view 
tone-colour is pre-eminent. His mastery of form, again, has been 
- attacked as formalism by superficial critics, blind to the real 



inspiration and distinction of his ideas, and to their perfection in 
regard to style and the appropriateness of every theme to the 
exact emotional state to be expressed. In his larger vocal works 
there are some which treat of emotional conditions far removed 
from the usual stock of subjects taken by the average composer; 
to compare the ideas in the " German Requiem " with those of 
the " Schicksalslied " or " Nanie " is to learn a lesson in artistic 
style which can never be forgotten. In the songs, too, it is 
scarcely too much to say that the whole range of human emotion 
finds expression in noble lyrics that yield to none in actual 
musical beauty. The four " Ernste Gesange," Brahms's last 
composition, must be considered as his supreme achievement 
in dignified utterance of noble thoughts in a style that perfectly 
fits them. The choice of words for these as well as for the 
" Requiem " and others of his serious works reveals a strong 
sense of the vanity and emptiness of human life, but at least as 
strong a confidence in the divine consolations. 

It has been the misfortune of the musical world in Germany 
that every prominent musician is ranged by critics and amateurs 
in one of two hostile camps, and it was probably due in the main 
to the misrepresentations of the followers of Wagner that the 
idea was so generally held that Brahms was a man of narrow 
sympathies and hard, not to say brutal manners. The latter 
impression was fostered, no doubt, by the master's natural 
detestation of the methods by which the average lionizer seeks to 
gain his object, and both alike are disproved in the Recollections of 
J. V. Widmann, an intimate friend for many years, which throw 
a new light on the master, revealing him as a man of the widest 
artistic sympathies, neither intolerant of excellence in a line 
opposed to his own, nor weakly enthusiastic over mediocre pro- 
ductions by composers whose views were in complete sympathy 
with him. His admiration for Verdi and Wagner is enough to 
show that the absence of any operatic work from his list of com- 
positions was simply due to the difficulty of finding a libretto 
which appealed to him, not to any antagonism to the lyric stage 
in its modern developments. How far he stood from the pre- 
judices of the typical pedant may be seen in the passionate love 
he showed throughout his life for national music, especially that 
of Hungary. Not only were his arrangements of Hungarian 
dances the first work by which his name was known outside his 
native land, but his first pianoforte quartet, op. 25 in G minor, 
incurred the wrath of the critics of the time by its introduction of 
some characteristics of Hungarian music into the finale. His 
arrangement of a number of children's traditional songs was 
published without his name, and dedicated to the children of 
Robert and Clara Schumann in the earliest years of his creative 
life; and among the last of his publications was a collection 
of forty-nine German Volkslieder, arranged with the utmost 
skill, taste and simplicity. He had a great admiration for the 
waltzes of Strauss, and in many passages of his own works 
the entrain that is characteristic of the Viennese dance-writers 
is present in a striking degree. 

See also W. H. Hadow, Studies in Modem Music (2nd series, 
1908) ; and the articles Music, Song. (J. A. F. M.) 

BRAHUI, a people of Baluchistan, inhabiting the Brahui 
mountains, which extend continuously from near the Bolan 
Pass to Cape Monze on the Arabian Sea. The khan of Kalat, 
the native ruler of Baluchistan, is himself a Brahui, and a 
lineal descendant of Kumbar, former chief of the Kumbarini, 
a Brahui tribe. The origin of the Brahuis is an ethnological 
mystery. Bishop Robert Caldwell and other authorities de- 
clare them Dravidians, and regard them as the western 
borderers of Dravidian India. Others believe them to be 
Scythians, 1 and others again connect them with Tatar 

1 Compare Mountstuart Elphinstone's {History of India, 9th ed., 
1905, p. 249) description of Scythians with physique of Brahuis. A 
relationship between the Jats (q.v.) and the Brahuis has been sug- 
gested, and it is generally held that the former were of Scythic stock. 
The Mengals, Bizanjos and Zehris, the three largest Brahui tribes, 
are called Jadgal or Jagdal, i.e. Jats, by some of their neighbours. 
The Zaghar Mengal, a superior division of the Mengal tribe, believe 
they themselves came from a district called Zughd, somewhere 
near Samarkand in central Asia. Gal appears to be a collective 



BRAID— BRAIN 



39 1 



mountaineers who early settled in southern parts of Asia. The 
origin of the word itself is in doubt. It is variously derived 
as a corruption of the Persian Ba Rohi (literally " of the hills ") ; 
as an eponym from Braho, otherwise Brahin or Ibrahim, a 
legendary hero of alleged Arab descent who led his people " out 
of the west," while Dr Gustav Oppert believes that the name is 
in some way related to, if not identical with, that of the Baluchis. 
He recognizes in the name of the Paratas and Paradas, who 
dwelt in north-eastern Baluchistan, the origin of the modern 
Brahui. He gives reasons for regarding the Bra as a contraction 
of Bara and obtains " thus in Barahui a name whose resemblance 
to that of the ancient Barrhai (the modern Bhars), as well as to 
that of the Paratas and Paravar and their kindred the Maratha 
Paravari and Dravidian Parheyas of Palaman, is striking." 
The Brahuis declare themselves to be the aborigines of the 
country they now occupy, their ancestors coming from Aleppo. 
For this there seems little foundation, and their language, 
which has no affinities with Persian, Pushtu or Baluchi, must be, 
according to the most eminent scholars, classed among the 
Dravidian tongues of southern India. Probably the Brahuis are 
of Dravidian' stock, a branch long isolated from their kindred 
and much Arabized, and thus exhibiting a marked hybridism. 

Whatever their origin, the Brahuis are found in a position 
of considerable power in Baluchistan from earliest times. Their 
authentic history begins with Mir Ahmad, who was their chief 
in the 17th century. The title of " khan " was assumed by Nasir 
the Great in the middle of the 18th century. The Brahuis are 
a confederacy of tribes possessing common lands and uniting 
from time to time for purposes of offence or defence. At their 
head is the khan, who formerly seems to have been regarded as 
semi-divine, it being customary for the tribesmen on visiting 
Kalat to make offerings at the Ahmadzai gate before entering. 
The Brahuis are a nomadic race, who dwell in tents made of 
goats' hair, black or striped, and live chiefly on the products 
of their herds. They are Sunnite Mahommedans, but are not 
fanatical. In physique they are very easily distinguished from 
their neighbours, the Baluchis and Pathans, being a smaller, 
sturdier people with rounder faces characterized by the flat, 
blunt and coarse features of the Dravidian races. They are of 
a dark brown colour, their hair and beards being often brown not 
black. They are an active, hardy race, and though as avaricious 
as the Pathans, are more trustworthy and less turbulent. Their 
ordinary dress is a tunic or shirt, trousers gathered in at the 
ankles and a cloak usually of brown felt. A few wear turbans, 
but generally their headgear is a round skullcap with tassel 
or button. Their women are not strictly veiled. Sandals of deer 
or goat skin are worn by all classes. Their weapons are rifles, 
swords and shields. They do not use the Afghan knife or any 
spears. Some few Brahuis are enlisted in the Bombay Native 
Infantry. 

See Dr Bellew, Indus to Euphrates (London, 1874) ! Gustav Oppert, 
The Original Inhabitants of India (1893); Dr Theodore Duka, 
Essay on the Brahui Grammar (after the German of Dr Trumpp of 
Munich University). 

BRAID (from the O. Eng. bregdan, to move quickly to and 
fro, hence to weave), a plait, especially a plait of hair, also a 
plaited tape woven of wool, silk, gold thread, &c, used for trim- 
ming or binding. A particular use is for the narrow bands, 
bordered with open work, used in making point lace. 

BRAIDWOOD, THOMAS (17 15-1806), British teacher of the 
deaf and dumb, was born in Scotland in 1715, and educated 
at Edinburgh University. He became a school teacher, and 
in 1760 opened in Edinburgh, with one pupil, the first school 
in Great Britain for the deaf and dumb, following the system 
of Dr John Wallis, described in Philosophical Transactions 
suffix in Baluchi, and Men or Min occurs on the lists of the Behistun 
inscriptions as the name of one of the Scythian tribes deported 
by Darius, the Achaemenian, for their turbulence (see Kalat, A 
Memoir on the County and Family of the Ahmadzai Khans of Kalat, 
by G. P. Tate). Sajdi, another Brahui tribal name, is Scythian, 
the principal clan of which tribe is the Saga, both names being 
identifiable with the Sagetae and Saki of ancient writers. Thus 
there seems some reason for believing that the former occupants 
of at least some portions of the Brahui domain were of Scythianblood. 



nearly a hundred years before. This school was the model for 
all of the early English institutions of the kind. Dr Johnson 
visited it in 1773, and describes it as " a subject of philosophical 
curiosity . . . which no other city has to show," and Braid- 
wood's dozen pupils as able " to hear with the eye." In 1783 
Braidwood moved to Hackney, where he died on the 24th of 
October 1806. 

BRAILA (in Rumanian Br alia, formerly Ibraila), the capital 
of the department of Braila, Rumania; situated amid flat and 
dreary country on the left bank of the river Danube, about 
100 m. from its mouth at Sulina. Pop. (1900) 58,392, including 
10,811 Jews. Southward, the Danube encircles a vast fen, 
tenanted only by waterfowl and herds of half-wild swine, while 
the plain which extends to the north-east and east only grows 
fertile at some distance inland. Braila itself is plainly built on 
a bank rising about 50 ft. above sea-level; but partly on a narrow 
strip of ground which separates this bank from the water's edge. 
Along, the crest of the bank a public park is laid out, com- 
manding a view of the desolate Dobrudja hills, across the river. 

On the landward side, Braila has the shape of a crescent, 
the curve of its outer streets following the line of the old fortifica- 
tions, dismantled in 1829. Few houses, among the older quarters, 
exceed two storeys in height, but the main streets are paved, 
and there is a regular supply of filtered water. A wide avenue, 
the Strada Bulivardului, divides the town proper from the 
suburbs. The principal church, among many, is the cathedral 
of St Michael, a large, ungainly building of grey sandstone. 
Electric tramways intersect the town, and are continued for 3 m. 
to Lacul Sarat (Salt Lake), where there are mineral springs and 
mud-baths, owned by the state. The waters, which contain 
over 45% of salt, iodine and sulphur, are among the strongest 
of their kind in Europe; and are of high repute, being annually 
visited by more than a thousand patients. Braila is the seat 
of a chamber of commerce. It is the chief port of entry for 
Walachia, and the headquarters of the grain trade; for, besides 
its advantageous position on the river, it is connected with 
the central Walachian railways by a line to Buzeu, and with 
the Russian and Moldavian systems by a line to Galatz. Quays, 
where ships drawing 1 5 ft. of water can discharge, line the river 
front; and there are large docks, grain elevators and ware- 
houses, besides paper mills, roperies, and soap and candle works. 
Over 20 steamers, maintained by the state, ply between Braila 
and Rotterdam. Among the vessels of all nations, the British 
are first in numbers and tonnage, the Greek second. Grain 
and timber form the chief articles of export; textiles, machinery, 
iron goods and coal being most largely imported. 

Many events connected with the history of Walachia took 
place in the neighbourhood of Braila. In 1475 Stephen the 
Great, having dethroned the voivode Radu, burned the town. 
In 1573 another Moldavian prince took the city by storm, and 
massacred the Turkish garrison. In 1659 it was again burned 
by the Walachian prince Mircea, and for the time the Turks 
were expelled, but afterwards returned. In the latter part of the 
18th century Braila was several times captured by the Russians, 
and in 1770 it was burned. By the peace of Bucharest (1812) 
the Turks retained the right of garrisoning Braila. In 1828 it 
was gallantly defended by Soliman Pasha, who, after holding out 
from the middle of May until the end of June, was allowed to 
march out with the honours of war. At the peace of Adrianople 
(1829) the place was definitely assigned to Walachia; but 
before giving it up, the grand-duke Michael of Russia razed the 
citadel, and in this ruinous condition it was handed over to the 
Walachians. Braila was the spot chosen by the Russian general 
Gorchakov for crossing the Danube with his division in 1854. 
On the banks of the Danube, a little above the city, are some 
remains of the piles of a bridge said by a very doubtful tradition 
to have been built by Darius (c. 500 B.C.). 

BRAIN (A.S. braegen), that part of the central nervous system 
which in vertebrate animals is contained within the cranium 
or skull; it is divided into the great brain or cerebrum, the 
hind brain or cerebellum, and the medulla oblongata, which is 
the transitional part between the spinal cord and the othei 



392 



BRAIN 



[ANATOMY 



two parts already named. Except where stated, we deal here 
primarily with the brain in man. 

i. Anatomy 

Membranes of the Human Brain. 

Three membranes named the dura mater, arachnoid and pia mater 

cover the brain and lie between it and the cranial cavity. The most 

external of the three is the dura mater, which consists of a cranial and 

a spinal portion. The cranial part is in contact with the inner table 




Fig. i. — Dura Mater and Cranial Sinuses. 



1 . Falx cerebri. 

2. Tentorium. 

3,3. Superior longitudinal sinus. 

4. Lateral sinus. 

5. Internal jugular vein. 

6. Occipital sinus. 

6'. Torcular Herophili. 

7. Inferior longitudinal sinus. 

8. Veins of Galen. 



and 10. Superior and inferior 

petrosal sinus. 
Cavernous sinus. 
Circular sinus which connects 

the two cavernous sinuses 

together. 
Ophthalmic vein, from 15, 

the eyeball. 
14. Crista galli of ethmoid bone. 



11. 
12. 



13 



of the skull, and is adherent along the lines of the sutures and to the 
margins of the foramina, which transmit the nerves, more especially 
to the foramen magnum. If forms, therefore, for these bones an 
internal periosteum, and the meningeal arteries which ramify in it 
are the nutrient arteries of the inner table. As the growth of bone 
is more active in infancy and youth than in the adult, the adhesion 
between the dura mater and the cranial bones is greater in early 
life than at maturity. From the inner surface of the dura mater 
strong bands pass into the cranial cavity, and form partitions 
between certain of the subdivisions of the brain. A vertical longi- 
tudinal mesial band, named, from its sickle shape, falx cerebri, dips 
between the two hemispheres of the cerebrum. A smaller sickle- 
shaped vertical mesial band, the falx cerebelli, attached to the internal 
occipital crest, passes between the two hemispheres of the cerebellum. 
A large band arches forward in the horizontal plane of the cavity, 
from the transverse groove in the occipital bone to the clinoid 

Erocesses of the sphenoid, and is attached laterally to the upper 
order of the petrous part of each temporal bone. It separates the 
cerebrum from the cerebellum, and, as it forms a tent-like covering 
for the latter, is named tentorium cerebelli. Along certain lines the 
cranial dura mater splits into two layers to form tubular passages 
for the transmission of venous blood. These passages are named the 
venous blood sinuses of the dura mater, and they are lodged in the 
grooves on the inner surface of the skull referred to in the description 
of the cranial bones. Opening into these sinuses are numerous veins 
which convey from the brain the blood that has been circulating 
through it; and two of these sinuses, called cavernous, which lie 
at the sides of the body of the sphenoid bone, receive the ophthalmic 
veins from the eyeballs situated in the orbital cavities. These blood 
sinuses pass usually from before backwards : a superior longitudinal 
along the upper border of the falx cerebri as far as the internal occi- 
pital protuberance; an inferior longitudinal along its lower border 
as far as the tentorium, where it joins the straight sinus, which 
passes back as far as the same protuberance. One or two small 
occipital sinuses, which lie in the falx cerebelli, also pass to join the 
straight and longitudinal sinuses opposite this protuberance ; several 
currents of blood meet, therefore, at this spot, and as Herophilus 
supposed that a sort of whirlpool was formed in the blood, the name 
torcular Herophili has been used to express the meeting of these 
sinuses. From the torcular the blood is drained away by two large 
sinuses, named lateral, which curve forward and downward to the 
jugular foramina to terminate in the internal jugular veins. In 
its course each lateral sinus receives two petrosal sinuses, which pass 
from the cavernous sinus backwards along the upper and lower 
borders of the petrous part of the temporal bone. The dura mater 



consists of a tough, fibrous membrane, somewhat flocculent exter- 
nally, but smooth, glistening, and free on its inner surface. The 
inner surface has the appearance of a serous membrane, and when 
examined microscopically is seen to consist of a layer of squamous 
endothelial cells. Hence the dura mater is sometimes called a fibro- 
serous membrane. The dura mater is well provided with lymph 
vessels, which in all probability open by stomata on the free inner 
surface. Between the dura mater and the subjacent arachnoid 
membrane is a fine space containing a minute quantity of limpid 
serum, which moistens the smooth inner surface of the dura and the 
corresponding smooth outer surface of the arachnoid. It is regarded 
as equivalent to the cavity of a serous membrane, and is named the 
sub-dural space. 

Arachnoid Mater. — The arachnoid is a membrane of great delicacy 
and transparency, which loosely envelops both the brain and spinal 
cord. It is separated from these organs by the pia mater; but 
between it and the latter membrane is a distinct space, called sub- 
arachnoid. The sub-arachnoid space is more distinctly marked 
beneath the spinal than beneath the cerebral parts of the membrane, 
which forms a looser investment for the cord than for the brain. At 
the base of the brain, and opposite the fissures between the convolu- 
tions of the cerebrum, the interval between the arachnoid and the pia 
mater can, however, always be seen, for the arachnoid does not, like 
the pia mater, clothe the sides of the fissures, but passes directly 
across between the summits of adjacent convolutions. The sub- 
arachnoid space is subdivided into numerous freely-communicating 
loculi by bundles of delicate areolar tissue, which bundles are in- 
vested, as Key and Retzius have shown, by a layer of squamous 
endothelium. The space contains a limpid cerebro-spinal fluid, which 
varies in quantity from 2 drachms to 2 oz., and is most plentiful 
in the dilatations at the base of the brain known as cisternae. It 
should be clearly understood that there is no communication between 
the subdural and sub-arachnoid spaces, but that the latter com- 
municates with the ventricles through openings in the roof of the 
fourth, and in the descending cornua of the lateral ventricles. 

When the skull cap is removed, clusters of granular bodies are 
usually to be seen imbedded in the dura mater on each side of the 
superior longitudinal sinus; these are named the Pacchionian bodies. 
When traced through the dura mater they are found to spring from 
the arachnoid. The observations of Luschka and Cleland have 
proved that villous processes invariably grow from the free surface 
of that membrane, and that when these villi greatly increase in size 
they form the bodies in question. Sometimes the Pacchionian 
bodies greatly hypertrophy, occasioning absorption of the bones of the 
cranial vault and depressions on the upper surface of the brain. 

Pia Mater. — This membrane closely invests the whole outer surface 
of the brain. It dips into the fissures between the convolutions, and 



Optic chiasma' 



Optic tract 

Corpus geniculatum 

externum 

Corpus geniculatum 

internum 

Locus perforatus 

posticus 



Middle peduncle 
of the cerebellum 



Restiform body. 

Olive. 

Pyramid. 

Anterior superficial 

arcuate fibres' 

Decussation 01 
pyramids 




Optic nerve 

Tnfundibulum 

Tuber cinereum 

Corpora mammillaria 

Oculo-rnotornerve(IIL) 

Trochlear nerve(IV.) 
winding round the crus 
cerebri 

Trigeminal nerve (V.) 

Abducent nerve (VI.) 
Facial nerve (VII.) 
Auditory nerve (VIII.) 

Vago-glossopharyngeal 
nerve (IX. and X.) 

Hypoglossal 
(nerve XII.) 

Spinal accessory 
nerve (XI.) 

First cervical nerve 



After D. J. Cunningham's Text-book oj Anatomy. 

Fig. 2. — Front View of the Medulla, Pons and Mesencephalon 
of a full-time Human Foetus. 

a wide prolongation, named velum interpositum, lies in the interior 
of the cerebrum. With a little care it can be stripped off the brain 
without causing injury to its substance. At the base of the brain 
the pia mater is prolonged on to the roots of the cranial nerves. 
This membrane consists of a delicate connective tissue, in which 
the arteries of the brain and spinal cord ramify and subdivide into 
small branches before they penetrate the nervous substance, and in 
which the veins conveying the blood from the nerve centres lie before 
they open into the blood sinuses of the cranial dura mater and the 
extradural venus plexus of the spinal canal. 



ANATOMY] 



BRAIN 



393 



Medulla Oblongata. 



Gracile nucleus 



The Medulla Oblongata rests upon the basi-occipital. It is somewhat 
pyramidal in form, about Ij in. long, and I in. broad in its widest 
part. It is a bilateral organ, and is divided into a right 
and a left half by shallow anterior and posterior median 
fissures, continuous with the corresponding fissures in 
the spinal cord ; the posterior fissure ends above in the 
fourth ventricle. Each half is subdivided into elongated 
tracts of nervous matter. Next to, and parallel with 
the anterior fissure is the anterior pyramid (see fig. 2). 
This pyramid is continuous below with the cord, and 
the place of continuity is marked by the passage across 
the fissure of three or four bundles of nerve fibres, . , . 

from each half of the cord to the opposite anterior Spmal root of tn « emmal ■*"<=■ 
pyramid; this crossing is called the decussation of the Substantia gelatinosa Rolandi- 
pyramids. To the side of the pyramid, and separated 
from it by a faint fissure, is the olivary fasciculus, 
which at its upper end is elevated into the projecting 
oval-shaped olivary body. Behind the olivary body 
in the lower half of the medulla are three tracts 
named from before backward the funiculus of 
Rolandp, the funiculus cuneatus and the funiculus 
gracilis (see fig. 3). The two funiculi graciles of 
opposite sides are in contact in the mid dorsal line 
and have between them the postero median fissure. 
When the fourth ventricle is reached they diverge to 
form the lower limit of that diamond-shaped space 
and are slightly swollen to form the clavae. All these 
three bundles appear to be continued up into the 
cerebellum as the restiform bodies or inferior cere- 
bellar peduncles, but really the continuity is very 
slight, as the restiform bodies are formed from the 
direct cerebellar tracts of the spinal cord joining with 
the superficial arcuate fibres which curve back just 

below the olivary bodies. The upper part of the fourth „ r„™;„„i™ t , 1 1 . a . 

. ,. . i_ 1 1 , ^.l • • l 11 rrom Cunningham, I ext-book of Anatomy. 

ventricle is bounded by the superior cerebellar s ' "»""""•>'• 

peduncles which meet just before the inferior quadri- 

geminal bodies are reached. Stretching across between 

them is the superior medullary velum or valve of 

Vieussens, forming the upper part of the roof, while the inferior 

velum forms the lower part, and has an opening called the foramen 

of Majendie, through which the sub-arachnoid space communicates 

with the ventricle. The floor (see fig. 3) has two triangular 

depressions on each side of a median furrow; these are the superior 

and inferior fovea, the significance of which will be noticed in the 

development of the rhombencephalon. Running horizontally across 

the middle of the floor are the striae acusticae which are continued 

into the auditory nerve. The floor of the fourth ventricle is of special 



most anterior is the pyramid or motor tract, the decussation of 
which has been seen. Behind this is the mesial fillet or sensory tract, 
which has also decussated a little below the point of section, while 
farther back still is the posterior longitudinal bundle which is coming 



Cuneate strand' 



Cuneate nucleus" 



Fasciculus solitarius- 



Deep arcuate fibres 
Hypoglossal nerve 



Anterior superficial 
arcuate fibres 



Inferior olivary nucleus. 



Mesial accessory olivary nucleus- 
Pyramid- 




Central canal 



Hypoglossal nucleus 



Hypoglossal nerve 



Superficial anterior 
arcuate fibres 



Fig. 4. — Transverse Section through the Human Medulla in the 
Lower Olivary Region. 



Frenulum 



Valve of Vieussens 



Superior peduncle of 
the cerebellum 

Middle peduncle of 
the cerebellum' 



Striae acusticae- 
Area acusticae. 
Trigonum vagi 



Cuneate tubercle 
Funiculus gracilis 




Taenia thalami 



■Pineal body 



-Superior quadri- 
geminal body 

Inferior quadri- 
geminal body 



Cms cerebri 

Pontine part of floor 
of ventricle IV. 

Eminentia teres 

Fovea superior 

Restiform body 

Trigonum hypoglossi 

• Clava 

Rolandic tubercle 
Funiculus cuneatus 



From Cunningham, Text-book of Anatomy. 

Fig. 3. — Back View of the Medulla, Pons and Mesencephalon of 
a full-time Human Foetus. 

interest because a little way from the surface are the deep origins of 
all the cranial nerves from the fifth to the twelfth. (See Nerve: 
cranial). If a section is made transversely through the medulla 
about the apex of the fourth ventricle three important bundles of 
fibres are cut close to the mid line on each side (see fig. 4). The 



up from the anterior basis bundle of the cord. External to and 
behind the pyramid is the crenated section of the olivary nucleus, 
the surface bulging of which forms the olivary body. 

The grey matter of the medulla oblongata, which contains numer- 
ous multipolar nerve cells, is in part continuous with the grey 
matter of the spinal cord, and in part consists of independent masses. 
As the grey matter of the cord enters the medulla it loses its cres- 
centic arrangement. The posterior cornua are thrown outwards 
towards the surface, lose their pointed form, and dilate into rounded 
masses named the grey tubercles of Rolando. The grey matter of 
the anterior cornua is cut off from the rest by the decussating 
pyramids and finally disappears. The formatio reticularis which is 
feebly developed in the cord becomes well developed in the medulla. 
In the lower part of the medulla a central canal continuous with 
that of the cord exists, but when the clavae on the opposite sides of 
the medulla diverge from each other, the central canal loses its 
posterior boundary, and dilates into the cavity of the fourth ventricle. 
The grey matter in the interior of the medulla appears, therefore, on 
the floor of the ventricle and is continuous with the grey matter near 
the central canal of the cord. This grey matter forms collections 
of nerve cells, which are the centres of origin of several cranial 
nerves. Crossing the anterior surface of the medulla oblongata, 
immediately below the pons, in the majority of mammals is a trans- 
verse arrangement of fibres forming the trapezium, which contains 
a grey nucleus, named by van der Kolk the superior olive. In the 
human brain the trapezium is concealed by the lower transverse 
fibres of the pons, but when sections are made through it, as L. Clarke 
pointed out, the grey matter of the superior olive can be seen. These 
fibres of the trapezium come from the cochlear nucleus of the auditory 
nerve, and run up as the lateral fillet. 

The Pons Varolii or Bridge is cuboidal in form (see fig. 2): its 
anterior surface rests upon the dorsum sellae of the sphenoid, and is 
marked by a median longitudinal groove ; its inferior surface receives 
the pyramidal and olivary tracts of the medulla oblongata; at its 
superior surface are the two crura cerebri; each lateral surface is 
in relation to a hemisphere of the cerebellum, and a peduncle passes 
from the pons into the interior of each hemisphere; the posterior 
surface forms in part the upper portion of the floor of the fourth 
ventricle, and in part is in contact with the corpora quadrigemina. 

The pons consists of white and grey matter: the nerve fibres of 
the white matter pass through the substance of the pons, in either 
a transverse or a longitudinal direction. The transverse fibres go 
from one hemisphere of the cerebellum to that of the opposite side ; 
some are situated on the anterior surface of the pons, and form its 
superficial transverse fibres, whilst others pass through its substance 
and form the deep transverse fibres. The longitudinal fibres ascend 
from the medulla oblongata and leave the pons by emerging from 
its upper surface as fibres of the two crura cerebri. The pons pos- 
sesses a median raphe continuous with that of the medulla oblongata, 
and formed like it by a decussation of fibres in the mesial plane. 



394 



BRAIN 



[ANATOMY 



In a horizontal section through the pons and upper part of the fourth 
ventricle the superficial transverse fibres are seen most anteriorly; 
then come the anterior pyramidal fibres, then the deep transverse 




Middle peduncle of 
cerebellum 



lobes, of which the most important are the amygdala or tonsil, which 
forms the lateral boundary of the anterior part of the vallecula, and 
the flocculus, which is situated immediately behind the middle 
peduncle of the cerebellum. The inferior 
vermiform process is subdivided into a 
posterior part or pyramid ; an elevation 
or uvula, situated between the two 
tonsils; and an anterior pointed process 
or nodule. Stretching between the two 
flocculi, and attached midway to the sides 
of the nodule, is a thin, white, semilunar- 
shaped plate of nervous matter, called 
the inferior medullary velum. 

The whole outer surface of the cere- 
bellum possesses a characteristic foliated 
or laminated appearance, due to its sub- 
division into multitudes of thin plates 
or lamellae by numerous fissures. The 
cerebellum consists of both grey and 
white matter. The grey matter forms 
the exterior or cortex of the lamellae, 
and passes from one to the other across 
the bottoms of the several fissures. The 
white matter lies in the interior of the 
organ, and extends into the core of each 
lamella. When a vertical section is made 
through the organ, the prolongations of 
white matter branching off into the in- 
terior of the several lamellae give to the 
section an arborescent appearance, known 
by the fanciful name of- arbor vitae (see 
fig. 6). Independent masses of grey 
matter are, however, found in the in- 
terior of the cerebellum. If the hemi- 
sphere be cut through a little to the outer 
side of the median lobe, a zigzag arrange- 
ment of grey matter, similar in appear- 
ance and structure to the nucleus of the 
olivary body in the medulla oblongata, 
and known as the corpus denlatum of the 
cerebellum, is seen; it lies in the midst 
of the white core of the hemisphere, and 
encloses white fibres, which leave the 
interior of the corpus at its inner and 
lower side. On the mesial side of this 
corpus denlatum lie three smaller nuclei. 
The white matter is more abundant in the 
hemispheres than in the median lobe, and 
is for the most part directly continuous with the fibres of the pe- 
duncles of the cerebellum. Thus the restiform or inferior peduncles 
pass from below upward through the white core, to end in the 
grey matter of the tentorial surface of the cerebellum, more especially 
in that of the central lobe ; on their way they are connected with the 



Transverse fibres of 
pons 



X 4> ' 









Foramen of 1 
Septum lucidum 









r 






mm.. 



Aqueduct of Sylvius 
Culmen 



Declive 



Pyramidal bundles 

Transverse fibres of pons 
From Cunningham, Text-book of Anatomy. 

Fig. 5. — Section through the Lower Part of the Human Pons Varolii immediately above 

the Medulla. 

pontine fibres, then the fillet, while most posteriorly and close to the 
floor of the fourth ventricle the posterior longitudinal bundle is 
seen (see fig. 5). 

The grey matter of the pons is scattered irregularly through its 
substance, and appears on its posterior surface; but not on the 
anterior surface, composed exclusively 
of the superficial transverse fibres. 

The Cerebellum. ^ « 

The Cerebellum, Little Brain, or 
After Brain occupies the inferior pair 
of occipital fossae, and lies below the 
plane of the tentorium cerebelli. It 
consists of two hemispheres or lateral 
lobes, and of a median or central lobe, 
which in human anatomy is called the 
vermis. It is connected below with Genu of corpus 
the medulla oblongata by the two callosum 

restiform bodies which form its inferior 
peduncles, and above with the corpora 
quadrigemina of the cerebrum by two 
bands, which form its superior pe- 
duncles; whilst the two hemispheres 
are connected together by the trans- 
verse fibres of the pons, which form the 
middle peduncles of the cerebellum. On 
the superior or tentorial surface of the 
cerebellum the median or vermiform 
lobe is a mere elevation, but on its 
inferior or occipital surface this lobe 
forms a well-defined process, which lies 
at the bottom of a deep fossa or val- 
lecula; this fossa is prolonged to the 

posterior border of the cerebellum, _ . , _ , , , , 

and forms there a deep notch which FromCuvmnghzm, Text-book of Anatomy. ' 

separates the two hemispheres from Fig. 6. — Mesial Section through the Corpus Callosum, the Mesencephalon, the Pons, Medulla and 
each other; in this notch the falx Cerebellum. Showing the third and fourth ventricles joined by the aqueduct of Sylvius. 

cerebelli is lodged. Extending hori- 




Anterior commissure 

Corpus mammillare 
Lamina cinerea 

Optic nerve. 



Pituitary body 

Tuber cinereum 

Third ner 



Valve of Vieussens 

Ventricle IV. 1 
Medulla 



Choroid plexus in ventricle IV. 



zontally backwards from the middle cerebellar peduncle, along the 
outer border of each hemisphere is the great horizontal fissure, which 
divides the hemisphere into its tentorial and occipital surfaces. 
Each of these surfaces is again subdivided by fissures into smaller 



grey matter of the corpus dentatum. The superior peduncles, which 
descend from the corpora quadrigemina of the cerebrum, form 
connexions mainly with the corpus dentatum. The middle peduncles 
form a large proportion of the white core, and their fibres terminate 



ANATOMY] 



BRAIN 



395 



in the grey matter of the foliated cortex of the hemispheres. It 
has been noticed that those fibres which are lowest in the pons go 
to the upper surface of the cerebellum and vice versa. 

Histology of the Cerebellum. — The white centre of the cerebellum 
is composed of numbers of medullated nerve fibres coursing to and 
from the grey matter of the cortex. These fibres are supported in 
a groundwork of neuroglial tissue, their nutrition being supplied 
by a small number of blood vessels. 

The cortex (see fig. 7) consists of a thin layer of grey material 
forming an outer coat of somewhat varying thickness over the whole 
external surface of the laminae of the organ. When examined 
microscopically it is found to be made up of two layers, an outer 
" molecular " and an inner " granular " layer. Forming a layer 
lying at the junction of these two are a number of cells, the cells 
of Purkinje, which constitute the most characteristic feature of the 
cerebellum. The bodies of these cells are pear-shaped. Their inner 
ends taper and finally end in a nerve fibre which may be traced into 
the white centre. In their course through the granule layer they give 
off a number of branching collaterals, some turning back and passing 
between the cellsof Purkinje into the molecular layer. Their inner 
ends terminate in one or sometimes two stout processes which 
repeatedly branch dichotomously, thus forming a very elaborate 
dendron in the molecular layer. The branchings of this dendron 




From Cunningham, Text-book of Anatomy. 

Fig. 7. — Transverse Section through a Cerebellar Folium (after 

Kolliker). Treated by the Golgi method. 
P. Axon of cell of Purkinje. GR 1 . Axons of granule cells in 

F. Moss fibres. molecular layer cut 

K and K 1 . Fibres from white core transversely. 

of folium ending in molecular M 1 . Basket-cells. 

layer in connexion with the ZK. Basket-work around the 

dendrites of the cells of cells of Purkinje. 

Purkinje. GL. Neuroglial cell. 

M. Small cell of the molecular N. Axon of an association 
GR. Granule cell. [layer. cell. 

■are also highly characteristic in that they are approximately re- 
stricted to a single plane like an espalier fruit tree, and those for 
neighbouring cells are all parallel to one another and at right angles 
to the- general direction of the folium to which they belong. In 
the molecular layer are found two types of cells. The most abund- 
ant are the so-called basket cells which are distributed through the 
whole thickness of the layer. They have a rounded body giving 
off many branching dendrons to their immediate neighbourhood 
and one long neuraxon which runs parallel to the surface and to the 
long axis of the lamina. In its course, this gives off numerous 
collaterals which run downward to the bodies of Purkinje's cells. 
Their terminal branchings together with similar terminals of other 
collaterals form the basket-work around the bodies of these cells. 

The granular layer is sometimes termed the rust-coloured layer 
from its appearance to the naked eye. It contains two types of 
nerve cells, the small granule cells and the large granule cells. The 
former are the more numerous. They give off a number of short 
dendrites with claw-like endings, and a fine non-medullated neuraxon 
process. This runs upward to the cortex, where it divides into two 
branches in the form of a T. The branches run for some distance 
parallel to the axis of the folium and terminate in unbranched ends. 



The large granule cells are multipolar cells, many of the branchings 
penetrating well into the molecular layer. The neuraxon process 
turns into the opposite direction and forms a richly branching 
system through the entire thickness of the granular layer. There 
is also an abundant plexus of fine medullated fibres within the granule 
layer. 

The fibres of the white central matter are partly centrifugal, the 
neuraxons of the cells of Purkinje, and partly centripetal. The 
position of the cells of these latter fibres is not known. The fibres 
give rise to an abundant plexus of fibrils in the granular layer, and 
many reaching into the molecular layer ramify there, especially in 
the immediate neighbourhood of the dendrites of Purkinje's cells. 
From the appearance of their plexus of fibrils these are sometimes 
called moss fibres. 

The Fourth Ventricle is the dilated upper end of the central canal 
of the medulla oblongata. Its shape is like an heraldic lozenge. Its 
floor is formed by the grey matter of the posterior surfaces of the 
medulla oblongata and pons, already described (see figs. 3 and 6) ; 
its roof partly by the inferior vermis of the cerebellum, the nodule 
of which projects into its cavity, and partly by a thin layer, called 
valve of Vieussens, or superior medullary velum; its lower lateral 
boundaries by the divergent clavae and restiform bodies; its upper 
lateral boundaries by the superior peduncles of the cerebellum. 
The inferior medullary velum, a reflection of the pia mater and epi- 
thelium from the back of the medulla to the inferior vermis, closes 
it in below. Above, it communicates with the aqueduct of Sylvius, 
which is tunnelled below the substance of the corpora quadrigemina. 
Along the centre of the floor is the median furrow, which terminates 
below in a pen-shaped form, the so-called calamus scriptorius. Situ- 
ated on its floor are the fasciculi teretes, striae acusticae, and 
deposits of grey matter described in connexion with the medulla 
oblongata. Its epithelial lining is continuous with that of the central 
canal. 

The Cerebrum. 
The Cerebrum or Great Brain lies above the plane of the ten- 
torium, and forms much the largtest division of the encephalon. It 
is customary in human anatomy to include under the name of cere- 
brum, not only the convolutions, the corpora striata, and the optic 
thalami, developed in the anterior cerebral vesicle, but also the 
corpora quadrigemina and crura cerebri developed in the mesen- 
cephalon or middle cerebral vesicle. The cerebrum is ovoid in shape, 
and presents superiorly, anteriorly and posteriorly a deep median 
longitudinal fissure, which subdivides it into two hemispheres. 
Inferiorly there is a continuity of structure between the two hemi- 
spheres across the mesial plane, and if the two hemispheres be drawn 
asunder by opening out the longitudinal fissure, a broad white band, 
the corpus callosum, may be seen at the bottom of the fissure passing 
across the mesial plane from one hemisphere to the other. The 
outer surface of each hemisphere is convex, and adapted in shape 
to the concavity of the inner table of the cranial bones; its inner 
surface, which bounds the longitudinal fissure, is flat and is separated 
from the opposite hemisphere by the falx cerebri ; its under surface, 
where it rests on the tentorium, is concave, and is separated by that 
membrane from the cerebellum and pons. From the front of the 
pons two strong white bands, the crura cerebri or cerebral peduncles, 
pass forward and upward (see fig. 2). Winding round the outer side 
of each crus is a flat white band, the optic tract. These tracts con- 
verge in front, and join to form the optic commissure, from which 
the two optic nerves arise. The crura cerebri, optic tracts, and optic 
commissure enclose a lozenge-shaped space, which includes — (a) a 
grey layer, which, from being perforated by several small arteries, is 
called locus perforatus posticus; (b) two white mammillae, the 
corpora albicantia ; (c) a grey nodule, the tuber cinereum, from which 
(d) the infundibulum projects to join the pituitary body. Immediately 
in front of the optic commissure is a grey layer, the lamina cinerea 
of the third ventricle; and between the optic commissure and the 
inner end of each Sylvian fissure is a grey spot perforated by small 
arteries, the locus perforatus anticus. 

If a transverse section is made at right angles to the surface of 
the crura cerebri it will pass right through the mesencephalon and 
come out on the dorsal side through the corpora quadrigemina (see 
fig. 8). The ventral part of each crus forms the crusta, which is the 
continuation forward of the anterior pyramidal fibres of the medulla 
and pons, and is the great motor path from the brain to the cord. 
Dorsal to this is a layer of pigmented grey matter, called the sub- 
stantia nigra, and dorsal to this again is the tegmentum, which is a 
continuation upward of the formatio reticularis of the medulla, 
and passing through it are seen three important nerve bundles. 
The superior cerebellar peduncle is the most internal of these and 
decussates with its fellow of the opposite side so that the two teg- 
menta are continuous across the middle line*. More externally the 
mesial fillet is seen, while dorsal to the cerebellar peduncle is the 
posterior longitudinal bundle. If the section happens to pass 
through the superior corpus quadrigeminum a characteristic circular 
area appears between the cerebellar peduncle and the fillet, which, 
from its tint, is called the red nucleus. More dorsally still the section 
will pass through the Sylvian aqueduct or passage from the third to 
the fourth ventricle, and this is surrounded by a mass of grey matter 
in the ventral part of which are the nuclei of the third and fourth 



39 6 



External geniculate 
body' 



Inferior brachium 

Internal geniculate 
body 



Mesial fillet 



Crusta 



Optic tract 




From Cunningham, Text-book of Anatomy. 

Fig. 8. — Transverse Section through the Human Mesencephalon at the level of the 
superior Quadrigeminal Body. 



nerves. The third nerve is seen at the level of the superior corpus 
quadrigeminum running from its nucleus of origin, through the red 
nucleus, to a groove on the inner side of the crus called the oculo- 
motor groove, which marks the separation between the crusta and 
tegmentum. Dorsal to the Sylvian aqueduct is a layer called the 
lamina quadrigemina and on this the corpora quadrigemina rest. 
The superior pair of these bodies is overlapped 
by the pineal body and forms part of the lower 
visual centres. Connexions can be traced to the 
optic tract, the higher visual centre on the mesial 
surface of the occipital lobe, the deep origin of 
the third or oculo-motor nerve as well as to the 
mesial and lateral fillet. The inferior pair of 
quadrigeminal bodies are more closely in touch 
with the organs of hearing, and are connected by 
the lateral fillet with the cochlear nucleus of the 
auditory nerve. 

Surface of the Brain. 
The peripheral part of each hemisphere, which 
consists of grey matter, exhibits a characteristic 
folded appearance, known as gyri (or convolu- 
tions) of the cerebrum. These gyri are separated 
from each other by fissures and sulci, some of 
which are considered to subdivide the hemisphere 
into lobes, whilst others separate the gyri in 
each lobe from each other. In each hemisphere 
of the human brain five lobes are recognized : the 
temporo-sphenoidal, frontal, parietal, occipital, 
and the central lobe or Island of Reil; it should, 
however, be realized that these lobes do not 
exactly correspond to the outlines of the bones 
after which they are named. Passing obliquely 
on the outer face of the hemisphere from before, 

upward and backward, is the well marked Sylvian .... 

fissure (fig. 9, s), which is the first to appear in the f 1 , Sulcus frontalis superior, 
development of the hemisphere. Below it lies the f, Sulcus frontalis inferior. 



BRAIN [ANATOMY 

Superior quadrigeminal basilaris) (A) and temporal. The frontal lobe 
y is separated from the parietal by the fissure 

of Rolando (fig. 9, r) which extends on the 
outer face of the hemisphere from the 
longitudinal fissure obliquely downward 
and forward towards the Sylvian fissure. 
About 2 in. from the hinder end of the 
hemisphere is the parieto-occipital fissure, 
which, commencing at the longitudinal 
fissure, passes down the inner surface of the 
hemisphere, and transversely outwards for 
Nucleus of third nerve * short distance on the outer surface of the 
hemisphere; it separates the parietal and 
occipital lobes from each other. 

The Temporo-Sphenoidal Lobe presents 
on the outer surface of the hemisphere 
three convolutions, arranged in parallel tiers 
from above downward, and named superior, 
middle and inferior temporal gyri. The 
fissure which separates the superior and 
middle of these convolutions is called the 
parallel fissure (fig. 9, t 1 ). The Occipital 
Lobe also consists from above downwards 
of three parallel gyri, named superior, 
middle and inferior occipital. The Frontal 
Lobe is more complex; immediately in 
front of the fissure of Rolando, and forming 
indeed its anterior boundary, is a convolu- 
tion named ascending frontal or pre-central, 
which ascends obliquely backward and 
upward from the Sylvian to the longitudinal 
fissure. Springing from the front of this 
gyrus, and passing forward to the anterior 
end of the cerebrum, are three gyri, arranged 
in parallel tiers from above downwards, and 
named superior, middle and inferior frontal 
gyri, which are also prolonged on to the 
orbital face of the frontal lobe. The Parietal 
Lobe is also complex; its most anterior 
gyrus, named ascending parietal or post-central, ascends parallel 
to and immediately behind the fissure of Rolando. Springing from 
the upper end of the back of this gyrus is the supra-parietal lobule, 
which, forming the boundary of the longitudinal fissure, extends as 
far back as the parieto-occipital fissure; springing from the lower 
end of the back of this gyrus is the supra-marginal, which forms the 



' Sylvian grey matter 



Sylvian aqueduct 



Tegmentum 



Posterior longitudinal 
bundle 



Red nucleus 



Fibres of superior 
cerebellar peduncle 



Third nerve 



Substantia nigra 



orpus mammillare 




K ^U 



tempofo-sphenoidal lobe, and above and in front of J.m, Sulcus frontalis medius. 
it, the parietal and frontal lobes. As soon as it p.m, Sulcus paramediahs. 
appears on the external surface of the brain the A, Pars basilaris. _ 

• " • ' ' " Pars triangularis. 

Pars orbitalis. 

Sylvian fissure. _ [fissure). 

Anterior horizontal limb (Sylvian 
Ascending limb (Sylvian fissure). 
Posterior horizontal limb (Sylvian 
fissure). 
s.asc, Ascending terminal part of the pos- 



fissure divides into three limbs, anterior hori 
zontal (s 1 ), ascending (s 2 ), and posterior horizontal 
{s 3 ), the latter being by far the longest. The place 
whence these diverge is the Sylvian point and 
corresponds to the pterion on the surface of the 
skull (see Anatomy: Superficial and Artistic). 
Between these three limbs and the vallecula or 
stem of the fissure are four triangular 



tongues or opercula; these are named, accord- 
ing to their position, orbital (fig. 9, C), frontal 
(pars triangularis) (B), fronto- parietal (pars 



From Cunningham, Texl-book 0] Anatomy. 

Fig. 9. — Gyri and Sulci, on the outer surface of the Cerebral Hemisphere. 

p.c.s, Superior praecentral sulcus, 
r, Fissure of Rolando. 
g.s, Superior genu. 
g.i, Inferior genu. 
d, Sulcus diagonalis. 
t 1 , Superior temporal sulcus 
P, Inferior temporal sulcus. 
p l , Inferior postcentral sulcus. 
p 2 , Superior postcentral sulcus. 
p 3 , Ramus horizontalis. 
p A , Ramus occipitalis. 
s.ot, Sulcus occipitalis transversus. 
occ. lat, Sulcus occipitalis lateralis 
sulcus lunatus of Elliot Smith) 
cm, Calloso-marginal sulcus. 
p.c.i, Inferior praecentral sulcus. c.t.r, Inferior transverse furrow, 



B, 
C, 

S, 
s 1 , 
s*, 
s 3 , 



terior horizontal limb of the Sylvian 
fissure. 
Inferior praecentral sulcus. 



(parallel 
[sulcus). 



(the 



ANATOMY] 



BRAIN 



397 




upper boundary of the hinder part of the Sylvian fissure; as this 
gyrus occupies the hollow in the parietal bone, which corresponds 
to the eminence, it may appropriately be named the gyrus of the 
parietal eminence. Above and behind the gyrus of the parietal 

eminence is the angular 

gyrus, which bends round 

the posterior extremity of 

the parallel fissure, while 

arching over the hinder end 

of the inferior temporo- 

sphenoidal sulcus is the 

post-parietal gyrus. Lying 

in the parietal lobe is the 

intra- parietal fissure (fig. 9, 

p 3 and p l ), which separates 

the gyrus of the parietal 

eminence from the supra- 
parietal lobule. 

The Central Lobe of the 

hemisphere, more usually 

called the insula or island 

of Reil, does not come to the 

surface of the hemisphere, 

but lies deeply within the 

Sylvian fissure, the oper- 

cula forming the margin of 

which, conceal it. It con- 
sists of four or five short 

gyri, which radiate from 

the locus perforatus anticus, 

situated at the inner end of 

the fissure. This lobe is 

almost entirely surrounded 

by a deep sulcus called 
Fig. 10. — Orbital surface of the left the limiting sulcus of Reil, 
frontal lobe and the islandof Reil ; the which insulates it from 
tip of the temporo-sphenoidal lobe has the adjacent gyri. It lies 
been removed to display the latter. opposite the upper part of 
17. Convolution of the margin of the the ali-sphenoid, where it 
longitudinal fissure. articulates with the parietal 

0. Olfactory fissure, over which the and squamous-temporal. 

olfactory peduncle and lobe are In front of the central 

situated. lobe, on the base of the 

TR. Orbital sulcus. [surface, brain, are the orbital gyri, 

l"l"'. Convolutions on the orbital which are separated from 

1, I, I, 1. Under surface of infero- one another by _ the orbital 

frontal convolution. sulcus. This is usually 

4. Under surface of ascending frontal; H-shaped, and the gyri 

and 5, of ascending parietal con- are therefore anterior, 

volutions. posterior, external and in- 

C. Central lobe or insula. ternal. Bisecting the in- 

ternal orbital gyrus is an 
antero-posterior sulcus (s. rectus), beneath which lies the olfactory 
lobe, bulbous in front, for the olfactory nerves to arise from. 

On the mesial surface of the hemisphere, as seen when the brain is 
longitudinally bisected and the cerebellum and medulla removed by 
cutting through the crus cerebri (see fig. 11), the 
divided corpus callosum is the most central 
object, while below it are seen the fornix, septum 
lucidum and third ventricle, the description of 
which will follow. The cerebral surface, above 
and in front of the corpus callosum, is divided 
into two by a sulcus, the contour of which 
closely resembles that of the upper margin of 
the corpus callosum. This is the calloso-marginal 
sulcus, so called because it separates the callosal 
gyrus, which lies between it and the corpus 
callosum, from the marginal gyri nearer the 
margin of the brain. When the sulcus reaches 
a point vertically above the hind end of the 
corpus callosum it turns sharply upward and so 
forms the hinder limit of the marginal gyri, the 
posterior inch or two of which is more or less 
distinctly marked off to form the paracentral 
lobule, where the upper part of the central fissure 
of Rolando turns over the margin of the brain. 
The callosal gyrus, which is also called the 
gyrus fornicatus from its arched appearance, is 
continued backward round the posterior end of 
the corpus callosum, and so to the mesial surface 
of the temporal lobe. Behind the upturned end 
of the calloso-marginal sulcus there is a square 
area which is called the precuneus or quadrate From Cunningham, Tcxl-book o\ Anatomy. 

lobe; it is bounded behind by the deeply cut Fig. 11. — The Gyri and Sulci on the Mesial Aspect of the Cerebral Hemisphere, 
internal parieto-occipital fissure and this runs r> Fissure of Rolando. r,o, Rostral sulcus. i,t, Incisura temporalis, 

from the margin of the brain downward and 
forward to join another fissure, the calcarine, at an acute angle, 
thus enclosing a wedge-shaped piece of brain called the cuneus 
between them. The calcarine fissure is fairly horizontal, and is 
joined about its middle by the internal parieto-occipital, so that the 



part in front of the junction is called the pre-calcarine, and that behind 
the post-calcarine fissure. The internal parieto-occipital and cal- 
carine are real fissures, because they cause an elevation in the 
interior of the brain, known as the hippocampus minor. Just in 
front of the anterior end of the calcarine fissure the callosal gyrus is 
constricted to form the isthmus which connects it with the hippo- 
campal or uncinate gyrus. Below the calcarine fissure is a gyrus 
called the gyrus lingualis, and this is bounded below by another 
true fissure, the collateral, which runs parallel to the calcarine, but 
is continued much farther forward into the temporal lobe and so 
forms the lower boundary of the hippocampal gyrus. It will thus 
be seen that the hippocampal gyrus is continuous posteriorly with 
the callosal gyrus above by means of the isthmus, and with the gyrus 
lingualis below. The hippocampal gyrus is bounded above by the 
dentate or hippocampal fissure which causes the hippocampus major 
in the descending cornu and so is a complete fissure. If its lips are 
separated the fascia dentata or gyrus dentatus and the fimbria 
continued from the posterior pillar of the fornix are seen. Anteriorly 
the fissure is arrested by the recurved process of the upper part of the 
hippocampal gyrus, called the uncus, and in front of this a slight 
sulcus, the incisura temporalis, marks off the temporal pole or tip 
of the temporal lobe from the region of the uncus. It will be seen 
that the callosal gyrus, isthmus, and hippocampal gyrus form 
nearly a complete ring, and to this the name of limbic lobe is given. 

Interior of the Cerebrum. 
If a horizontal slice be removed from the upper part of each 
hemisphere (see fig. 12), the peripheral grey matter of the gyri will 
be seen to follow their various windings, whilst the core of each gyrus 
consists of white matter continuous with a mass of white matter 
in the interior of the hemisphere. If a deeper slice be now made 
down to the plane of the corpus callosum, the white matter of that 
structure will be seen to be continuous with the white centre of 
each hemisphere known as the centrum ovale. The corpus callosum 
does not equal the hemispheres in length, but approaches nearer to 
their anterior than their posterior ends. It terminates behind in a 
free rounded end, named the splenium (see fig. 11), whilst in front 
it forms a knee-shaped bend, and passes downwards and backwards 
as far as the lamina cinerea. If the dissection be performed on a 
brain which has been hardened in spirit, the corpus callosum is seen 
to consist almost entirely of bundles of nerve fibres, passing trans- 
versely across the mesial plane between the two hemispheres ; these 
fibres may be traced into the white cores and grey matter of the 
gyri, and connect the gyri, though by no means always corresponding 
ones, in the opposite hemispheres. Hence the corpus callosum is a con- 
necting or commissural structure, which brings the gyri of the two 
hemispheres into anatomical and physiological relation with each 
other. On the surface of the corpus callosum a few fibres, the striae 
longitudinales , run in the antero-posterior or longitudinal direction 
(see fig. 12, b). Their morphological interest is referred to in the 
section below on Comparative Anatomy. In the sulcus between the 
corpus callosum and the limbic lobe a narrow band of fibres called 
the cingulum is seen, most of its fibres only run a short distance in 
it and link together adjacent parts of the brain. If the corpus 
callosum be now cut through on each side of its mesial line, the large 
cavity or lateral ventricle in each hemisphere will be opened into. 




The lateral ventricle is subdivided into a central space or body, 
and three bent prolongations or cornua; the anterior cornu extends 
forward, outward and downward into the frontal lobe ; the posterior 
cornu curves backward, outward and inward into the occipital lobe; 



398 



BRAIN 



[ANATOMY 



the descending cornu curves backward, outward, downward, forward 
and inward, behind and below the optic thalamus into the temporo- 
sphenoidal lobe. On the floor of the central space may be seen 
from before backward the grey upper surface of the pear-shaped 
caudate nucleus of the corpus striatum (figs. 12 and 13, /), and to its 
inner and posterior part a small portion of the optic thalamus, whilst 
between the two is the curved flat band, the taenia semicircularis 
s. 12 and 13, g). Resting on the upper surface of the thalamus 




Fig. 12. — To show the Right Ventricle and the left half of the 
Corpus Callosum. 



o, Transverse fibres, and 

b, Longitudinal fibres of corpus 

callosum. 

c, Anterior, and [ventricle. 

d, Posterior cornua of lateral 

e, Septum lucidum. 
/, Corpus striatum. 



g, Taenia semicircularis. 

h, Optic thalamus. 

k, Choroid plexus. 

/, Taenia hippocampi. 

m, Hippocampus major. 

n, Hippocampus minor. 

o, Eminentia collaterals. 



is the vascular fringe of the velum interpositum, named choroid 
plexus, and immediately internal to this fringe is the free edge of the 
white posterior pillar of the fornix. The anterior cornu has the an- 
terior end of the corpus striatum projecting into it. The posterior 
cornu has an elevation on its floor, the hippocampus minor (fig. 12, n), 
and between this cornu and the descending cornu is the elevation 
called eminentia collateralis, formed by the collateral fissure (fig. 12,0). 

Extending down the descending cornu and following its curvature 
is the hippocampus major, which terminates below in a nodular end, 
the pes hippocampi; on its inner border is the white taenia hippo- 
campi, continuous above with the posterior pillar of the fornix. 
If the taenia be drawn to one side the hippocampal fissure is exposed, 
at the bottom of which the grey matter of the gyrus hippocampi 
may be seen to form a well-defined dentated border (the so-called 
fascia dentata). The choroid plexus of the pia mater turns round the 
gyrus hippocampi, and enters the descending cornu through the 
lateral part of the great transverse fissure between the taenia hippo- 
campi and optic thalamus. The lateral ventricle is lined by a 
ciliated epithelium called the ependyma. This lining is continuous 
through the foramen of Monro with that of the third ventricle, 
which again is continuous with the lining of the fourth ventricle 
through the aqueduct of Sylvius. A little fluid is contained in the 
cerebral ventricles, which, under some pathological conditions, may 
increase greatly in quantity, so as to occasion considerable dilatation 
of the ventricular cavities. 

If the corpus callosum be now divided about its middle by a 
transverse incision, and the posterior half of this structure be turned 
back (see fig. 13), the body of the fornix on which the corpus callosum 
rests is exposed. If the anterior half of the corpus callosum be now 
turned forward, the grey partition, or septum lucidum, between the 
two lateral ventricles is exposed. This septum fits into the interval 
between the under surface of the corpus callosum and the upper 
surface of the anterior part of the fornix. It consists of two layers 
of grey matter, between which is a narrow vertical mesial space, 
the fifth ventricle (fig. 13, e), and this space does not communicate 
with the other ventricles nor is it lined with ependyma. If the 
septum be now removed, the anterior part of the fornix is brought 
into view. 

The fornix is an arch-shaped band of nerve fibres extending in the 



antero-posterior direction. Its anterior end forms the anterior 
pillars of the arch, its posterior end the posterior pillars, whilst the 
intermediate body of the fornix forms the crown of the arch. It 
consists of two lateral halves, one belonging to each hemisphere. 
At the summit of the arch the two lateral halves are joined to form 
the body; but in front the two halves separate from each other, 
and form two anterior pillars, which descend in front of the third 
ventricle to the base of the cerebrum, where they form the corpora 
albicantia, and from these some white fibres called the bundle of 
Vicq dAzyr ascend to the optic thalamus (see fig. 11). Behind the 
body the two halves diverge much more from each other, and form 
the posterior pillars, in the triangular interval between which is a 
thin lamina of commissural fibres called the lyra (fig. 13, a). Each 
posterior pillar curves downward and outward into the descending 
cornu of the ventricle, and, under the name of taenia hippocampi, 
forms the mesial free border of the hippocampus major (fig. 13, /). 
Eventually it ends in the substance of the hippocampus and in the 
uncus of the temporal lobe. If the body of the fornix be now 
divided by a transverse incision, its anterior part thrown forward, 
and its posterior part backward, the great transverse fissure of the 
cerebrum is opened into, and the velum interpositum lying in that 
fissure is exposed. 

The velum interpositum is an expanded fold of pia mater, which 
passes into the anterior of the hemispheres through the great trans- 
verse fissure. It is triangular in shape; its base is a line with the 
posterior end of the corpus callosum, where it is continuous with the 
external pia mater; its lateral margins are fringed by the choroid 
plexuses, which are seen in the bodies and descending cornua of the 
lateral ventricles, where they are invested by the endothelial lining 
of those cavities. Its apex, where the two choroid plexuses blend 
with each other, lies just behind the anterior pillars of the fornix. 
The interval between the apex and these pillars is the aperture of 
communication between the two lateral ventricles and the third, 
already referred to as the foramen of Monro. The choroid plexuses 
contain the small choroidal arteries; and the blood from these is 
returned by small veins, which join to form the veins of Galen. 
These veins pass along the centre of the velum, and, as is shown 
in fig. 1, open into the straight sinus. If the velum interpositum 
be now carefully raised from before backward, the optic thalami, 
third ventricle, pineal body and corpora quadrigemina are exposed. 




Fig. 13. — A deeper dissection of the Lateral Ventricle, and of the 
Velum Interpositum. 



in de- 



a, Lyra, turned back. | 

b, b, Posterior pillars of the I 

fornix, turned back. 

c, c, Anterior pillars of the fornix. 

d, Velum interpositum and 

veins of Galen. 

e, Fifth ventricle. 
/, /, Corpus striatum. 

The optic thalamus is a large, somewhat ovoid body situated behind 
the corpus striatum, and above the crus cerebri. Its upper surface 
is partly seen in the floor of the body of the lateral ventricle, but is 
for the most part covered by the fornix and velum interpositum. 
Its postero-inferior surface forms the roof of the descending cornu 



;, g, Taenia semicircularis. 
1, h, Optic thalamus. 
k, Choroid plexus. 
/, Taenia hippocampi. 
m, Hippocampus major 

scending cornu. 
n, Hippocampus minor. 
0, Eminentia collateralis. 



ANATOMY] 



BRAIN 



399 



of the ventricle, whilst its inner surface forms the side wall of the 
third ventricle. At its outer and posterior part are two slight eleva- 
tions, in close relation to the optic tract, and named respectively 
corpus geniculatum internum and externum. 

The posterior knob-like extremity of the thalamus is called the 
pulvinar; this, as well as the two corpora geniculata and the superior 
corpus quadrigeminum, is connected with the optic tract. 

The third ventricle (see fig. 6) is a cavity situated in the mesial 
plane between the two optic thalami. Its roof is formed by the velum 
jnterpositum and body of the fornix; its floor by the posterior 
perforated space, corpora albicantia, tuber cinereum, infundibulum, 
and optic commissure; its anterior boundary by the anterior 
pillars of the fornix, anterior commissure and lamina cinerea; its 
posterior boundary by the corpora quadrigemina and posterior 
commissure. The cavity of this ventricle is of small size in the living 
head, for the inner surfaces of the two thalami are connected together 



Genu of corpus callosum 

Anterior horn of lateral 
ventricle 

Caudate nucleus. 

Anterior limb of internal 

capsule 

Ventricle V. 

Genu of internal capsule 

Anterior pillars of fornix 

Globus pallidus 



Bundle of Vicq d'Azyr 

Posterior limb of internal 

capsule 

Thalamus 

Retrolenticular part of 

internal capsule 

Hippocampus major 

Splenium 

Choroid plexus 



Band of Vicq d'Azyr 



Claustrum 



Insula 



— 'Putamen 



Calcarine fissure 




From Cunningham, Text-book of Anatomy 

Fig. 14. — Horizontal Section through the Right Cerebral Hemisphere 32 oz. 



at the Level of the Widest Part of the Lenticular Nucleus. 

by intermediate grey matter, named the middle or soft commissure. 
Immediately in front of the corpora quadrigemina, the white fibres 
of the posterior commissure pass across between the two optic thalami. 
If the anterior pillars of the fornix be separated from each other, the 
white fibres of the anterior commissure may be seen lying in front of 
them. 

The pineal body is a reddish cone-shaped body situated upon the 
anterior pair of the corpora quadrigemina (see figs. 3 and 6). From 
its broad anterior end two white bands, the peduncles of the pineal 
body, pass forward, one on the inner side of each optic thalamus. 
Each peduncle joins, along with the taenia semicircularis, the 
anterior pillar of the fornix of its own side. In its structure this 
body consists of tubular gland tissue containing gritty calcareous 
particles, constituting the brain sand. Its morphology will be 
referred to later. 

A general idea of the internal structure of the brain is best obtained 
by studying a horizontal section made just below the level of the 
Sylvian point and just above the great transverse fissure (see fig. 14). 
Such a section will cut the corpus callosum anteriorly at the genu 



and posteriorly at the splenium, but the body is above the plane of 
section. Behind the genu the fifth ventricle is cut, and behind that 
the two pillars of the fornix which here form the anterior boundary 
of the third ventricle. At the posterior end of this is the pineal 
body, which the section has just escaped. To the outer side of the 
fornix is seen the foramen of Munro, leading into the front of the body 
and anterior horn of the lateral ventricle. It will be seen that the 
lateral boundary of this horn is the cut caudate nucleus of the corpus 
striatum, while the lateral boundary of the third ventricle is the cut 
optic thalamus, both of which bodies have been already described, 
but external to these is a third triangular grey mass, with its apex 
directed inward, which cannot be seen except in a section. This is 
the lenticular nucleus of the corpus striatum, the inner or apical 
half of which is of a light colour and is called the globus pallidus, 
while the basal half is reader and is known as the putamen. External 
to the putamen is a long narrow strip of grey matter called the 
claustrum, which is sometimes regarded as a third nucleus 
of the corpus striatum. These masses of grey matter, taken 
together, are the basal nuclei of the brain. Internal to the 
lenticular nucleus, and between it and the caudate nucleus 
in front and the thalamus behind, is the internal capsule, 
through which run most of the fibres connecting the cerebral 
cortex with the crus cerebri. The capsule adapts itself to the 
contour of the lenticular nucleus and has an anterior limb, 
a bend or genu, and a posterior limb. Just behind the genu 
of the internal capsule is a very important region, for here the 
great motor tract from the Rolandic region of the cortex 
passes on its way to the crusta and spinal cord. Besides this 
there are fibres passing from the cortex to the deep origins of 
the facial and hypo-glossal nerves. Behind the motor tracts 
are the sensory, including the fillet, the superior cerebellar 
peduncle and the inferior quadrigeminal tract, while quite at 
the back of the capsule are found the auditory and optic 
radiations linking up the higher (cortical) and lower auditory 
and visual centres. Between the putamen and the claustrum 
is the external capsule, which is smaller and of less importance 
than the internal, while on the lateral side of the claustrum 
is the white arid then the grey matter of the central lobe. 
As the fibres of the internal capsule run up toward the cortex 
they decussate with the transverse fibres of the corpus callosum 
and spread out to form the corona radiata. It has only been 
possible to deal with a few of the more important bundles of 
fibres here, but it should be mentioned that much of the white 
matter of the brain is formed of association fibres which link 
up different cortical areas, and which become medullated 
and functional after birth. 

Weight of the Brain. 
This has been the subject of a great deal of research, but 
the results are not altogether conclusive; it seems, however, 
that, although the male brain is 4 to 5 oz. heavier than that of 
the female, its relative weight to that of the body is about the 
same in the two sexes. An average male brain weighs about 
48 oz. and a female 432 oz. The greatest absolute weight is 
found between twenty-five and thirty-five years of age in the 
male and a little later in the female. At birth the brain weighs 
comparatively much more than it does later on, its proportion 
to the body weight being about I to 6. At the tenth year it 
is about I to 14, at the twentieth I to 30, and after that about 
I to 36-5. In old age there is a further slight decrease in 
proportion. In many men of great intellectual eminence the 
brain weight has been large — Cuvier's brain weighed 64J oz., 
Goodsir's 57 J, for instance — but the exceptions are numerous. 
Brains over 60 oz. in weight are frequently found in quite 
undistinguished people, and even in idiots 60 oz. has been 
recorded. On the other hand, microcephalic idiots may have 
a brain as low as 10 or even 8 J oz., but it is doubtful whether 
normal intelligence is possible with a brain weighing less than 
The taller the individual the greater is his brain weight, 



but short people have proportionally heavier brains than tall. 
The weight of the cerebellum is usually one-eighth of that of 
the entire brain. Attempts have been made to estimate the surface 
area of the grey matter by dissecting it off and measuring it, and 
also by covering it with gold leaf and measuring that. The results, 
however, have not been conclusive. 

Further details of the brain, abundantly illustrated, will be found 
in the later editions of any of the standard text-books on anatomy, 
references to which will be found in the article on Anatomy : Modern 
Human. Das Menschenhirn, by G. Retzius (Stockholm, 1896), and 
numerous recent memoirs by G. Elliot Smith and D. J. Cunningham 
in the Journ. Anat. and Phys. and Anatomisch Anzeig., may be 
consulted. 

Histology of Cerebral Cortex. 

The cerebral cortex (see fig. 15) consists of a continuous sheet of 
grey matter completely enveloping the white matter of the hemi- 
spheres. It varies in thickness in different parts, and becomes 
thinner in old age, but all parts show a somewhat similar microscopic 
structure. Thus, in vertical section, the following layers may be 
made out ; — 



4-00 



BRAIN 



[ANATOMY 



i. The Molecular Layer {Stratum zonale). — This is made up of a 
large number of fine nerve branchings both medullated and non- 
medullated. The whole forms a close network, the fibres of which 
run chiefly a tangential course. The cells of this layer are the so- 
called cells of Cajal. They possess an irregular body, giving off 4 or 
5 dendrites, which terminate within the molecular layer and a long 
nerve fibre process or neuraxon which runs parallel to the surface of 
the convolution. 

2. The Layer of small Pyramidal Cells. — The typical cells of this 
layer are pyramid-shaped, the apices of the pyramids being directed 
towards the surface. The apex terminates in a dendron which 
reaches into the molecular layer, giving off several collateral hori- 
zontal branches in its course. The final branches in the molecular 
layer take a direction parallel to the surface. Smaller dendrites 
arise from the lateral and basal surfaces of these cells, but do not 
extend far from the body of the cell. The neuraxon always arises 
from the base of the cell and passes towards the central white 




INTRACORTICAU 

ASSOCIATION 

FIBRES 



From Cunningham, Text-book 0] Anatomy. 

Fig. 15. — Diagram to illustrate Minute Structure of the Cerebral 
Cortex. 

A ) ,, ,. „ E. Small pyramidal cell. 

B. \ Neuroglia cells. F Large pvramida i ce n. 

C. Cell with short axon (N) which breaks G. Cell of Martinotti. 

up in a free arborization. H. Polymorphic cell. 

D. Spindle-shaped cell in stratum zonale. K. Corticipetal fibres. 

matter, thus forming one of the nerve-fibres of that substance. In 
its path it gives off a number of collaterals at right angles, which 
are distributed to the adjacent grey matter. 

3. The Layer of large Pyramidal Cells. — This is characterized by 
the presence of numbers of cells of the same type as those of the 
preceding layer, but of larger size. The nerve-fibre process becomes 
a medullated fibre of the white matter. 

4. The Layer of Polymorphous Cells. — The cells of this layer are 
irregular in outline, and give off several dendrites branching into the 
surrounding grey matter. The neuraxon gives off a number of 
collaterals, and then becomes a nerve-fibre of the central white 
matter. 

Scattered through these three layers there are also a number of 
cells {cells of Golgi) whose neuraxon divides at once, the divisions 
terminating within the immediate vicinity of the cell-body. Some 
cells are also found in whieh the neuraxon, instead of running into 



the white matter of the brain, passes toward the surface ; these are 
called cells of Martinotti. 

The medullated nerve-fibres of the white matter when traced 
into the cortex are seen to enter in bundles set vertically to the 
surface. These bundles taper and are resolved into isolated fibres 
in the upper parts of the pyramidal layers. The fibres constituting 
the bundles form two sets, (a) The centrifugal fibres consist as 
above described of the fibre processes of the pyramidal and poly- 
morphous cells, {b) The centripetal fibres ascend through the cortex 
to terminate within the molecular layer by horizontally running 
branches. As they pass through they give off a number of collaterals. 
The position of the cells from which these fibres arise is not known. 
In addition to the radially arranged bundles of fibres, networks are 
formed by the interlacement with them of large numbers of fine 
medullated fibres running tangentially to the surface. These are 
derived chiefly from the collaterals of the pyramidal cells and of the 
centripetal fibres. They form two specially marked bundles, one 
within the layer of the polymorphous cells known as the inner 
band of Baillarger, and another in the layer of large pyramidal cells 
called the outer band of Baillarger. This latter is very thick in the 
calcarine region, and forms the white stria of Gennin, while the inner 
band is best seen in the precentral gyrus. As both these strands 
cross the already mentioned radial bundles at ri^ht angles, they are 
regarded as specialized parts of an interradial reticulum of fibres, but, 
nearer the surface than the radial bundles penetrate, tangential 
fibres are found, and here they are called the supraradial reticulum. 
In certain parts of the brain the fibres of this reticulum are more 



-EPIPH. 




'0P.T.N. 
-GANS.HAB. 
- OPT. LOBE 



nuc/v: 



NUC.X. 



From The Museum Catalogue of the Royal College of Surgeons of England. 



Fig. 16- 



-Brain of Petromyzon marinus (dorsal view). 
B, choroid plexus removed. 



A, Brain; 



closely set, and form the band of Bechterew in the superficial part of 
the small pyramidal cell zone. 

For further information on the structure of the cerebral cortex, 
see A. W. Campbell, Proc. R. Soc. vols, lxxii. and lxxiv. 

Comparative Anatomy. 
A useful introduction to the study of the vertebrate brain is that 
of the Amphioxus, one of the lowest of the Chordata or animals 
having a notochord. Here the brain is a very slightly modified 
part of the dorsal tubular nerve-cord, and, on the surface, shows no 
distinction from the rest of that cord. When a section is made the 
central canal is seen to be enlarged into a cavity, the neurocoele, 
which, in the young animal, communicates by an opening, the 
neuropore, with the bottom of the olfactory pit, and so with the 
exterior. More ventrally another slight diverticulum probably 
represents the infundibulum. The only trace of an eye is a patch 
of pigment at the anterior end of the brain, and there are no signs 
of any auditory apparatus. There are only two pairs of cerebral 
nerves, both of which are sensory (Willey, Amphioxus, 1894). In the 
Cyclostomata, of which the lamprey (Petromyzon) is an example, 
the minute brain is much more complex, though it is still only a very 
slight enlargement of the anterior end of the cord. The single cavity 
seen in Amphioxus is here subdivided into three: an anterior or 
prosencephalon, a middle or mesencephalon, and a hinder or rhomben- 
cephalon. The rhombencephalon has a very slight transverse 
thickening in the fore-part of its roof, this is the rudimentary cere- 
bellum {Cer.); the rest of this part of the brain is taken up by the 
large medulla, the cavity of which is the fossa rhomboidalis or fourth 
ventricle. This fossa is roofed over by the epithelium lining the 
cavity of the ventricle, by pia mater and blood-vessels constituting 
a choroid plexus (fig. 16, B). The fourth ventricle communicates 
with the parts in front by means of a passage known as the aqueduct 
of Sylvius. 

The mesencephalon or mid-brain, when looked at from the dorsal 

surface, shows a pair of large hollow swellings, the optic lobes or 

I corpora bigemina. Their cavities open out from the aqueduct of 



ANATOMY] 



BRAIN 



401 



OLF NERVE 
RAMUS V. 



Sylvius, and from the nervous tissue in their walls the optic nerves 
derive their fibres. From the front of the prosencephalon or anterior 
vesicle the olfactory nerves come off, and at the base of each of these 
are two hollow swellings ; the larger and more anterior is the olfac- 
tory bulb, the smaller and more posterior the cerebral hemisphere. 
Both these swellings must be regarded as lateral outgrowths from 
the blind front end of the original single vesicle of the brain as seen 
in Amphioxus, and from the anterior subdivision or prosencephalon 
in the lamprey. The anterior vesicle, however, is now again sub- 
divided, and that part from which the cerebral hemispheres 
bud out, and the hemispheres themselves, is called the 
telencephalon, while the posterior part of the original 
prosencephalon is known as the thalamencephalon, or more 
rarely the diencephalon. On the dorsal surface of the 
thalamencephalon are two nervous masses called the 
ganglia habenulae; the right is much larger than the left, 
and from it a stalk runs forward and upward to end in 
the vestigial pineal body (or epiphysis), which contains 
rudiments of a pigmented retina and of a lens, and 
which is usually regarded as the remains of one of a pair 
of median eyes, though it has been suggested that it may 
be an organ for the appreciation of temperature. From the 
small left ganglion habenulae a still more rudimentary 
pineal stalk projects, and there are signs of a third out- 
growth (paraphysis) in front of these. On the floor of the 
thalamencephalon the blind pouch-like infundibulum is 
in contact with the pituitary body, an outgrowth from 
the combined pituitary and olfactory pouch, which in the 
adult opens on to the top of the head just ih front of the 
pineal area. The anterior closed end of the nerve-tube, in 
front of the foramina of Munro or openings from which the 
hemispheres have grown out, is known as the lamina 
terminalis, and in this is seen a little white commissure, 
connecting the hemispheres of opposite sides and belonging 
entirely to the telencephalon, known as the anterior commissure. 
The roof of the telencephalon is mainly epithelial, and contains 
no traces of cortical structure. In the posterior part of the 
roof of the thalamencephalon is the small posterior commissure 
(Ahlborn, Zeits. wiss. Zool. Bd. xxxix., 1883, p. 191). In the 
Elasmobranch Fish, such as the sharks and rays, the cerebellum 
(Cer. fig. 17) is very large and contains the layers found in all the 
higher vertebrates. In the mesencephalon fibres corresponding 
with those of the fillet of higher vertebrates can be seen, and there is 
a nucleus in the hinder part of the corpora bigemina foreshadowing 
the separation into corpora quadrigemina. There is only one pineal 
stalk in the roof of the thalamencephalon, and the ganglia habenulae 
— very constant structures in the vertebrate brain — are not so 
marked as in Petromyzon, but are, as usual, connected with the 
olfactory parts of the cerebrum, with the surface of the optic lobes 
(tectum opticum), and with the corpus interpedunculare (Meynert's 
bundle). They are united across the middle line by a small superior 
or habenular commissure. In the floor of the thalamencephalon are 
two masses of ganglionic tissue, the optic thalami. The infundi- 
bulum dilates into two rounded bodies, the lobi inferiores, while the 
pituitary body or hypophysis cerebri has two lateral diverticula 
known as sacci vasculosi. Ganglia geniculata are found for the first 
time in connexion with the optic tracts in the lower part of the 
thalamus. The olfactory lobes (fig. 17, Olf. Bulb) are very large and 
often separated by long stalks from the cerebral hemispheres, 
which are comparatively much larger than those of the Cyclo- 
stomata; their roof or pallium is nervous, but devoid of cortical 



anterior pineal organ or paraphysis is large (Saunders, Ann. and 
Mag. Nat. Hist. ser. 6, vol. iii., 1889, p. 157; Burkhardt, Central- 
nervensystem v. Protopterus, Berlin, 1892). 

In the Amphibia the brain is of a low type, the most marked 
advances on that of the fish being that the anterior commissure is 
divided into a dorsal and ventral part, of which the ventral is the 
true anterior commissure of higher vertebrates, while the dorsal is 
a hippocampal commissure and coincides in its appearance with 
the presence of a small mass of cells in the outer layer of the median 



PARAPHY 
MONRO FOR, \ 'DORS- SAC. 



PAR. STALK MESEN. 
COMM. SUP./ COMM. POST. ' 




AREA PRECOM. 

OLF. TUBER: 



MEO.OBl. 




INF. FASC.LCNS. 

From Cat. R. C. S. England. 

Fig. 17. — Section of the Brain of Porbeagle Shark (Lamna). 

structure, while in the floor in some species large anterior basal 
ganglia or corpora striata are found (Miklucho-Maclay, Beitrdge z. 
vergl. Neurol., 1870; Edinger, Arch. mikr. Anat. Bd. Iviii., 1901, 
p. 661, " Cerebellum "). The Teleostean Fish are chiefly remarkable 
for the great development of the optic lobes and suppression of the 
olfactory apparatus. The pallium is non-nervous, and the optic 
tracts merely cross one another instead of forming a commissure. 
A process of the cerebellum called valvula cerebelli projects into the 
cavity of each optic lobe (Rabl. Ruckhard, Arch. Anat. u. Phys., 
1898, p. 345 [Pallium]; Haller, Morph. Jahrb. Bd. xxvi., 1898, 
p. 632 [Histology and Bibliography]). The brain of the Dipnoi, or 
mud fish, shows no very important developments, except that the 



COMM.V, 

OPT Chi' 
From Col. K.C.S. England. 

Fig. 18.— Section of Brain of Turtle (Chelone). 

wall of the pallium, which is probably the first indication of a 
hippocampal cortex or cortex of any kind (Osborn, Journ. Morph. 
vol. ii., 1889, p. 51). 

In the Reptilia the medulla has a marked flexure with a ventral 
convexity, and an undoubted cerebral cortex for the first time makes 
its appearance. The mesial wall of the cerebral hemisphere is divided 
into a large dorsal hippocampal area (fig. 18, Hip.) and a smaller 
ventral olfactory tubercle. Between these two a narrow area of 
ganglionic matter runs forward from the side of the lamina terminalis 
and is known as the paraterminal or precommissural area (Elliot 
Smith, Journ. Anat. and Phys. vol. xxxii. p. 411). To the upper 
lateral part of the hemisphere Elliot Smith has given the name of 
neopallium, while the lower lateral part, imperfectly separated from 
it, is called the pyriform lobe. In the Lacertilia the pineal eye, if it 
be an eye, is better developed than in any existing vertebrate, 
though even in them there is no evidence of its being used for sight. 
Behind the so-called pineal eye and its stalk is the epiphysis or pineal 
body, and sometimes there is a dorsal sac between them (see fig. 18). 1 
The middle or soft commissure appears in certain reptiles (Crocodilia 
and Chelonia), as does also the corpus mammillare (Edinger, 
Senckenberg, Naturf. Gesell. Bd. xix., 1896, and Bd. xxii., 1899; 
Haller, Morph. Jahrb. Bd. xxviii., 1900, p. 252). Among the birds 
there is great unity of type, the cerebellum is large and, by its forward 
projection, presses the optic lobes down toward the ventro-lateral 
part of the brain. The cerebral hemispheres are also large, owing 
chiefly to the great size of the corpora striata, which already show 
a differentiation into caudate nucleus, putamen and globus pallidus. 
The pallium is reptilian in character, though its cortical area is more 
extensive. The geniculate bodies are very large (Bumm, 
Zeits. wiss. Zool. Bd. xxxviii., 1883, p. 430; Brandis, Arch, 
mikr. Anat. Bd. xli., 1893, P- 62 3. and xliii., 1894, p. 96, 
and xliv., 1895, p. 534; Boyce and Warrington, Phil. 
isiraiAT Trans, vol. cxci., 1899, p.. 293). 
) ' ' Amongthe Mammalia the Monotrematahaveacerebellurn 

/ which shows, in addition to the central lobe of the lower 

vertebrates, a flocculus on each side, and the two halves of 
the cerebellum are united by a ventral commissure, the 
pons varolii. The pallium is reptilian in its arrangement, 
but that part of it which Elliot Smith has named the neo- 
pallium is very large, both in the Ornithorynchus and 
us vas Echidna, a fact very difficult to account for. In the latter 

animal the cortical area is so extensive as to be thrown 
into many and deep sulci, and yet the Echidna is one 
of the lowliest of mammals in other respects. A well- 
marked rhinal fissure separates the pyriform lobe from 
the neopallium, while, on the mesial surface, the hippocampal 
fissure separates the neopallium from the hippocampal area. Just 
below the hippocampal fis sure a specially coloured tract indicates 

x The literature of the pineal region is enormous. Studnicka 
(in Oppels Vergleichende mikrosk. Anat. Teile 4-5, 1904, 1905) gives 
285 references. The present conception of the generalized arrange- 
ment is: (a) A single glandular median organ from the fore-brain 
called the paraphysis. (0) A pouch of the ependymal roof of the 
ventricle called the dorsal sac. (7) A right and left epiphysis, one 
of which may be wholly or partially suppressed. These may change 
their position to anterior and posterior in some animals. 



4-02 



BRAIN 



[ANATOMY 



the first appearance of the fascia dentata (see fig. 20). The anterior 
commissure is divided, as in reptiles, into dorsaland ventral parts, of 
which the latter is the larger (fig. 20, Comm. V. and D.), while just 
behind the dorsal part is the first appearance of the fimbria or fornix. 
In addition to the two fissures already named, there is, in the Echidna, 
one which in position and mode of formation corresponds with the 
Sylvian fissure of higher mammals. Elliot Smith, however, wisely 
refuses to homologize it absolutely with that fissure, and proposes 
the name of pseudosylvian for it. The pineal body is rudimentary, 
and the optic lobes are now, and throughout the Mammalia, sub- 
divided into four corpora quadrigemina. 

Among the Marsupialia the Tasmanian devil (Sarcophilus) gives 
a very good idea of a generalized mammalian brain, and shows a 
large development of the parts concerned in the sense of smell. 



-OLF.BU.LB. 

CEREB.MAS. 




V.M. 




CER.HEM. 



FLDC* 



/ 

TUBER. V. 

From Cat. R.C.S. England. 

Fig. 19. — Ventral and Dorsal Views of the Brain of Ornithorynchus. 

The most important advance on the monotreme brain is that the 
calcarine fissure has now appeared on the posterior part of the mesial 
surface and causes a bulging into the ventricle, called the calcar 
avis or hippocampus minor, just as tne hippocampal fissure causes 
the hippocampus major (Gervais, Nuov. Arch. Mus. torn, v., 1869; 
Ziehen, Jenaische Denkschr. Bd. vi., 1897). 

In the Eutheria or mammals above the marsupials, the cerebellum 
gradually becomes more complex, owing to the appearance of lateral 
lobes between the flocculus and the vermis, as well as the para- 
flocculus on the outer side of the flocculus. The corpus callosum 
now first appears as a bridge between the neopallia, and its develop- 
ment leads to the stretching of the hippocampal formation, so that 
in the higher mammals the hippocampus is only found in the lower 



anterior part of the occipital lobe has a well-marked vertical sulcus, 
called the simian sulcus or Affenspalte; this often has a semilunar 
shape with its convexity forward, and is then called the sulcus 



SULC. PRECRU. 



-SULC. SUPRAS. 
"SULC. LAT. 




SULC.PRECRU. 
SULC. PROR 



SULC. SUPAA3. 



rASC. DENT. 



OLF. BULB 




CER.HEM: 



OLF.'BULB, 



COMM.V. 



PKR. L. 




~C£HEB£L. 



OLF TUBER. 



POMS 



floc: 



From Cai. R.C.S. England. 

Fig. 20. — Mesial and Lateral Views of the Brain of Ornithorynchus. 

and back part of the ventricle, while the rudiments of the dorsal 
part remain as the striae longitudinales on the corpus callosum. 
The dorsal part of the original anterior commissure becomes the 
fornix, and the paraterminal area is modified to form the septum 
lucidum. The first appearance of the fissure of Rolando is probably 
in some of the Carnivora, in which, as the sulcus crucialis, it forms 
the posterior boundary of the " ursine lozenge " described by Mivart 
(Journ. Linn. Soc. vol. xix., 1886) (see fig. 22, Side. Cru.). In the 



SULC. ORB. 



OLF. BULB 




HIP. F. 



SULC. ORB. 



From Cat. R.C.S. England. 

Fig. 22. — Dorsal and Lateral Views of the Brain of a Ratel 

(Mellivora indica). 

lunatus. It is usually concealed in European brains by the overgrowth 
of the surrounding gyri, but it occasionally remains, though less 
frequently than in the brains of Egyptian fellaheen. Its relation to 
the white stria of Cennari is especially interesting, and is 
recorded by Elliot Smith in the Anatomischer Anzeiger, Bd. 
xxiv., 1904, p. 436. The rhinal fissure, which is so charac- 
teristic a feature of the lower mammals, almost disappears 
in Man, and is only represented by the incisura temporalis 
(see fig. II, i.t). The hippocampal fissure persists with little 
modification all through the mammalian class. The cal- 
carine fissure remains with many modifications from the 
marsupials to man, and in view of the famous controversy of 
1864, in which Owen, Huxley and the then bishop of 
Oxford took part, it is interesting to note that its hip- 
pocampus minor can now be clearly demonstrated, even 
in the Marsupialia. Another very ancient and stable sulcus 
is the orbital, which is a simple antero-posterior line until Man 
is reached (see fig. 23, Sulc. Orb.). The great point of importance, 
however, in the evolution of the mammalian brain is the gradual 
suppression of the olfactory region, and the development of the neo- 
pallium, a development which takes a sudden stride between the 
Anthropoid apes and Man. (For further particulars of this and other 
points in the comparative anatomy of the brain, see Catalogue of the 
Physiological Series of the Museum of the Royal College of Surgeons 
of England, vol. ii. 2nd ed., by R. H. Burne and G. Elliot 
Smith, London, 1902.) 



SULC.CALC. 



FASC 



. RHJN .F. 



COMM, 
OLF.BULB 




Embryology. 



-Fl. 



OLF. TUBER. 



' COMM.V 



PVR.L. . 
DLF - TR - OLF! TUBER."* 
From Cat. R.C.S. England. 

Fig. 21. — Mesial and Lateral Views of the Brain of the Tasmanian Devil 

{Sarcophilus). 

higher apes or Anthropoidea the human fissures and sulci are largely 
recognizable, so that a gibbon's brain, apart from all question of 
comparative anatomy, forms a useful means of demonstrating to a 
junior class the main gyri and sulci of Man in a simple and dia- 
grammatic way. The main points of difference, apart from greater 
simplicity, are that the central lobe or island of Reil is exposed on 
the surface of the brain, as it is in the human foetus, and that the 



The brain, like the rest of the nervous system, is developed 

from the ectoderm or outer layer of the embryo by the 

formation of a groove in the mid-dorsal line. The lips of this 

medullary groove unite to form a canal beginning at the 

place where the neck of the embryo is to be. The part of 

the neural canal in front of the earliest union forms the brain 

and very early becomes constricted into three vesicles, to 

which the names of prosencephalon, mesencephalon and 

rhombencephalon are now usually given. The simple tubular 

brain we have seen as a permanent arrangement in Am- 

phioxus, but the stage of the three vesicles is a transitory one, 

and is not found in the adult of any existing animal. From the 

sides of the prosencephalon, the optic vesicles grow out before the 

neural tube is completely closed, and eventually form the optic 

nerves and retinae, while, soon after this, the cerebral hemispheres 

bulge from the antero-dorsal part of the first primary vesicle, their 

points of evagination being the foramina of Munro. From the 

ventral parts of these cerebral hemispheres the olfactory lobes are 



ANATOMY] 



BRAIN 



403 



constricted off, while just behind the openings of the foramina of 
Munro a constriction occurs which divides the prosencephalon into 
two secondary vesicles, the anterior of which, containing the foramina 
of Munro, is called the telencephalon, while the posterior is the 
thalamencephalon or diencephalon. A constriction also occurs in the 
hind vesicle or rhombencephalon, dividing it into an anterior part, 
the metencephalon, from which the cerebellum is developed, and a. 
posterior or myelencephalon, the primitive medulla oblongata. At this 
stage the general resemblance of the brain to that of the lamprey is 
striking. 

Before the secondary constrictions occur three vertical flexures 
begin to form. The first is known as the cephalic, and is caused by the 
prosencephalon bending sharply downward, below and in front of 
the mesencephalon. The second is the cervical, and marks the place 
where the brain ends and the spinal cord begins ; the concavity of 
this flexure is ventral. The third to appear has a ventral convexity 
and is known as the pontine, since it marks the site of the future 
pons Varolii; it resembles the permanent flexure in the reptilian 
brain. 

It will now be seen that the original neural canal, which is lined 
by ciliated epithelium, forms the ventricles of the brain, while 
superficial to this epithelium (ependyma) the grey and white matter 
is subsequently formed. It has been shown by His that the whole 
neural tube may be divided into dorsal or alar, and ventral or basal 
laminae, and, as the cerebral hemispheres bud out from the dorsal 
part of the anterior primary vesicle, they consist entirely of alar 
laminae. The most characteristic feature of the human and anthro- 
poid brain is the rapid and great expansion of these hemispheres, 
especially in a backward direction, so that the mesencephalon and 
metencephalon are hidden by them from above at the seventh 
month of intra-uterine life. At first the foramina of Munro form 




-suit ut ace. 



SULCIKKOCC 



SM.C PAR. 



SYL.r. 



From Cat. R.C.S. England. 
Fig. 23. — Lateral view of cerebral hemisphere of Gorilla (Anthropopithecus 

gorilla). 

a communication not only between the third and lateral ventricles, 
but between the two lateral ventricles, so that the cavity of each 
hemisphere is continuous with that of the other; soon, however, 
a median longitudinal fissure forms, into which the mesoderm grows 
to form the falx, and so the foramina of Munro are constricted into 
a V-shaped canal. In the floor of the hemispheres the corpora 
striata are developed at an early date by a multiplication of nerve 
cells, and on the external surface a depression, called the Sylvian 
fossa, marks the position of the future central lobe, which is after- 
wards hidden as the lips of the fossa (opercula) gradually close in 
on it to form the Sylvian fissure. The real fissures are complete 
infoldings of the whole thickness of the vesicular wall and produce 
swellings in the cavity. Some of them, like the choroidal 011 _ the 
mesial surface, are developed very early, while the vesicle is little 
more than epithelial, and contain between their walls an inpushing 
of mesoderm to form the choroid plexus. Others, like the hippo- 
campal and calcarine, appear in the second and third months and 
correspond to invaginations of the nervous tissue, the hippocampus 
major and minor. The sulci appear later than the fissures and do 
not affect the internal cavity; they are due to the rapid growth of 
the cortex in certain areas. The corpus callosum and fornix appear 
about the third month and their development is somewhat doubtful; 
they are probably modifications of the lamina terminalis, but they 
may be secondary adhesions between the adjacent surfaces of the 
cerebral hemispheres where the cortical grey matter has not covered 
the white. They begin at their antero-ventral part near the genu 
of the corpus callosum and the anterior pillars of the fornix, and these 
are the parts which first appear in the lower mammals. The original 
anterior vesicle from which the hemispheres evaginate is composed, 
as already shown, of an anterior part or telencephalon and a posterior 
or thalamencephalon ; the whole forming the third ventricle in the 
adult. Here the alar and basal laminae are both found, but the 
former is the more important ; from it the optic thalami are derived, 
and more posteriorly the geniculate bodies. The anterior wall, of 
course, is the lamina terminalis, and from it are formed the lamina 



cinerea, the corpus callosum, fornix and septum lucidum. The roof 
largely remains epithelial and is invaginated into the ventricle by 
the mesoderm to form the choroid plexuses of the third ventricle, 
but at the posterior part it develops the ganglia habenulae and the 
pineal body, from a structure just in front of which both a lens 
and retinal elements are derived in the lower forms. This is one 
great difference between the development of this organ and that 
of the true eyes; indeed it has been suggested that the pineal is an 
organ of thermal sense and not the remains of a median eye at all. 
The floor of the third ventricle is developed from the basal laminae, 
which here are not very important and from which the tuber cinereum 
and, until the fourth month, single corpus mammillare are developed. 
The infundibulum or stalk of the posterior part of the pituitary 
body at first grows down in front of the tuber cinereum and, accord- 
ing to Gaskel's theory, represents an ancestral mouth to which the 
ventricles of the brain and the central canal of the cord acted as the 
stomach and intestine {Quart. Journ. of Mic. Sci. 31, p. 379; and 
Journ. of Phys. v. 10, p. 153). The reason why the basal lamina is 
here small is because it contains the nuclei of no cranial nerves. 
The anterior and posterior commissures appear before the middle 
.and the middle before the corpus callosum, as they do in phylogeny. 
In connexion with the thalamencephalon, though not really belong- 
ing to it, may be mentioned the anterior lobes of the pituitary body ; 
these begin as an upward diverticulum from the posterior wall of the 
primitive pharynx or stomatodaeum about the fourth week. This 
pouch of Rathke, as it is called, becomes nipped off by the developing 
base of the skull, and its bifid blind end meets and becomes applied 
to the posterior part of the body, which comes down from the brain. 
In the mesencephalon the alar laminae form the corpora quadri- 
eemina ; these at first are bigeminal and hollow as they are in the 
lower vertebrates. The basal laminae thicken to form the crura 
cerebri. In the rhombencephalon the division into basal 
and alar laminae is better marked than in any other 
part; there is a definite groove inside the fourth ven- 
tricle, which remains in the adult as the superior and 
inferior fovea and which marks the separation between 
the two laminae. In the basal laminae are found the 
deep origins of most of the motor cranial nerves, while 
those of the sensory are situated in the alar laminae. 
The roof of the fourth ventricle widens out very much 
and remains largely epithelial as the superior and 
inferior medullary vela. The cerebellum develops in the 
anterior part of the roof of the rhombencephalon as two 
lateral rudiments which unite in the mid line and so 
form a transverse bar similar to that seen in the adult 
lamprey; at the end of the second month the flocculus 
and paraflocculus become marked, and later on a series 
of transverse fissures occur dividing the various lobes. 
Of the cerebellar peduncles the inferior develops first 
(third month), then the middle forming the pons (fourth 
month), and lastly the superior (fifth month) (Elliot 
Smith, Review of Neurology and Psychiatry, October 1903 ; 
W. Kuithan, " Die Entwicklung des Kleinhirns bei Sauge- 
tieren," Munchener Med. Abhandl., 1895; B. Stroud, 
"Mammalian cerebellum," Journ. of Comp. Neurology, 
1895). Much of our knowledge of the tracts of fibres in the brain is 
due to the fact that they acquire their white sheaths at different 
stages of development, some long after birth. 

For further details and references see Quain's Anat. vol. i. (1908) ; 
Minot's Human Embryology (New York) ; W. His, Anat. menschlicher 
Embryonen (Leipzig, 1881); Marshall's Vertebrate Embryology; 
Kolliker, Grundriss der Entviickelungsgeschichte (Leipzig, 1880); 
A. Keith, Human Embryology and Morphology (London, 1904) ; 
O. Hertwig, Handbuch der vergleichenden und experimentellen Ent- 
wickelungslehre der Wirbeltiere, Bd. 2, part 3 (Jena, 1902-1906); 
Development of the Human Body, J. P. McMurrich (1906). 

(F. G. P.) 

2. Physiology 
The nervous system has as its function the co-ordinating of 
the activities of the organs one with another. It puts the organs 
into such mutual relation that the animal reacts as a whole with 
speed, accuracy and self-advantage, in response to the en- 
vironmental agencies which stimulate it. For this office of the 
nervous system there are two fundamental conditions. The 
system must be thrown into action by agencies at work in the 
environment. Light, gravity, mechanical impacts, and so on, 
which are conditions significant for animal existence, must find 
the system responsive and through it evoke appropriate activity 
in the animal organs. And in fact there have been evolved 
in the animal a number of structures called receptive organs 
which are selectively excitable by different environmental 
agencies. Connected with these receptive organs lies that 
division of the nervous system which is termed afferent because 
it conducts impulses inwards towards the nervous centres. 
This division consists of elongated nerve-cells, in man some two. 



4°4 



BRAIN 



[PHYSIOLOGY 



million in number for each half of the body. These are living 
threads of microscopic tenuity, each extending from a receptive 
organ to a central nervous mass. These central nervous masses 
are in vertebrates all fused into one, of which the part which 
lies in the head is especially large and complex, because directly 
connected with particularly important and delicate receptive 
organs. The part of the central nervous organ which lies in 
the head has, in consequence of its connexion with the most 
important receptive organs, evolved a dominant importance in 
the nervous system, and this is especially true of the higher 
animal forms. This head part of the central nervous organ is 
sufficiently different from the rest, even to anatomical examina- 
tion, to have received a separate name, the brain. But the fact 
of its having received a separate name ought not to obscure the 
singleness and solidarity of the whole central nervous organ 
as one entity. The functions of the whole central nervous 
organ from region to region are essentially similar throughout. 
One of its essential functions is reception, via afferent nerves, 
of nervous impulses generated in the receptive organs by en- 
vironmental agents as stimuli. In other words, whatever the 
nature of the agent, its result on the receptive organs enters the 
central nervous organ as a nervous impulse, and all segments 
of the central nervous organ receive impulses so generated. 
Further, it is not known that nervous impulses present qualitative 
differences among themselves. It is with these impulses that 
the central nervous organ whether spinal cord or brain has to 
deal. 

Material and Psychical Signs of Cerebral Activity. — In the 
central nervous organ the action resulting from entrant impulses 
has issue in three kinds of ways. The reaction may die out, be 
suppressed, and so far as discoverable lead to nothing; or the 
impulses may evoke effect in either or both of two forms. Just 
as from the receptive organs, nerves lead into the central nervous 
organ, so conversely from the central organ other nerves, termed 
efferent, lead to various organs of the body, especially glands and 
muscles. The reaction of the central nervous organ to impulses 
poured into it commonly leads to a discharge of impulses from 
it into glands and muscles. These centrifugal impulses are, so 
far as is known, qualitatively like the centripetal impulses. 
On reaching the glands and muscles they influence the activity 
of those organs. Since those organs are therefore the mechanisms 
in which the ultimate effect of the nervous reaction takes place, 
they are often termed from this point of view effector organs. 
A change ensuing in effector organs is often the only sign an 
observer has that a nervous reaction has occurred, unless the 
nervous system under observation be the observer's own. 

If the observer turns to his own nervous system for evidence 
of reaction, he meets at once in numberless instances with 
sensation as an outcome or sign of its reaction. This effect he 
cannot show to any being beside himself. He can only describe 
it, and in describing it he cannot strictly translate it into any 
term of material existence. The unbridged gulf between sensa- 
tion and the changes produced in effector organs necessitates a 
separate handling of the functions of the nervous system accord- 
ing as their office under consideration is sensation or material 
effect. This holds especially in the case of the brain, and for the 
following reasons. 

Psychosis and the Fore-Brain. — Hippocrates wrote, " It is 
through the brain that we become mad, that delirium seizes us, 
that fears and terrors assail us." " We know that pleasure and 
joy on the one hand and pain and grief on the other are referable 
to the brain. It is in virtue of it that we think, understand, see, 
hear, know ugliness and beauty, evil and good, the agreeable 
and the disagreeable." Similarly and more precisely Descartes 
indicated the brain, and the brain alone, as the seat of conscious- 
ness. Finally, it was Flourens who perhaps first definitely 
insisted on the restriction of the seat of consciousness in higher 
animals to that part of the brain which is the fore-brain. A 
functional distinction between the fore-brain and the remainder 
of the nervous system seems, in fact, that consciousness and phy- 
sical reactions are adjunct to the fore-brain in a way in which 
they are not to the rest of the system. After transection of the 



spinal cord, or of the brain behind the fore-brain, psychical 
phenomena do not belong to the reactions of the nervous arcs 
posterior to the transection, whereas they do still accompany 
reactions of the nervous arcs in front and still connected with the 
fore-brain. A man after severance of the spinal cord does not 
possess in the strict sense consciousness of the limbs whose 
afferent nerves lie behind the place of spinal severance. He can 
see them with his eyes, and if the severance lie between the arms 
and the legs, can feel the latter with his hands. He knows them 
to be a part of his body. But they are detached from his con- 
sciousness. Sensations derived from them through all other 
channels of sense than their own do not suffice to restore them 
in any adequate measure to his consciousness. He must have 
the sensations so called " resident " in them, that is, referred to 
them, without need of any logical inference. These can be yielded 
only by the receptive organs resident in the part itself, its skin, 
its joints, its muscles, &c, and can only be yielded by those 
receptive organs so long as the nerve impulses from them have 
access to the fore-brain. Consciousness, therefore, does not seem 
to attach to any portion of the nervous system of higher animals 
from which the fore-brain has been cut off. In the dog it has 
been found that no sign of memory, let alone intelligence, has 
been forthcoming after removal of the greater part of the fore- 
brain. 

In lower vertebrates it is not clear that consciousness in 
primitive form requires always the co-operation of the fore-brain. 
In them the fore-brain does not seem a conditio sine qua non for 
psychosis — so far as we may trust the rather hazardous in- 
ferences which study of the behaviour of fish, &c, allows. And 
the difference between higher and lowlier animal forms in respect 
of the fore-brain as a condition for psychosis becomes more 
marked when the Arthropoda are examined. The behaviour 
of some Insecta points strongly to their possessing memory, 
rudimentary in kind though it may be. But in them no homo- 
logue of the fore-brain of vertebrates can be indisputably made 
out. The head ganglia in these Invertebrates may, it is true, 
be analogous in function in certain ways to the brain of verte- 
brates. Some experiments, not plentiful, indicate that destruc- 
tion of these head ganglia induces deterioration of behaviour 
such as follows loss of psychical functions in cases of destruction 
of the fore-brain in vertebrates. Though, therefore, we cannot 
be clear that the head ganglia of these Invertebrates are the 
same structure morphologically as the brain of vertebrates, 
they seem to hold a similar office, exercising analogous functions, 
including psychosis of a rudimentary kind. We can, therefore, 
speak of the head ganglia of Arthropods as a brain, and in doing 
so must remember that we define by physiological evidence 
rather than by morphological. 

Cerebral Control over Lower Nervous Centres. — There accrues 
to the brain, especially to the fore-brain of higher Vertebrates, 
another function besides that of grafting psychical qualities upon 
the reactions of the nervous system. This function is exhibited 
as power to control in greater or less measure the pure reflexes 
enacted by the system. These pure reflexes have the character 
of fatality, in the sense that, given a particular stimulus, a 
particular reaction unvaryingly follows; the same group of 
muscles or the same gland is invariably thrown into action in 
the same way. Removal of the fore-brain, i.e. of that portion of 
the central nervous organ to which psychosis is adjunct, renders 
the nervous reactions of the animal more predictable and less 
variable. The animal, for instance, a dog, is given over more 
completely to simple reflexes. Its skin is touched and it scratches 
the spot, its jaw is stroked and it yawns, its rump is rubbed and 
it shakes itself, like a dog coming out of water; and these 
reactions occur fatally and inopportunely, for instance, when 
food is being offered to it, when the dog normally would allow 
no such insignificant skin stimuli as the above to defer his 
appropriate reaction. Goltz relates the behaviour of a dog 
from which almost the whole fore-brain had been removed. 
The animal lived healthily under the careful treatment accorded 
it. At feeding time a little quinine (bitter) added to its sop of 
meat and milk led to the morsels, after being taken into the 



PHYSIOLOGY] 



BRAIN 



405 



mouth, being at once and regularly rejected. None was ever 
swallowed, nor was the slightest hesitation in their rejection 
ever obtained by any coaxing or command, or encouragement 
of the animal by the attendant who constantly had charge of it. 
On the other hand, directly an undoctored piece had entered 
the mouth it was swallowed at once. Goltz threw to his own 
house-dog a piece of the same doctored meat. The creature 
wagged its tail and took it eagerly, then after receiving it into 
its mouth pulled a wry face and hesitated, astonished. But on 
encouragement to go on eating it the dog did so. Perhaps it 
deemed it unseemly to appear ungrateful to the giver and reject 
the gift. It overcame its reflex of rejection, and by its self- 
control gave proof of the intact cerebrum it possessed. 

There seems a connexion between consciousness and the 
power to modify reflex action to meet the exigencies of the 
occasion. Pure reflexes are admirably adapted to certain ends. 
They are reactions which have long proved advantageous to the 
phylum of which the existent animal is the representative 
embodiment. But the reflexes have a machine-like fatality, 
and conscious aim does not forerun their execution. The subject 
as active agent does not direct them. Yet they lie under the 
control of higher centres. The cough, the eye-closure, the 
impluse to smile, all these can be suppressed. The innate respira- 
tory rhythm can be modified to meet the requirements of vocal 
utterance. In other words, the reaction of reflex arcs is con- 
trollable by the mechanism to whose activity consciousness is 
adjunct. The reflexes controlled are often reactions but slightly 
affecting consciousness, but consciousness is very distinctly 
operative with the centres which exert the control. It may be 
that the primary aim, object and purpose of consciousness is 
control. " Consciousness in a mere automaton," writes Professor 
Lloyd Morgan, " is a useless and unnecessary epiphenomenon." 
As to how this conscious control is operative on reflexes, how it 
intrudes its influence on the running of the reflex machinery, 
little is known. 

The Cerebrum an Organ giving Adaptation and Readjustment of 
Motor Acts. — The exercise of this control and the acquirement 
of skilled actions have obviously elements in common. By 
skilled actions, we understand actions not innately given, 
actions acquired by training in individual experience. The 
controlling centres pick out from an ancestral motor action some 
part, and isolate and enhance that until it becomes a skilled act. 
The motor co-ordination ancestrally provided for the ring finger 
gives an extending of it only in company with extension of the 
fingers on either side of it. The isolated lifting of the ring finger 
can, however, soon be acquired by training. In such cases the 
higher centre with conscious effort is able to dissociate a part 
from an ancestral co-ordination, and in that way to add a 
skilled adapted act to the powers of the individual. 

The nervous organs of control form, therefore, a special instru- 
ment of adaptation and of readjustment of reaction, for better 
accommodation to requirements which may be new. The attain- 
ment of more precision and speed in the use of a tool, or the 
handling of a weapon, means a process in which nervous organs 
of control modify activities of reflex centres themselves already 
perfected ancestrally for other though kindred actions. This 
process of learning is accompanied by conscious effort. The 
effort consists not so much in any course of reasoning but rather 
in the acquiring of new sensorimotor experience. To learn 
swimming or skating by simple cogitation or mere visual observa- 
tion is of course impossible. The new ideas requisite cannot be 
constructed without motor experience, and the training must 
include that motor experience. Hence the training for a new 
skilled motor manoeuvre must be simply ad hoc, and is of itself 
no training for another motor co-ordination. 

The more complex an organism -the more points of contact 
does it have with its environment, and the more does it need 
readjustment amid an environment of shifting relationships. 
Hence the organs of consciousness and control, being organs of 
adaptation and readjustment of reaction, will be more pro- 
nounced the farther the animal scale is followed upward to its 
crowning species, man. The cerebrum and especially the cerebral 



cortex may be regarded as the highest expression of the nervous 
organ of individual adaptation of reactions. Its high develop- 
ment in man makes him the most successful animal on earth's 
surface at the present epoch. The most important part of all 
this adjustment in his case, as he stands now, consists doubtless 
in that nervous activity which is intellectual. The mentality 
attached to his cerebrum includes reason in higher measure than 
is possessed by the mentality of other animals. He, therefore, 
more than they, can profitably forecast the future and act 
suitably to meet it from memory of the past. The cerebrum has 
proved itself by his case the most potent weapon existent for 
extending animal dominance over the environment. 

Means and Present Aims of Physiological Study of the Brain. — 
The aspects of cerebral activity are therefore twofold. There is 
the contribution which it makes to the behaviour of the animal 
as seen in the creature's doings. On the other hand there is its 
product in the psychical life of the animal. The former of these 
is subject matter for physiology; the latter is especially the 
province of psychology. Physiology does, however, concern 
itself with the psychical aspect of cerebral functions. Its scope, 
embracing the study of the bodily organs in regard to function, 
includes the psychic as well as the material, because as just 
shown the former inextricably interlace with the latter. But the 
relation between the psychic phenomena and the working of the 
brain in regard to any data of fundamental or intimate character 
connecting the two remains practically as unknown to us as to 
the Greek philosophers. What physiology has at present to be 
content with in this respect is the mere assigning of certain kinds 
of psychic events to certain local regions of the cerebrum. This 
primitive quest constitutes the greater part of the " neurology " 
of our day, and some advance has been made along its lines. 
Yet how meagre are really significant facts will be clear from 
the brief survey that follows. Before passing finally from these 
general considerations, we may note that it becomes more and 
more clear that the brain, although an organ than can be treated 
as a whole, is complex in the sense that separable functions belong 
in some measure to its several parts. 

The means principally adopted in studying the functions of 
the brain — and it must be remembered that this study in its 
present phase is almost exclusively a mere search for localization 
— are four. These are the physiological, the clinico-pathological, 
the histological and the zoological. The first named proceeds 
by observing the effects of artificial excitation, chiefly electric, 
of various parts of the brain, and the defects produced by 
destruction or removal of circumscribed portions. The clinico- 
pathological proceeds by observing the disturbances of body 
and mind occurring in disease or injury, and ascertaining the 
extent of the disease or injury, for the most part post mortem. 
The histological method examines the microscopic structure of 
the various regions of the brain and the characters and arrange- 
ment of the nerve-cells composing it. The zoological follows and 
compares the general features of the brain, as represented 
in the various types of animal creation. 

It is on the functions of the fore-brain that interest now 
mainly focuses, for the reasons mentioned above. And the 
interest in the fore-brain itself chiefly attaches to the functions 
of its cortex. This is due to several causes. In man and the 
animals nearest him the cortex forms by far the larger part of 
the whole cerebral hemisphere. More than any other part it 
constitutes the distinctively human feature. It lies accessible 
to various experimental observations, as also to traumatic 
lesions and to the surgeon's art. It is composed of a great 
unbroken sheet of grey matter; for that reason it is a structure 
wherein processes of peculiar interest for the investigation in 
view are likely to occur. To make this last inference more 
clear a reference to the histology of nervous tissue must be made. 
The whole physiological function of the nervous system may 
be summed up in the one word " conduction." This " con- 
duction " may be defined as the transmission of states of excite- 
ment (nerve-impulses) along the neural arcs composing the 
system. The whole nervous system is built up of chains of nerve- 
cells (neurones) which are nervous conductors, the chains often 



406 



BRAIN 



[PHYSIOLOGY 



being termed arcs. Each neurone is an elongated cell which 
transmits nerve-impulses from its one end to its other, without 
so far as is known modifying the impulses in transit, unless 
in that part of the nerve-cell where the nucleus lies. That part 
of the neurone or nerve-cell is called the perikaryon or cell- 
body, and from that part usually many branches of the cell (each 
branch being a nerve-fibre) ramify. There is no evidence that 
impulses are modified in transit along a branch of a nerve-cell, 
but there is clear evidence of manifold modification of nerve- 
impulses in transit along the nerve-arcs of the nervous system. 
These nerve-arcs are neurone-chains. In them one neurone 
continues the line of conduction where the immediately fore- 
going neurone left it. That is, the neurones are laid in conductive 
series, the far end of one apposed to the near end of its precursor. 
The place of juxtaposition of the end of one neurone against 
the beginning of another is called the synapse. At it the con- 
duction which has so far been wholly intra-neuronic is replaced 
by an inter-neuronic process, in which the nerve impulse passes 
from one neurone to the next. The process there, it is natural to 
think, must be physiologically different from that conductive 
process that serves for transmission merely within the neurone 
itself. It may be that to this inter-neuronic conduction are due 
the differences between conduction in nerve-arcs and nerve- 
trunks (nerve-fibres) respectively. Significant of' the former 
are changes in rhythm, intensity, excitability and modifications 
by summation and inhibition; in fact a number of the main 
features of nervous reaction. These characters impressed upon 
conduction in nerve arcs (neurone-chains) would therefore be 
traceable to the intercalation of perikarya and synapses, for 
both these structures are absent from nerve-trunks. It is 
therefore probably to perikarya and synapses that the greater 
part of the co-ordination, elaboration and differentiation of 
nervous reactions is due. Now, perikarya and synapses are 
not present in the white matter of the central nervous organ, 
any more than they are in nerve-trunks. They are confined 
exclusively to those portions of the central organ which consist 
of grey matter (so called from its naked-eye appearance). Hence 
it is to the great sheet of grey matter which enfolds the cerebrum 
that the physiologist turns, as to a field where he would expect 
to find evidences of the processes of cerebral co-ordination at 
work. It is therefore to items regarding the functions of the 
great sheet of cerebral cortex that we may now pass. 

The Cerebral Cortex and its Functions. — The main question 
which vexed the study of the physiology of the cerebral hemi- 
spheres in the 19th century was whether differences of function 
are detectible in the different regions of the hemisphere and 
especially in those of its cortex. One camp of experimenters 
and observers held that the cortex was identical in function 
throughout its extent. These authorities taught that the 
various faculties and senses suffer damage in proportion to the 
amount of cortex removed or injured, and that it is a matter of 
indifference what may be the particular region wherein the 
destruction takes place. Against this an opposed set of observers 
held that different regions perform different functions, and 
this latter " differential " view was raised in two wholly dis- 
similar forms in the first and last quarters of the 19th century 
respectively. In the first quarter of the century, a school, with 
which the name of Gall is prominently associated, held that 
each faculty of a set of particular so-called " faculties," which 
it assumed constituted intelligence, has in the brain a spatially 
separate organ proper to itself. Gall's doctrine had two funda- 
mental propositions. The first was that intelligence resides 
exclusively in the brain: the second, that intelligence consists 
of twenty-seven " faculties," each with a separate local seat 
in the brain. The first proposition was not new. It is met with 
in Hippocrates, and it had been elaborated by Descartes and 
others. But Bichat in his A natomie generate had partly wandered 
from the gradually established truth and referred the emotions 
to the visceral organs, returning to a naive view popularly 
prevalent. Gall's first proposition was probably raised especially 
in reaction against Bichat. But Gall's proposition was retro- 
grade from the true position of the science of his time. Flourens 



and others of his contemporaries had already shown not only 
that intelligence was resident exclusively in the brain, but that 
it was resident exclusively in that part of the brain which is 
the fore-brain. Now Gall placed certain of his twenty-seven 
intellectual faculties in the cerebellum, which is part of the 
hind-brain. 

Phrenology. — As to Gall's second proposition, the set of 
faculties into which he analysed intelligence shows his power 
of psychological analysis to have been so weak that it is matter 
of surprise his doctrine could obtain even the ephemeral vogue 
it actually did. Among his twenty-seven faculties are, for 
instance, " l' amour de la progtniture, V instinct carnassier, Vamitii, 
la ruse, la sagacite comparative, I'esprit mitaphysique, le talent 
pottique, la mimique," &c. Such crudity of speculation is re- 
markable in one who had undoubtedly considerable insight into 
human character. Each of the twenty-seven faculties had its 
seat in a part of the brain, and that part of the brain was called 
its " organ." The mere spatial juxtaposition or remoteness 
of these organs one from another in the brain had, according 
to Gall, an influence on the constitution of the mind. " Comme 
Vorgane des arts est place loin de I'organe du sens des couleurs, 
cette circonstance explique pourquoi les peintres d'hisloire ont ttt 
rarement coloristes." All these " faculty-organs " were placed 
by Gall at the surface of the brain. " This explains the corre- 
spondence which exists between craniology and the doctrine 
of the functions of the brain (cerebral physiology), the single 
aim of my researches." Gall wrote that he found the bump of 
pride (la bosse de Vorgueil) as far down in the animal series as 
the goat. Broussais traced the " organ " of veneration as far 
down as the sheep. Gall found the bump of murder (bosse du 
meurtre) in the carnivora. Later it was traced also in herbivora. 
Broussais added apologetically that " the herbivora cause a 
real destruction of plants." 

Gall's doctrine enjoyed enormous vogue. He himself had the 
gifts and the demerits of quackery. His doctrine possessed, 
apart from its falsity, certain other mischievous qualities. 
" Que ces hommes si glorieux, qui font egorger les nations par 
millions, sachent qu'ils n'agissent point de leur propre chef, que 
c'est la nature qui a place dans leur cceur la rage de la destruction." 
One of his scientific opponents rejoined, " Nay, it is not that 
which they should know. What they should know is that if 
providence has allowed to man the possibility of doing evil, it 
has also endowed him with the power to do good." The main 
cause of the success of phrenology (q.v.) has been no doubt the 
common desire of men to read the characters and hidden thoughts 
of others by external signs. Each bump or " bosse " on the 
cranium was supposed to indicate the existence and degree of 
development of one or other of the twenty-seven " faculties." 
One such " bosse " showed the development of the organ of 
" goodness," and another the development of the organ of 
" murder." Such an easy means to arrive at information so 
curious delighted many persons, and they were not willingly 
undeceived. 

Modern Localization Doctrines. — The crude localization of the 
phrenologists is therefore too clumsy to possess an interest it 
might otherwise have had as an early expression of belief in 
cerebral localization, a belief which other labours have subse- 
quently justified, although on facts and lines quite different 
from these imagined by Gall'and his followers. Patient scientific 
toil by the hands of E. Hitzig and D. Ferrier and their followers 
has slowly succeeded in obtaining certain facts about the cortex 
cerebri which not only show that different regions of it are con- 
cerned with different functions, but, for some regions at least, 
outline to some extent the kind of function exercised. It is true 
that the greater part of the cortex remains still terra incognita 
unless we are content with'mere descriptive features concern- 
ing its coarse anatomy. For several scattered regions some 
knowledge of their function has been gained by physiological 
investigation. These scattered regions are the visual, the 
auditory, the olfactory and the precentral. 

The grey matter of the cerebral cortex is broadly characterized 
histologically by the perikarya (nerve-cells bodies) which lie in it 



PHYSIOLOGY] 



BRAIN 



407 



possessing a special shape; they are pyramidal. The dendrite 
fibres of these cells — that is, their fibres which conduct towards 
the perikarya — are branches from the apex and corners of the 
pyramid. From the base often near its middle arises one large 
fibre — the axone fibre, which conducts impulses away from the 
perikaryon. The general appearance and arrangement of the 
neurones in a particle of cortical grey matter are shown in fig. 15, 
above. The apices of the pyramidal perikarya are turned 
towards the free surface of the cortex. The figure as interpreted 
in terms of functional conduction means that the cortex is beset 
with conductors, each of which collects nerve-impulses, from 
a minute but relatively wide field by its branched dendrites, 
and that these nerve-impulses converge through its perikaryon, 
issue by its axone, and are carried whithersoever the axone runs. 
In some few cells the axone breaks up into branches in the im- 
mediate neighbourhood of its own perikaryon in the cortex. 
In most cases, however, the axone runs off into the subjacent 
white matter, leaving the cortex altogether. On reaching the 
subjacent white matter it mingles with other fibres and takes one 
of the following courses: — (1) to the grey matter of the cortex of 
the same hemisphere, (2) to the grey matter of the cortex of the 
opposite hemisphere, (3) to the grey matter of the pons, (4) to 
the grey matter of the bulb or spinal cord. It is noteworthy 
that the dendrite fibres of these cortical neurones do not trans- 
gress the limits of the grey cortex and the immediate neighbour- 
hood of the perikaryon to which they belong; whereas the dis- 
charging or axone fibre does in the vast majority of cases trans- 
gress the limits of the grey matter wherein its perikaryon lies. 
The cortical neurone therefore collects impulses in the region of 
cortex just about its perikaryon and discharges them to other 
regions, some not cortical or even cerebral, but spinal, &c. One 
question which naturally arises is, do these cells spontaneously 
generate their impulses or are they stirred to activity by impulses 
which reach them from without? The tendency of physiology 
is to regard the actions of the cortex as reactions to impulses 
communicated to the cortical cells by nerve-channels reaching 
them from the sense organs. The neurone conductors in the 
cortex are in so far considered to resemble those of reflex centres, 
though their reactions are more variable and complex than in the 
use of the spinal. The chains of neurones passing through the 
cortex are more complex and connected with greater numbers of 
associate complex chains than are those of the spinal centres. 
But just as the reflex centres of the cord are each attached to 
afferent channels arriving from this or that receptive-organ, for 
instance, tactile-organs of the skin, or spindles of muscle-sense, 
&c, so the regions of cortex whose function is to-day with some 
certainty localized seem to be severally related each to some 
particular sense-organ. The localization, so far as ascertained, 
is a localization which attaches separate areas of cortex to the 
several species of sense, namely the visual, the auditory, the 
olfactory, and so on. This being so, we should expect to find the 
sensual representation in the cortex especially marked for the 
organs of the great distance-receptors, the organs which — con- 
sidered as sense organs — initiate sensations having the quality 
of projicience into the sensible environment. The organs of 
distance-receptors are the olfactory, the visual and the auditory. 
The environmental agent which acts as stimulus in the case of 
the first named is chemical, in the second is radiant, and in the 
last is mechanical. 

Olfactory Region of Cortex. — There is phylogenetic evidence 
that the development of the cortex cerebri first occurred in con- 
nexion with the distance-receptors for chemical stimuli — that is, 
expressed with reference to psychosis, in connexion with olfaction. 
The olfactory apparatus even in mammals still exhibits a neural 
architecture of primitive pattern. The cell which conducts 
impulses to the brain from the olfactory membrane in the nose 
resembles cells in the skin of the earthworm, in that its cell-body 
lies actually amid the epithelium of the skin-surface and is not 
deeply buried near or in the central nervous organ. Further, it 
has at its external end tiny hairlets such as occur in specially 
receptive-cells but not usually in purely nervous cells. Hence 
we must think that one and the same cell by its external end 



receives the environmental stimulus and by its deep end excites 
the central nervous organ. The cell under the stimulation of the 
environmental agent will therefore generate in itself a nervous 
impulse. This is the clearest instance we have of a neurone being 
actually excited under natural circumstances by an agent of the 
environment directly, not indirectly. The deep ends of these 
olfactory neurones having entered the central nervous organ 
come into contact with the dentrites of large neurones, called, 
from their shape, mitral. In the dog, an animal with high 
olfactory sense, the axone of each olfactory neurone is connected 
with five or six mitral cells. In man each olfactory neurone is 
connected with a single mitral cell only. We may suppose that 
the former arrangement conduces to intensification of the central 
reaction by summation. At the same time it is an arrangement 
which could tend to smother sharp differentiation of the central 
reaction in respect to locality of stimulus at the receptive surface. 
Considering the diffuse way in which olfactory stimuli are applied 
in comparison, for instance, with visual, the exact localization of 
the former can obviously yield little information of use for 
locating the exact position of their source. On the other hand, in 
the case of visual stimuli the locus of incidence, owing to the 
rectilinear propagation of light, can serve with extraordinary 
exactitude for inferences as to the position of their source. The 
adaptation of the neural connexions of the two organs in this 
respect is therefore in accord with expectation. 

The earliest cerebral cortex is formed in connexion with the 
neurone-chains coming into the central nervous organ from the 
patch of olfactory cells on the surface of the head. The region of 
cerebrum thus developed is the so-called olfactory lobe and 
hippocampal formation. The greater part of the cerebral hemi- 
sphere is often termed the pallium, because as its development 
extends it folds cloak-wise over the older structures at the base 
of the brain. The olfactory lobe, from its position, is sometimes 
called the pallium basale, and the hippocampal formation the 
pallium marginale; and these two parts of the pallium form 
what, on account of their phylogenetic history, Elliott Smith 
well terms the archipallium. A fissure, the limbic fissure, marks 
off more or less distinctly this archipallium from the rest of the 
pallium, a remainder which is of later development and therefore 
designated by Elliott Smith the neopallium. Of the archipallium, 
the portion which constitutes the olfactory lobe is well formed 
in the selachian fish. In the reptilian cerebrum the hippocampal 
region, the palliutn marginale, coexists in addition. These are 
both of them olfactory in function. Even so high up in the 
animal scale as the lowest mammals they still form one half of 
the entire pallium. But in the higher apes and in man the 
olfactory portion of the pallium is but a small fraction of the 
pallium as a whole. It is indeed so relatively dwarfed and 
obscured as to be invisible when the brain is regarded from the 
side or above. The olfactory part of the pallium exhibits little 
variation in form as traced up through the higher animals. It is 
of course small in such animals as Cetaceans, which are anosmatic. 
In highly osmatic such as the dog it is large. The uncus, and 
subiculum cornu ammonis of the human brain, belong to it. 
Disease of these parts has been accompanied by disturbance of 
the sense of smell. When stimulated electrically (in the rabbit) 
the olfactory pallium occasions peculiar torsion of the nose and 
lips (Ferrier), and change, often slowing or arrested, of the 
respiratory rhythm. P. E. Flechsig has shown that the nerve- 
fibres of this part of the pallium attain the final stage of their 
growth, that is to say, acquire their sheaths of myelin, early in 
the ontogenetic development of the brain. In the human brain 
they are myelinate before birth. This is significant from the 
point of view of function, for reasons which have been made 
clear especially by the researches of Flechsig himself. 

The completion of the growth of the nerve-fibres entering and 
leaving the cortex occurs at very various periods in the growth 
of the brain. Study of the development of the fibres entering 
and leaving the various regions of the pallium in the human 
brain, discovers that the regions may be conveniently grouped 
into those whose fibres are perfected before birth and those 
whose fibres are perfected during the first post-natal month, 



408 



BRAIN 



[PHYSIOLOGY 



and those whose fibres are perfected after the first but before the 
end of the fourth post-natal month. The regions thus marked 
out by completion before birth are five in number, and are each 
connected, as also shown by collateral evidence, with one or 
other particular species of sense-organ. And these regions have 
another character in common recognizable in the nerve-fibres 
entering and leaving them, namely, they possess fibres projected 
to or from parts of the nervous system altogether outside the 
cortex itself. These fibres are termed " projection " fibres. 
Other regions of the cortex possess fibres coming from or going 
to various regions of the cortex itself, but do not possess in 
addition, as do the five primitive cortical fields, the fibres of 
projection. So that the facts established by Flechsig for the 
regions of pallium, which other evidence already indicated as 
connected with the sense-organ of smell, support that evidence 
and bring the olfactory region of cortex into line with certain 
Other regions of cortex similarly primarily connected with organs 
of sense. 

It will be noted that what has been achieved by these various 
means of study in regard to the region of the cortex to which 
olfactory functions are attributed amounts at present to little 
more than the bare ascertainment of the existence there of 
nervous mechanisms connected with olfaction, and to the de- 
limiting roughly of their extent and of their ability to influence 
certain movements, and in man sensations, habitually associated 
with exercise of the olfactory organ. As to what part the cortical 
mechanism has in the elaboration or association of mental 
processes to which olfaction contributes, no evidence worth the 
name seems as yet forthcoming. In this respect our knowledge, 
or rather our want of knowledge, of the functions of the olfactory 
region of the cortex, is fairly typical of that to which we have 
to confess in regard to the other regions of the cortex, even the 
best known. 

Visual Region of the Cortex. — There is a region of the cortex 
especially connected with vision. The optic nerve and tract 
constitute the second link in the chain of neurones joining the 
retina to the brain. They may therefore be regarded as the 
equivalent of an intraspinal tract connecting the deep ends of 
the afferent neurones from the skin with higher nervous centres. 
In the bony fishes the optic tract reaches the grey matter of the 
optic lobe, a part of the mid-brain, to which the so-called anterior 
colliculus is equivalent in the mammalian brain. In the optic 
lobe the axones of the neurones of the optic tract meet neurones 
whose axones pass in turn to the motor neurones of the muscles 
moving the eyeballs, and also to other motor neurones. But in 
these fish the optic tract has no obvious connexion with the 
fore-brain or with any cerebral pallium. Ascending, however, 
to the reptilian brain is found an additional arrangement: a 
small portion of the optic tract passes to grey matter in front of 
the optic lobe. This grey matter is the lateral geniculate body. 
From this geniculate body a number of neurones extend to the 
pallial portion of the cerebrum, for in the reptilian brain the 
pallium is present. The portion of pallium connected with the 
lateral geniculate body lies above and behind the olfactory or 
archipallium. It is a part of what was mentioned above as 
neopallium. 

In the mammalian brain the portion of the optic tract which 
goes to the optic lobe {ant. colliculus of the mammal) is dwarfed 
by great development of the part which goes to the geniculate 
body and an adjoining grey mass, the pulvinar (part of the optic 
thalamus). From these latter pass large bands of fibres to the 
occipital region of the neopallium. In mammals this visual 
region of the cortex is distinguished in its microscopic features 
from the cortex elsewhere by a layer of myelinate nerve-fibres, 
many of which are the axones of neurones of the geniculate body 
and pulvinar. Thus, whereas in the bony fishes all the third 
links of the conductive chain from the retina lead exclusively 
to the final neurones of motor centres for muscles, in the mammal 
the majority of the third links conduct to grey matter of the 
cortex cerebri. 

The application of electric stimuli to the surface of the cortex 
does not for the greater part of the extent of the cortex evoke 



in higher mammalian brains any obvious effect; no muscular 
act is provoked. But from certain limited regions of the cortex 
such stimulation does evoke muscular acts, and one of these 
regions is that to which the neurones forming the third link of 
the conductive chain from the retina pass. The muscular acts 
thus provoked from that region are movements of the eyeballs 
and of the neck turning the head. In the monkey the movement 
is the turning of both eyeballs and the head away from the side 
stimulated. In short, the gaze is directed as to an object on 
the opposite side. The newer conductive chain traceable through 
the cortex does therefore, after all, like the older one through 
the optic lobe, lead ultimately to the motor neurones of the eye 
muscles and the neck, only it takes a longer course thither and 
is undoubtedly much more complex. What gain is effected by 
this new and as it were alternative and longer route, which takes 
a path up to the cerebral cortex and down again, we can only 
conjecture, but of one point we may rest well assured, namely, 
that a much richer inter-connexion with other arcs of the nervous 
system is obtained by the path that passes via the cortex. The 
functional difference between the old conductive circuit and the 
new can at present hardly indeed be stated even in outline. 
A natural inference might be that the phylogenetically older and 
less complex path is concerned with functions purely reflex- 
motor, not possessing sensation as an attribute. But fish, which 
possess only the older path, can be trained to seize bait of one 
colour and not of another colour, even against what appeared 
to be an original colour-preference in them. Such discrimination 
individually acquired seems to involve memory, though it may 
be rudimentary in kind. Where motor reaction to visual stimuli 
appears to involve memory — and without memory the training 
could hardly be effective — some germ of consciousness can hardly 
be denied to the visual reactions, although the reactions occurred 
in complete absence of a cortical path and indeed of a visual 
cortex altogether. 

Removal of the visual pallium in the tortoise produces little 
or no obvious defect in vision; but in the bird such a lesion 
greatly impairs the vision of the eye of the side opposite to the 
lesion. The impairment does not, however, amount to absolute 
blindness. Schrader's hawk, after removal of the pallium, 
reacted to movements of the mice with which it was caged. 
But the reactions were impaired: they lacked the sustained 
purpose of the normal reactions. The bird saw the mice; that 
was certain, for their movements across its field of vision made 
it turn its gaze towards them. But on their ceasing to move, 
the reaction on the part of the bird lapsed. Neither did their 
continuing to move excite the attack upon them which would 
have been the natural reaction on the part of the bird of prey 
towards its food. The bird apparently did not recognize them as 
prey, but saw them merely as moving objects. It saw them per- 
haps as things to which mental association gave no significance. 
Similarly, a dog after ablation of the occipital lobes of the cortex 
is able to see, for it avoids obstacles in its path; but if food is 
offered to it or the whip held up to it, it does not turn towards 
the food or away from the whip. It sees these things as if it saw 
them for the first time, but without curiosity, and as if it had no 
experience of their meaning. It gives no hint that it any longer 
understands the meaning of even familiar objects so long as these 
are presented to it through the sense of vision. Destruction of 
the visual cortex of one hemisphere alone produces in the dog 
impairment of vision, not as in the bird practically exclusively 
in the opposite eye, but in one lateral half of each eye, and that 
half the half opposite the hemisphere injured. Thus when the 
cortex destroyed is of the right cerebral hemisphere, the resultam 
visual defect is in the left half of the field of vision of both eyes. 
And this is so in man also. 

In man disturbances of sensation can be better studied 
because it is possible to obtain from him his description of his 
condition. The relation of the cortex cerebri to human vision 
can be summarized briefly as follows. The visual cortex is dis- 
tinguishable in higher mammals by a thin white stripe, the stripe 
of Gennari, seen in its grey matter when that is sectioned. This 
stripe results from a layer of nerve-fibres, many of which aie 



PHYSIOLOGY] 



BRAIN 



409 



axones from the neurones of the lateral geniculate body and the 
pulvinar, the grey masses directly connected with the optic 
nerve-fibres. In the dog, and in such monkeys as the Macaque, 
the region of cortex containing this stripe traceable to optic 
fibres forms practically the whole occipital lobe. But in the man- 
like apes and in man this kind of cortex is confined to one region 
of the occipital lobe, namely, that of the calcarine fissure and the 
cuneus behind that. This region of cortex thus delimited in man 
is one of Flechsig's areas of earlier myelinization. It is also one 
of his areas possessing projection fibres; and this last fact 
agrees with the yielding by this area, when under electrical 
stimulation, of movements indicating that impulses have been 
discharged from it into the motor neurones of the muscles of 
the eyes and neck. Evidence from cases of disease show that 
destruction of the cortex of the upper lip of the calcarine fissure, 
say in the right half of the brain, causes in man impairment in 
the upper right-hand quadrant of both retinae: destruction of 
the lower lip of the fissure causes impairment in the lower right- 
hand quadrants. Destruction of the calcarine region of one 
hemisphere produces therefore "crossed hemianopia," that is, 
loss of the opposite half of the field of vision. But in this 
hemianopia the region of central vision is always spared. That 
is, the piece of visual field which corresponds with the yellow 
spot of the retina is not affected in either eye, unless the calcarine 
regions of both hemispheres are destroyed. This central point 
of vision is connected therefore not with one side of the brain 
only but with both. 

The impairment of sight is more severe in men than in lower 
animals. Where the destruction of the visuo-sensory cortex 
in one calcarine region is complete, a candle-flame offered in the 
hemianopic field cannot even be perceived. It may hardly 
excite a reflex contraction of the pupil. In such cases the visual 
defect amounts to blindness. But this is a greater defect than 
is found in the dog even after entire removal of both occipital 
lobes. The dog still avoids obstacles as it walks. Its defect 
is rather, as said above, a complete loss of interest in the visual 
images of things. But a dog or monkey after loss of the visual 
cortex hesitates more and avoids obstacles less well in a familiar 
place than it does when entirely blind from loss of the peripheral 
organ of vision. In man extensive destruction of the visual 
cortex has as one of its symptoms loss of memory of localities, 
thus, of the paths of a garden, of the position of furniture, and 
of accustomed objects in the patient's own room. This loss of 
memory of position does not extend to spatial relations ordinarily 
appreciated by touch, such as parts of the patient's own person 
or clothing. There is nothing like this in the symptoms following 
blindness by loss of the eye itself. Those who lose their sight by 
disease of the retina retain good memorial pictures of positions 
and directions appreciated primarily by vision. 

Cases of disease are on record in which loss of visual memory 
has occurred without hemianopia. Visual hallucinations referred 
to the hemianopic side have been observed. This suggests 
that the function of visual memory in regard to certain kinds 
of percepts must belong to localities of cortex different from 
those pertaining to other visual percepts. The area of cortex 
characterized by the stripe of Gennari occupies in man, as 
mentioned, the calcarine and cuneate region. It is surrounded by 
a cortical field which, though intimately connected with it by 
manifold conducting fibres, &c, is yet on various grounds dis- 
tinct from it. This field of cortex surrounding the visuo-sensory 
of the calcarine-cuneate region is a far newer part of the neo- 
pallium than the region it surrounds. Both in the individual 
(Flechsig) and in the phylum (Bolton, Campbell, Mott) itsdevelop- 
ment occurs far later than that of the visuo-sensory which it 
surrounds. Flechsig finds that it has no " projection " fibres, 
that is, that it receives none of the optic radiations from the 
lower visual centres and gives no centrifugal fibres in the reverse 
direction. This field encompassing the visuo-sensory region 
differs from the latter in its microscopic structure by absence 
of the lower layer of stellate cells and by the presence in it of a 
third or deep layer of pyramidal cells (Mott). Its fibres are 
on the average smaller than are those of the visuo-sensory 



( W. A. Campbell) . This zonal field is small in the lowei apes, and 
hardly discoverable in the dog. In the anthropoid apes it is 
much larger. In man it is relatively much larger still. The , 
impairment of visual memory and visual understanding in regard 
to direction and locality is said to be observed in man only when 
the injury of the cortex includes not only the calcarine-cuneate 
region but a wide area of the occipital lobe. From this it is 
argued that the zonal field is concerned with memories and 
recognitions of a kind based on visual perceptions. It has 
therefore been termed the visuo-psychic area. It is one of 
Flechsig's " association-areas " of the cortex. 

Adjoining the antero-lateral border of the just-described 
visuo-psychic area lies another region separate from it and yet 
related to it. This area is even later in its course of develop- 
ment than is the visuo-psychic. It is one of Flechsig's " terminal 
fields," and its fibres are among the last to ripen in the whole 
cortex. This terminal field is large in man. It runs forward in 
the parietal lobe above and in the temporal lobe below. Its 
wide extent explains, in the opinion of Mott, the displacement 
of the visuo-sensory field from the outer aspect of the hemisphere 
in the lower monkeys to the median aspect in man. To this 
terminal field all the more interest attaches because it includes 
the angular gyrus, which authorities hold to be concerned 
with the visual memory of words. Study of diseased conditions 
of speech has shown that the power to understand written words 
may be lost or severely impaired although the words may be 
perfectly distinct to the sight and although the power to under- 
stand heard words remains good. This condition is asserted 
by many physicians to be referable to destruction of part of 
the angular gyrus. Close beneath the cortex of the angular 
gyrus runs a large tract of long fibres which pass from the visual 
cortex (see above) to the auditory cortex (see below) in the 
superior temporal gyrus and to the lower part of the frontal 
lobe. This lower part of the frontal lobe is believed — and has 
long been believed — to be concerned intimately with the pro- 
duction of the movements of speech. A difficulty besetting 
the investigation of the function of the angular gyrus is the 
fact that lesion of the cortex there is likely to implicate the 
underlying tract of fibres in its damage. It cannot be considered 
to have been as yet clearly ascertained whether the condition 
of want of recognition of seen words — " word-blindness " — 
is due to cortical injury apart from subcortical, to the angular 
gyrus itself apart from the underlying tract. Word-blindness 
seems, in the right-handed, to resemble the aphasia believed 
to be connected with the lower part of the frontal lobe, in that 
it ensues upon lesions of the left hemisphere, not of the right. 
In left-handed persons, on the contrary, it seems to attach to 
the right hemisphere. 

Auditory Region of the Cortex. — Besides the two great organs 
of distance-receptors, namely, the nose and eye, whose cerebral 
apparatus for sensation has just been mentioned, those of a 
third great distance-receptor have to be considered. The agents 
of stimulation of the two former are respectively chemical 
(olfactory) and radiant (visual) ; the mode of stimulation of the 
third is mechanical, and the sensations obtained by it are termed 
auditory. Their cerebral localization is very imperfectly ascer- 
tained. Electric stimuli applied to a part of the uppermost 
temporal gyrus excites movements of the ears and eyes in the 
dog. Destruction of the same region when executed on both 
hemispheres is argued by several observers to impair the sense 
of hearing. To this region of cortex fibres have been traced from 
the lower centres connected with the nerve-fibres coming from 
the cochlea of the ear. From each cochlear nerve a path has been 
traced which passes to the insulae and the above-mentioned 
temporal region of cortex of both the cerebral hemispheres. 
The insula is a deeper-seated area of cortex adjoining the upper- 
most temporal convolution. To it Flechsig's chronological 
studies also impute a connexion with the nerves of the ear. 
Early myelinization of fibres, presence of ascending and descend- 
ing "projection" tracts to and from lower centres outside the 
cortex, calibre of fibres, microscopic characters of its cortical 
cells, all those kinds of indirect items of evidence that obtain 



4io 



BRAIN 



[PHYSIOLOGY 



for the visual cortex likewise mark out this insular-temporal 
area as connected fairly directly with a special sense-organ, 
as in fact a sensory field of the cortex; and the suspicion is that 
it is auditory. Clinical observation supports the view in a 
striking way, but one requiring, in the opinion of some, further 
confirmation. It is widely believed that destruction of the 
upper and middle part of the uppermost temporal convolution 
produces " word-deafness," that is, an inability to recognize 
familiar words when heard, although the words are recognized 
when seen. 

More precise information regarding this auditory region of 
the cortex has recently been obtained by the experiments of 
Kalischer. These show that after removal of this region from 
both sides of the brain in the dog the animal shows great defect 
in answering to the call of its master. Whereas prior to the 
operation the animal will prick its ears and attend at once 
to the lightest call, it requires after the removal of the auditory 
regions great loudness and insistence of calling to make it attend 
and react as it did. This is the more striking in view of other 
experimental results obtained. Kalischer trained a number of 
his dogs not to take meat offered them except at the sound 
of a particular note given by an organ pipe or a harmonium. 
The dogs rapidly learned not to take the food on the sounding 
of notes of other pitch than the one taught them as the per- 
missive signal. This reaction on the part of the animal was not 
impaired by the removal of the so-called auditory regions of 
the cortex. Kalischer suggests that this reaction taught by 
training is not destroyed by the operation which so greatly 
impairs the common reaction to the master's call, because the 
former is a simpler process more allied to reflex action. In 
it the attention of the dog is already fastened upon the object, 
namely the food, and the stimulus given by the note excites a 
reaction which simply allows the act of seizing the food to take 
place, or on the other hand stops it. In the case of answering 
the call of the master the stimulus has to excite attention, to 
produce perception of the locality whence it comes, and to 
invoke a complicated series of movements of response. He 
finds that destruction of the posterior colliculi of the mid-brain, 
which have long been known to be in some way connected with 
hearing, likewise destroys the response to the call of the master, 
but did not destroy the trick taught to his dogs of taking meat 
offered at the sound of a note of one particular pitch but not 
at notes of other pitch given by the same instrument. 

Other Senses and Localization in the Cortex Cerebri. — Turning 
now to the connexion between the function of the cortex and 
the senses other than those of the great distance-receptors just 
dealt with, even less is known. Disturbance and impairment of 
skin sensations are observable both in experiments on the cere- 
brum of animals and in cases of cerebral disease in man. But the 
localization in the cortex of regions specially or mainly concerned 
with cutaneous sensation has not been made sufficiently clear to 
warrant statement here. Still less is there satisfactory knowledge 
regarding the existence of cortical areas concerned with sensa- 
tions originated in the alimentary canal. The least equivocal of 
such evidence regards the sense of taste. There is some slight 
evidence of a connexion between this sense and a region of the 
hippocampal gyrus near to but behind that related to smell. 

As to the sensations excited by the numerous receptors which 
lie not in any of the surface membranes of the body but embedded' 
in the masses of the organs and between them, the proprio- 
ceptors, buried in muscles, tendons and joints, there is little 
doubt that these sensations may be disturbed or impaired by 
injury of the cortex cerebri. They may probably also be excited 
by cortical stimulation. But evidence of localization of their 
seat in, and their details of connexion with, the cortex, is at 
present uncertain. Many authorities consider it probable that 
sensations of touch and the sensations initiated by the proprio- 
ceptors of muscles and joints (the organs of the so-called muscular 
sense) are specially related to the post-central gyrus and perhaps 
to the pre-central gyrus also. The clearest items on this point are 
perhaps the following. 
Besides the regions instanced above, infthe limbic (olfactory), 



occipital (visual), and temporal (auditory) lobes, as exhibiting 
precocity of development, there is a region showing similar 
precocity in the fronto-parietal portion of the hemisphere. This 
is the region which in the Primates includes the large central 
fissure (sometimes called the fissure of Rolando). To it fibres 
are traced which seem to continue a path of conduction that 
began with afferent tracts belonging to the spinal cord, and tracts 
which there is reason to think conduct impulses from the receptor- 
organs of skin and muscles. The part of the cortex immediately 
behind the central fissure seems to be the main cortical goal for 
these upward-conducting paths. That post-central strip of cortex 
would in this view bear to these paths a relation similar to that 
which the occipital and temporal regions bear to afferent tracts 
from the retina and the cochlea. There are observations which 
associate impaired tactual sense and impaired perception of 
posture and movement of a limb with injury of the central region 
of the cortex. But there are a number also which show that the 
motor defect which is a well-ascertained result of injury of the 
pre-central gyrus is sometimes unaccompanied by any obvious 
defect either of touch or of muscular sense. It seems then that 
the motor centres of this region are closely connected with the 
centres for cutaneous and muscular sense, yet are not so closely 
interwoven with them that mechanical damage inflicted on the 
one of necessity heavily damages the other as well. There is ' 
evidence that the sensory cortex in this region lies posterior to 
that which has been conveniently termed the " motor." These 
latter in the monkey and the man-like apes and man lie in front 
of the central fissure: the sensory lie probably behind it. A. W. 
Campbell has found changes in the cortex of the post-central 
convolution ensuing in the essentially sensory disease, tabes 
dorsalis, a disease in which degeneration of sensory nerve-fibres 
of the muscular sense and of the skin senses is prominent. He 
considers that in man and the man-like apes the part of the post- 
central gyrus which lies next to and enters into the central fissure 
is concerned with simpler sensual recognitions, while the adjoin- 
ing part of that convolution farther back is a " psychic region " 
concerned with more complex psychosis connected with the 
senses of skin and muscle. His subdivision of the post-central 
gyrus is based on histological differences which he discovers 
between its anterior and its posterior parts and on the above- 
described analogous differentiation of a " sensory " from a 
" psychic " part in the visual region of cortex. 

It will be noted that although certain regions of the cortex are 
found connected closely with certain of the main sense organs, 
there are important receptive organs which do not appear to 
have any special region of cortex assigned to their sensual 
products. Thus, there is the " vestibular labyrinth " of the ear. 
This great receptive organ, so closely connected in function with 
the movements and adjustment of the postures of the head and 
eyes, and indeed of the whole body, is prominent in the co- 
ordination necessary for the equilibrium of the body, an essential 
part of the fundamental acts of progression, standing, &c. Yet 
neither structural nor functional connexion with any special 
region of the cortex has been traced as yet for the labyrinthine 
receptors. Perceptions of the position of the head and of the 
body are of course part of our habitual and everyday experience. 
It may perhaps be that these perceptions are almost entirely 
obtained through sense organs which are not labyrinthine, but 
visual, muscular, tactual, and so on. The labyrinth may, though 
it controls and adjusts the muscular activities which maintain 
the balance of the body, operate reflexly without in its operation 
exciting of itself sensations. The results of the unconscious 
reflexes it initiated and guided would be perceptible through other 
organs of sense. But against this purely unconscious functioning 
of the labyrinth and its nervous apparatus stands the fact that 
galvanic stimulation of the labyrinth is accompanied by well- 
known distinctive sensations — including giddiness, &c. More- 
over, the prominent factor in sea-sickness, a disorder richly 
suffused with sensations, is probably the labyrinth. Yet there is 
marked absence of evidence of any special and direct connexion 
between the cortex cerebri and the labyrinth organs. 

Also there is curiously little evidence of connexion of the cortex 



PHYSIOLOGY] 



BRAIN 



411 



Fingers 
<$ thumb.. 



with the nervous paths of conduction concerned with pain. As 
far as the present writer can find from reference to books and 
from the clinical experience of others, " pain " is unknown as an 
aura in cortical epilepsy, or at most is of equivocal occurrence. 

The preceding brief exposition of some of the main features 
of the localization of function in the cortex cerebri, gradually- 
deciphered by patient inquiry, shows that the scheme of partition 
of function so far perceptible does not follow the quaint lines of 
analysis of the phrenologists with their supposed mental entities, 
so-called " faculties." On the contrary it is based, as some of 
those who early favoured a differential arrangement of function 
in the cerebrum had surmised, on the separateness of the incoming 
channels from peripheral organs of sense. These organs fall into 
groups separate one from another not only by reason of their 
spatial differentiation at the surface and in the thickness of the 
body, but also because each group generates sensations which 
introspection tells us are of a species unbridgeably separate from 
those generated by the other groups. Between sensations of 
hearing and sensations of sight there is a dissimilarity across 
which no intermediate series of sensual phenomena extend. The 
two species of sensations are wholly disparate. Simi- 
larly there is a total and impassable gap between 
sensations of touch and sensations of sight and sound. 
In other words the sensations fall into groups which 
are wholly disparate and are hence termed species. 
But within each species there exist multifold varieties 
of the specific sensation, e.g. sensations of red, of yellow, 
&c. We should expect, therefore, that the conducting 
paths from the receptive organs which in their function 
as sense-organs yield wholly disparate sensations would 
in so far as subserving sensation diverge and pass to 
separate neural mechanisms. That these sense-organs 
should in fact be found to possess in the cortex of the 
cerebrum separate fields for their sensual nervous 
apparatus is, therefore, in harmony with what would 
be the a priori supposition. 

But, as emphasized at the beginning of this article, 
the receptive organs belonging to the surfaces and 
the depths of the body and forming the starting- 
points for the whole system of the afferent nerves, 
have two functions more or less separate. One of 
these functions is to excite sensations and the other is 
to excite movements, by reflex action, especially in 
glands and muscles. In this latter function, namely 
the reflexifacient, all that the receptive organs effect is 
effected by means of the efferent nerves. They all have 
to use the efferent, especially the motor, nerves of 
the body. So rich is the connexion of the receptive organs 
with the efferent nerves that it is not improbable that, 
through the central nervous organ, each receptive organ is 
connected with every motor nerve of the whole nervous system, — 
the facts of strychnine poisoning show that if this is not literally 
true it is at least approximately so. Hence one of the goals to 
which each afferent fibre from a receptive organ leads is a number 
of motor nerves. Their conducting paths must, therefore, con- 
verge in passing to the starting-points of the motor nerves; 
because these latter are instruments common to the use of a 
number of different receptive organs in so far as they excite 
reflex actions. On the other hand those of their conducting 
paths which are concerned in the genesis of sensation, instead of 
converging, diverge, at least as far as the cortex cerebri, or if not 
divergent, remain separate. These considerations would make it 
appear likely that the conducting path from each receptive 
organ divides in the central nervous system into two main lines, 
one of which goes off to its own particular region of the cortex 
cerebri whither run conductors only of similar sensual species to 
itself, while the other main line passes with many others to a 
great motor station where, as at a telephone exchange, co- 
ordinate use of the outgoing lines is assured to them all. Now 
there is in fact a portion of the cortex in mammals the functions 
of which are so pre-eminently motor, as judged by our present 
methods, that it is commonly designated the motor cortex (see 



fig. 24). This region of the cortex occupies in the Primates, 
including Man, the pre-central gyrus. Among the items of evi- 
dence which reveal its motor capabilities are the following. 

The Precentral or Motor Region of the Cortex. — The application 
to it of electric currents excites movements in the skeletal muscles. 
The movements occur in the half of the body of the side crossed 
from that of the hemisphere excited. The " motor representa- 
tion," as it is termed, is in the cortex better described as a 
representation of definite actions than of particular muscles. 
The actions " represented " in the top part of the gyrus, namely 
next the great longitudinal fissure, move the leg; those in the 
lowest part of the gyrus belong to the tongue and mouth. The 
topical distribution along the length of the gyrus may be de- 
scribed in a general way as following a sequence resembling that 
of the motor representation in the spinal cord, the top of the 
gyrus being taken as corresponding with the caudal end of the 
spinal cord. The sequence as the gyrus is followed downwards 
runs: perineum, foot, knee, hip, abdomen, chest, shoulder, elbow, 
wrist, hand, eyelids and ear, nose, mouth and tongue. The 
nature of the movement is very fairly constant for separate 
Anus$v&gin&. 

Ank^.. ,< : \^^^^_ Abdomen 
Kne$ '"--^i^^ /^SZ^S^^ .Chest, 




Opening 
ofja,w. 



VocaJ, 
cords. 



Sulcus centmUSh 



Mastication 



tu*/ 



Fig. 24.- 



-Diagram of the Topography of the Main Groups of Foci in the 
Motor Field of Chimpanzee. 

points of this motor cortex as observed both in the same and in 
similar experiments. Thus flexion of the arm will be excitable 
from one set of points, and extension of the arm from another set 
of points; opening of the jaw from one set and closure from 
another, and so on. These various movements if excited strongly 
tend to have characters like those of the movements seen in an 
epileptic convulsion. Strong stimulation excites in fact a con- 
vulsion like that of epilepsy, beginning with the movement 
usual for the point stimulated and spreading so as to assume the 
proportions of a convulsion affecting the entire skeletal mus- 
culature of one half or even of the whole body. The resemblance 
to an epileptic seizure is the closer because the movement before 
it subsides becomes clonic (rhythmic) as in epilepsy. The 
determination of the exact spots of cortex in which are repre- 
sented the various movements of the body has served a useful 
practical purpose in indicating the particular places in the cortex 
which are the seat of disease. These the physician can localize 
more exactly by reason of this knowledge. Hence the surgeon, 
if the nature of the disease is such as can be dealt with by surgical 
means, can without unnecessarily damaging the skull and brain, 
proceed directly to the point which is the seat of the mischief. 
The motor representation of certain parts of the body is much 
more liberal than is that of others. There is little correspondence 
between the mere mass of musculature involved and the area of 
the cortex devoted to its representation. Variety of movement 



412 



BRAIN 



[PHYSIOLOGY 



rather than force or energy of movement seems to demand 
extent of cortex. The cortical area for the thumb is larger than 
those for the whole abdomen and chest combined. The cortical 
area for the tongue is larger than that for the neck. Different 
movements of one and the same part are very unequally repre- 
sented in the cortex. Thus, flexion of the leg is more extensively 
represented than is extension, opening of the jaw has a much 
larger cortical area than has closure of the jaws. It is interesting 
that certain agents, for instance strychnine, and the poison of the 
bacilli which cause the disease known as tetanus or lock-jaw, 
upset this normal topography, and replace in the cortex flexion 
of the limb by extension of the limb, and opening of the jaw by 
closure of the jaw. There is, however, no evidence that they do 
this by changing in any way the cortical mechanisms themselves. 
It is more likely that their action is confined to the lower centres, 
bulbar and spinal, upon which the discharge excited from the 
cortex plays. The change thus induced in the movement ex- 
cited by the cortex does, however, show that the point of cortex 
which causes for instance opening of the mouth is connected 
with the motor nerves to the closing muscles as well as with 
those of the opening muscles. This is an item of evidence that 
the " centres " of the cortex are connected with the motor nerves 
of antagonistic muscles in such a way that when the " centre " 
excites one set of the muscles to contract, it simultaneously 
under normal circumstances causes inhibition of the motor 
neurones of the opposed set of muscles (reciprocal innervation). 
In the great majority of movements excited from the motor 
cortex of a single hemisphere of the cerebrum, the movement 
evoked is confined to one side of the body, namely to that opposite 
to the hemisphere stimulated. There are, however, important 
exceptions to this. Thus, adduction of both vocal cords is 
excited from the cortex of either hemisphere. The movement of 
closure of the eyelids is usually bilateral, unless the stimulation 
be very weak; then the movement is of the eyelids of the opposite 
side only. The same holds true for the movements of the jaw. 
It, therefore, seems clear that with many movements which are 
usually bilaterally performed in ordinary life, such as opening 
of the jaw, blinking, &c, the symmetrical areas of the motor 
regions of both hemispheres are simultaneously in action. 

In regard to all these movements elicitable by artificial stimuli 
from the motor cortex it is obvious that were there clearer evi- 
dence that the pallial region from which they are elicitable is 
fairly directly connected with corticopetal paths subserving 
cutaneous sensation or " muscular sense," the movements might 
be regarded as falling into the category of higher reflexes con- 
nected with the organs of touch, muscular sense, &c, just as the 
movements of the eyeball excitable from the visual cortex may 
be regarded as higher reflexes connected with vision. The evi- 
dence of the connexion of the reactions of the motor cortex with 
cutaneous and muscular senses appears, however, scarcely 
sufficient to countenance at present this otherwise plausible view, 
which has on general grounds much to commend it. 

It is remarkable that movements of the eyeball itself, i.e. 
apart from movement of the lids, are not in the category of 
movements elicitable from the precentral gyrus, the " motor " 
cortex. They are found represented in a region farther forward, 
namely in front of the precentral gyrus altogether, and occupying 
a scattered set of points in the direction frontal from the areas 
for movements of arm and face. This frontal area yields on 
excitation conjugate movements of both eyeballs extremely like 
if not exactly similar to those yielded by excitation of the 
occipital (visual) region of the cortex. It is supposed by some 
that this frontal area yielding eye-movements has its function 
in this respect based upon afferent conductors from other parts 
of the eyeball than the retina, for instance upon kinaesthetic 
(Bastian) impressions or upon sensual impressions derived from 
the cornea and the coats of the eyeball including the ciliary 
and iris muscles. The ocular muscles are certainly a source of 
centripetal impulses, but their connexion with the cortex is not 
clear as to either their nature or their seat. The question seems 
for the present to allow no clearer answer. It is certain, however, 
that the frontal area of eye movements has corticofugal paths 



descending from it to the lower motor centres of the eyeballs 
quite independent of those descending from the occipital (visual) 
area of eye-movements. Further, it seems clear that in many 
animals there is another cortical region, a third region, the region 
which we saw above might be considered auditory, where move- 
ments of the eyeball similar to those elicitable in the occipital 
and frontal cortex can be provoked. A. Tschermak is inclined 
to give the eyeball movements of the frontal region the signifi- 
cance of reflex movements which carry the visual field in various 
directions in answer to demands made by sensory data derived 
from touch, &c, as for instance from the hand. The movements 
of the eyeballs elicitable from the occipital region of the cortex 
he regards as probably concerned with directing the gaze toward 
something seen, for instance, in the peripheral field of vision. 
The occipital movement would, therefore, be excited through the 
retina, and would result in bringing the yellow spot region of 
the retinae of both eyes to bear upon the object. This view has 
much to justify it. The movements of the eyeballs excited 
from the cortex of the auditory region would in a similar way 
be explicable as bringing the gaze to bear upon a direction in 
which a sound had been located, auditory initiation replacing 
the visual and tactual of the occipital and the frontal regions 
respectively. 

Turning from these still speculative matters to others less 
suggestive but of actual ascertainment, we find that the motor 
nature of the precentral cortex as ascertained by electric stimuli 
is further certified by the occurrence of disturbance and impair- 
ment of motor power and adjustment following destruction of 
that region of the cortex. The movements which such a part 
as a limb executes are of course manifold in purpose. The hind 
limb of a dog is used for standing, for stepping, for scratching, 
for squatting, and, where a dog, for instance, has been trained 
to stand or walk on its hind legs alone, for skilled acts requiring 
a special training for their acquisition. It is found that when 
the motor area of the brain has been destroyed, the limb is at 
first paralysed for all these movements, but after a time the limb 
recovers the ability to execute some of them, though not all. 
The scratching movement suffers little, and rapid improvement 
after cerebral injury soon effaces the impairment, at first some- 
what pronounced, in the use of the limb for walking, running, 
&c, and ordinary movements of progression. Even when both 
hemispheres have been destroyed the dog can still stand and 
walk and run. Destruction of the motor region of the cortex 
renders the fore limbs of the dog unable to execute such skilled 
movements as the steadying of a bone for gnawing or the trained 
act of offering the paw in answer to the command of the master. 
Skilled acts of the limb, apart from conjoined movements in 
which it, together with all the other limbs, takes part, assume of 
course a larger share of the office of the limb in the Primates 
than in the dog; and this is especially true for the fore limb. 
It is when the fore-foot becomes a hand that opportunity is given 
for its more skilled individual use and for its training in move- 
ments as a tool, or for the handling of tools and weapons. It is 
these movements which suffer most heavily and for the longest 
period after injury of the motor region of the cortex. Hence 
the disablement ensuing upon injury to the cortex would be 
expected to be most apparent in the Primates; and it is so, 
and most of all in Man. Further, in Man there ensues a condition 
called " contracture," which is not so apparent or frequent a 
result in other animals, — indeed, does not occur at all in other 
animals except the monkey. In contracture the muscles of the 
paretic limb are not flaccid, as they are usually in paralysis, 
but they are tense and the limb is more or less rigidly fixed by 
them in a certain position, usually one of flexion at elbow and 
wrist. This condition does not occur at first, but gradually 
supervenes in the course of a number of weeks. In Man the 
destruction of the motor area of the cortex cripples the limb 
even for the part it should play in the combined limb movements 
of walking, &c, and cripples it to an extent markedly contrasting 
with the slight disturbances seen in the lower mammals, e.g. the 
dog. 

As regards the recovery of motor power after lesions of the 



BRAINERD— BRAKE 



4i3 



motor cortex, two processes seem at work which are termed 
respectively restitution and compensation. By the former is 
understood the recovery obtained when a part of a " centre " 
is destroyed, and the rest of the centre, although thrown out of 
function at first, recovers and supplements the deficiency later. 
An example of restitution would be the recovery from temporary 
hemianopia caused by a small injury in one occipital lobe. By 
compensation is understood the improvement of an impaired 
nervous function, traceable to other centres different from those 
destroyed supplying means to compass the reaction originally 
dependent on the centres subsequently destroyed. Instances 
of such compensation are the recovery of taxis for equilibrium 
subsequent to destruction of the labyrinth of the ear, where 
the recovery is traceable to assistance obtained through the eye. 
It will be noted that these instances of recovery by restitution 
and by compensation respectively are taken from cases of injury 
inflicted on receptive rather than on motor centres. It is doubt- 
ful how far they really apply to the undoubted improvement 
that does within certain limits progress and succeed in partially 
effacing the paresis immediately consequent on lesions of the 
motor area. It has to be remembered that in all cases of trau- 
matic injury to the nervous system, especially where the trauma 
implicates the central nervous organ, the first effects and impair- 
ment of function resulting are due to a mixed cause, namely 
on the one hand the mechanical rupture of conducting 
paths actually broken by solution of their continuity, and on 
the other hand the temporary interruption of conducting 
paths by " shock." Shock effects are not permanent: they 
pass off. They are supposed to be due to a change at the 
synapses connecting neurone with neurone in the grey matter. 
They amount in effect to a long-lasting and gradually subsiding 
inhibition. 

For diseases of the brain see Neuropathology, Insanity, Skull 
(Surgery), &c. (C. S. S.) 

BRAINERD, DAVID (1718-1747), American missionary 
among the Indians, was born at Haddam, Connecticut, on the 
20th of April 1 7 18. He was orphaned at fourteen, and studied 
for nearly three years (1 739-1 742) at Yale. He then prepared 
for the ministry, being licensed to preach in 1742, and early in 
1743 decided to devote himself to missionary work among the 
Indians. Supported by the Scottish " Society for Promoting 
Christian Knowledge," he worked first at Kaunaumeek, an 
Indian settlement about 20 m. from Stockbridge, Massachusetts, 
and subsequently, until his death, among the Delaware Indians 
in Pennsylvania (near Easton) and New Jersey (near Cranbury). 
His heroic and self-denying labours, both for the spiritual and 
for the temporal welfare of the Indians, wore out a naturally 
feeble constitution, and on the 19th of October 1747 he died 
at the house of his friend, Jonathan Edwards, in Northampton, 
Massachusetts. 

His Journal was published in two parts in 1746 by the Scottish 
Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge; and in 1749, at 
Boston, Jonathan Edwards published An Account of the Life of the 
Late Rev. David Brainerd, chiefly taken from his own Diary and other 
Private Writings, which has become a missionary classic. A new 
edition, with the Journal and Brainerd's letters embodied, was 
published by Sereno E. Dwight at New Haven in 1822; and in 
1884 was published what is substantially another edition, The 
Memoirs of David Brainerd, edited by James M. Sherwood. 

BRAINERD, a city and the county-seat of Crow Wing county, 
Minnesota, U.S.A., on the E. bank of the Mississippi river, about 
127 m. N.W. of Minneapolis. Pop. (1890) 5703; (1900) 7524, 
of whom 2193 were foreign-born; (1905) 8133; (1910) 8526. 
It is served by the Minnesota & International and the Northern 
Pacific railways. The latter maintains here large car and repair 
shops, and a sanatorium for its employees. There are also the 
Sisters of St Joseph hospital, a county court house, a public 
library andaY.M.C.A. building. A dam across the Mississippi 
provides water power (about 60,000 H.P.) which is utilized 
extensively for manufacturing purposes. Lumbering is an 
important industry, and there are saw mills and planing mills, 
and an extensive creosote plant for treating railway ties and 
timber. There are also flour mills, paper and pulp mills, cigar 
factories, a brewery, a large foundry and a grain elevator. In 



1 906. large quantities of iron ore were discovered in the vicinity, 
the new range, the Cuyuna, running through the city from 
north-east to south-west. Brainerd, named in honour of David 
Brainerd, was settled in 1870, and chartered as a city in 1883. 

BRAINTREE, a market town in the Maldon parliamentary 
division of Essex, England; 45 m. N.E. of London by a branch 
line from Witham of the Great Eastern railway. Pop. of 
urban district, 5330. The parish church of St Michael is a 
fine edifice of Early English work with later additions. A corn 
exchange, mechanics' institute and public hall may also be 
mentioned. The bishops of London had formerly a palace in 
the town, but there are no remains of the building. The manu- 
factures of silk and crape have superseded that of woollen cloth, 
which was introduced by the Flemings who fled to England to 
escape the persecution of the duke of Alva. Matting and 
brushes are also made. On the north lies the large village of 
Booking, with the Perpendicular parish church of St Mary, 
similar industries, and a population of 3347. 

BRAINTREE, a township of Norfolk county, Massachusetts, 
U.S.A., on the Monatiquot river about 10 m. S. of Boston. Pop. 
(1890)4848; (1900) 5081, including 1 2 50 foreign-born; (1905, state 
census) 6879; (1910) 8066. The New York, New Haven & Hart- 
ford railway crosses the town and has stations at its villages of 
Braintree, South Braintree and East Braintree, which are also 
served by suburban electric railways. In South Braintree are 
the Thayer Academy (co-educational; opened 1877) and the 
Thayer public library, both founded by and named in honour 
of General Sylvanus Thayer (1785-1872), a well-known military 
engineer born in Braintree, who was superintendent of the 
United States Military Academy in 181 7-1833 and has been 
called the " father of West Point." There are large shoe factories 
and other manufactories. Bog iron was early found in Braintree, 
and iron-works, among the first in America, were established 
here in 1644. Braintree was first incorporated in 1640 from 
land belonging to Boston and called Mount Wollaston, and 
was named from the town in England. At Merry Mount, in 
that part of Braintree which is now Quincy, a settlement was 
established by Thomas Morton in 1625, but the gay life of the 
settlers and their selling rum and firearms to the Indians greatly 
offended the Pilgrims of Plymouth, who in 1627 arrested Morton; 
soon afterward Governor John Endecott of Massachusetts 
Bay visited Merry Mount, rebuked the inhabitants and cut 
down their Maypole. Later the place was abandoned, and in 
1634 a Puritan settlement was made here. In 1708 the town 
was divided into the North Precinct and the South Precinct, 
and it was in the former, now Quincy, that John Adams, John 
Hancock and John Quincy Adams were born. Quincy was 
separated from Braintree in 1792 (there were further additions to 
Quincy from Braintree in 1856), and Randolph in 1793. 

See D. M. Wilson, Quincy, Old Braintree and Merry Mount (Boston, 
1906); C. F. Adams, Jr., Three Episodes of Massachusetts History 
(Boston, 1892 and 1896); W. S. Pattee, History of Old Braintree 
and Quincy (Quincy, 1878). 

BRAKE, a town of Germany, in the grand duchy of Oldenburg, 
on the left bank of the Weser, about halfway between Bremen 
and the mouth of the river. Pop. 5000. It was for centuries 
the port of Bremen; and though, since the founding of Bremer- 
haven, it no longer possesses a monopoly of the river traffic as 
before, it still continues to flourish. Large docks have been 
constructed, and the place has a considerable import trade in 
English coal. Shipbuilding and weaving are carried on to some 
extent. 

Brake in Oldenburg must be distinguished from the village of 
the same name in the principality of Lippe, known as Brake bei 
Limgo, which gave its name to the cadet line of the counts of 
Lippe-Brake (1621-1709). 

BRAKE. (1) A term for rough-tangled undergrowth, con- 
nected, according to the New English Dictionary, with " break," 
to separate. The " brake-fern " (Pteris aquilina) is the common 
" bracken," and is a shortened form of that northern Eng. 
word, derived from a Scand. word for " fern " (cf. Swed. braken), 
though often confused with " brake," undergrowth- M A term 



414 



BRAKE 



applied to many implements and mechanical and other appli- 
ances, often spelled " break." Here there are probably several 
words, difficult to separate in origin, connected either with 
"break," to separate, and its derived meanings, or with the Fr. 
braquer (appearing in such expressions as braquer un canon, to 
turn or point a gun), from O. Fr. brae, modern bras, an arm, Lat. 
bracchium. The word is thus used of a toothed instrument for 
separating the fibre of flax and hemp; of the " break-rolls " 
employed in flour manufacture; of a heavy wheeled vehicle 
used for " breaking in " horses, and hence of a large carriage of 
the wagonette type ; of an arm or lever, and so of the winch of a 
crossbow and of a pump handle, cf. " brake-pump "; of a curb 
or bridle for a horse; and of a mechanical appliance for checking 
the speed of moving vehicles, &c. It is noteworthy that the 
two last meanings are also possessed by the Fr. jrein and the 
Ger. Bremse. 

Brakes, in engineering, are instruments by means of which 
mechanical energy may be expended in overcoming friction. 
They are used for two main classes of purpose: (i) to limit or 
decrease the velocity of a moving body, or to bring it completely 
to rest; and (2) to measure directly the amount of frictional 
resistance between two bodies, or indirectly the amount of energy 
given out by a body or bodies in motion. Machines in which 
brakes are employed for purposes of the second class are com- 
monly known as dynamometers (q.v.). The other class is exem- 
plified in the brakes used on wheeled vehicles and on cranes, lifts, 
&c. Here a body, or system of bodies, originally at rest, has 
been set in motion and has received acceleration up to a certain 
velocity, the work which has been done in that acceleration 
being stored up as " actual energy " in the body itself. Before 
the body can be brought to rest it must part with this energy, 
expending it in overcoming some external resistance. If the 
energy be great in proportion to the usual resistance tending to 
stop the body, the motion will continue for a long time, or through 
a long distance, before the energy has been completely expended 
and the body brought to rest. But in certain cases considerations 
of safety or convenience require that this time or distance be 
greatly shortened, and this is done by artificially increasing the 
external resistance for the time being, by means of a brake. 

A simple method of obtaining this increased resistance is by 
pressing a block or shoe of metal or wood against the rim of a 
moving wheel, or by tightening a flexible strap or band on a 
rotating pulley or drum. In wheeled road vehicles, a wheel 
may be prevented from rotating by a chain passed through its 
spokes and attached to the body of the vehicle, when the resist- 
ance is increased by the substitution of a rubbing for a rolling 
action; or the same effect may be produced by fixing a slipper 
or skid under the wheel. Other forms of brake depend, not on 
the friction between two solid bodies, but on the frictional 
resistance of a fluid, as in " fan " and " pump " brakes. Thus 
the motion of revolving blades may be opposed by the resistance 
of the air or of a liquid in which they are made to work, or the 
motion of a plunger fitting tightly in a cylinder filled with a 
fluid may be checked by the fluid being prevented from escape 
except through a narrow orifice. The fly used to regulate the 
speed of the striking train in a clock is an example of a fan brake, 
while a pump brake is utilized for controlling the recoil of guns 
and in the hydraulic buffers sometimes fitted at terminal railway 
stations to stop trains that enter at excessive speed. On electric 
tramcars a braking effect is sometimes obtained by arranging 
the connexions of the motors so that they act as generators 
driven by the moving car. In this way a counter-torque is 
exerted on the axles. The current produced is expended by 
some means, as by being made to operate some frictional braking 
device, or to magnetize iron shoes carried on the car just over, 
but clear of, the running rails, to which they are then magnetically 
attracted (see Traction). 

The simplest way of applying a brake is by muscular force, 
exerted through a hand or foot lever or through a screw, by 
which the brake block is pressed against the rim of the wheel or 
the band brake tightened on its drum. This method is sufficient 
in the case of most road vehicles, and is largely used on railway 



vehicles. But the power thus available is limited, and becomes 
inadequate for heavy vehicles moving at high speeds. Moreover, 
on a train consisting of a number of vehicles, the hand brakes on 
each of which are independent of all others, either a brakesman 
must be carried on each, or a number of the brakes must be left 
unused, with consequent loss of stopping power; while even if 
there is a brakesman on every vehicle it is impossible to secure 
that all the brakes throughout the train are applied with the 
promptness that is necessary in case of emergency. 

Considerations of this sort led to the development of power 
brakes for railway trains. Of these there are five main classes: — 

(1) Mechanical brakes, worked by springs, friction wheels on 
the axle, chains wound on drums, or other mechanical devices, 
or by the force produced when, by reason of a sudden 
checking of the speed of the locomotive, the momentum Railway 
of the cars causes pressure on the draw-bars or buffing brakes. 
devices. (2) Hydraulic brakes, worked by means of 
water forced through pipes into proper mechanism for transmit- 
ting its force to the brake-shoes. (3) Electric brakes. (4) Air 
and vacuum brakes, worked by compressed air or by air at 
atmospheric pressure operating on a vacuum. (5) Brakes worked 
by steam or water from the boiler of the engine, operating by 
means of a cylinder; the use of these is generally limited to the 
locomotive. Of this kind is the counter-pressure or water brake 
of L. le Chatelier. If the valve gear of a locomotive in motion 
be reversed and the steam regulator be left open, the cylinders 
act as compressors, pumping air from the exhaust pipe into the 
boiler against the steam pressure. A retarding effect is thus 
exercised, but at the cost of certain inconveniences due to the 
passage of hot air and cinders from the smoke box through the 
cylinders. To remedy these, le Chatelier arranged that a jet of 
hot water from the boiler should be delivered into the exhaust 
pipe, so that steam and not the hot flue gases should be pumped 
back. 

Power brakes may be either continuous or independent — 
continuous if connected throughout the train and with the 
locomotive by pipes, wires, &c, as the compressed air, vacuum 
and electric brakes; independent if not so connected, as the 
buffer-brakes and hand-brakes. Continuous brakes may be 
divided into two other great classes — automatic and non- 
automatic. The former are so arranged that they are applied 
automatically on all the coaches of the train if any important 
part of the apparatus is broken, or the couplings between cars are 
ruptured; in an emergency they can be put on by the guard, or 
(in some cases) by a passenger. Non-automatic brakes can be 
applied only by the person (usually the engine-driver) to whom 
the management of them is given; they may become inoperative 
on all the coaches, and always on those which have become 
detached, if a coupling or other important and generally essential 
part is broken. Many mechanical and several hydraulic and 
electrical continuous brakes have been invented and tried; but 
experience has shown them so inadequate in practice that they 
have all practically disappeared, leaving the field to the air and 
the vacuum brakes. At first these were non-automatic, but in 
1872 the automatic air-brake was invented by George Westing- 
house, and the automatic vacuum-brake was developed a few 
years later. 

Those respects in which non-automatic brakes are inadequate 
will be understood from the following summary of the require- 
ments most important in a train-braking apparatus: (1) It 
must be capable of application to every wheel throughout the 
train. (2) It must be so prompt in action that the shortest 
possible time shall elapse between its first application and the 
moment when the full power can be exerted throughout the train. 
(3) It must be capable of being applied by the engine-driver or 
by any of the officials in charge of the train, either in concert or 
independently. (4) The motion of the train must be arrested 
in the shortest possible distance. (5) The failure of a vital part 
must declare itself by causing the brake to be applied and to 
remain applied until the cause of failure is removed. (6) The 
breaking of the train in two or more parts must cause immediate 
' automatic application of the brakes on all the coaches. (7) 



BRAKE 



4i5 



When used in ordinary service stops it must be capable of gradual 
and uniform application (followed, if necessary, by a full emerg- 
ency application at any part of the service application) and of 
prompt release under all conditions of application. (8) It must 
be simple in operation and construction, not liable to derange- 
ment, and inexpensive in maintenance. 

The Westinghouse non-automatic or " straight " air-brake, 
patented in 1869, consists in its simplest form of a direct-acting, 
steam-driven air-pump, carried on the locomotive, which 
1 ht f° rces compressed air into a reservoir, usually placed 
air-brake. unc j er t jje foot-plate of the locomotive. From this reser- 
voir a pipe is led through the engine cab, where it is fitted with a 
three-way cock, to the rear of the locomotive tender, where it ter- 
minates in a flexible hose, on the end of which is a coupling. The 
coaches are furnished with a similar pipe, having hose and coupling 
at each end, which communicates with one end of a cylinder contain- 
ing a piston, to the rod of which the brake-rods and levers are 
connected. The application of the brakes is effected by the engine- 
driver turning the three-way cock, so that compressed air flows 
through the pipe and, acting against one side of the brake-cylinder 
piston, applies the brake-shoes to the wheels by the movement of 
this piston and the rods and levers connected to it. To release the 
brakes the three-way cock is turned to cut off communication 
between the main reservoir and the train-pipe, and to open a port 
permitting the escape of the compressed air in the train-pipe and 
brake-cylinders. This brake was soon found defective and inade- 
quate in many ways. An appreciable time was required for the air 
to flow through the pipes from the locomotive to the car-cylinders, 
and this time increased quickly with the length of the trains. Still 



discharges air from the train-pipe, this equilibrium is destroyed, 
and the greater pressure in the auxiliary reservoir forces the 
triple-valve to a position which allows air from the auxiliary reser- 
voir to pass directly into the brake-cylinder. This air forces out the 
piston of the brake-cylinder and applies the brakes, connexion being 
made with the brake-rigging at R. The purpose of the small groove 
n which establishes communication between the two sides of the 
piston when the brakes are off, is to prevent their unintended 
application through slight leakage from the train-pipe. To release 
the brakes, the driver, by moving the handle of his valve to the 
release position, admits air from the main reservoir to the train-pipe, 
the pressure in which thus becomes greater than that in the auxiliary 
reservoir; the piston and slide-valve of the triple- valve are thereby 
forced back to their normal position, the compressed air in the 
brake-cylinder is discharged, and the piston is brought back by the 
coiled spring, thus releasing the brakes. At the same time the 
auxiliary reservoir is recharged. 

With this " ordinary " brake, since an appreciable time is required 
for the reduction of pressure to travel along the train-pipe from the 
engine, the brakes are applied sensibly sooner at the front 
than at the end of the train, and with long trains this <?"'<*" 
difference in the time of application becomes a matter of " ° s 
importance. The " quick-acting " brake was introduced to brake - 
remedy this defect. For it the triple valve is provided with a supple- 
mentary mechanism, which, when the air pressure in the train-pipe is 
suddenly or violently reduced, opens a passage whereby air from the 
train-pipe is permitted to enter the brake-cylinder directly. The result 
is twofold : not only is the pressure from the auxiliary reservoir acting 
in the brake-cylinder reinforced by the pressure in the train-pipe, but 
the pressure in the train-pipe is reduced locally in every vehicle 
in extremely rapid succession instead of at the engine only, and 




Fig. 1. — Westinghouse Air-Brake. 
Section through Triple- Valve and Brake-Cylinder. 



more objectionable, however, was the fact that on detached coaches 

the air-brakes could not be applied, the result being sometimes 

serious collisions between the front and rear portions of the train. 

In the Westinghouse " ordinary " automatic air-brake a main 

air reservoir on the engine is kept charged with compressed air at 

80 lb per sq. in. by means of the steam-pump, which may 

; h^t ^e controlled by an automatic governor. On electric 

air-brake. ra jl wa y S a pump, driven by an electric motor, is generally 

employed; but occasionally, on trains which run short distances, 

no pump is carried, the main reservoir being charged at the terminal 

points with sufficient compressed air for the journey. Conveniently 

E laced to the driver's hand is the driver's valve, by means of which 
e controls the flow of air from the main reservoir to the train-pipe, 
or from the train-pipe to the atmosphere. A reducing-valve is 
attached to the driver's valve, and in the normal or running position 
of the latter reduces the pressure of the air flowing from the main 
reservoir to the train-pipe by 10 or 15 lb per sq. in. From the engine 
a train-pipe runs the whole length of the train, being rendered 
continuous between each vehicle and between the engine and the 
rest of the train by flexible hose couplings. Each vehicle is provided 
with a brake-cylinder H (fig. 1), containing a piston, the movement 
of which applies the brake blocks to the wheels, an " auxiliary air- 
reservoir " G, and an automatic " triple-valve " F. The auxiliary 
reservoir receives compressed air from the train-pipe and stores it 
for use in the brake-cylinder of its own vehicle, and both the auxiliary 
reservoir and the triple-valve are connected directly or indirectly 
with the train-pipe through the pipe E. The automatic action of 
the brake is due to the construction of the triple-valve, the principal 
parts of which are a piston and slide-valve, so arranged that the air 
in the auxiliary reservoir acts at all times on the side of the piston 
to which the slide-valve is attached, while the air in the train-pipe 
exerts its pressure on the opposite side. So long as the brakes are 
not in operation, the pressures in the train-pipe, triple-valve and 
auxiliary reservoir are all equal, and there is no compressed air in the 
brake-cylinder. But when, in order to apply the brake, the driver 



in consequence all the brakes are applied almost simultaneously 
throughout the train. The same effect is produced should the train 
break in two, or a hose or any part of the train-pipe burst; but 
during ordinary or " service " stops the triple- valve acts exactly 
as in the ordinary brake, the quick-acting portion, that is, the 
vertical piston and valve seen in fig. 1, not coming into operation. 
When the handle Z is turned to the position X the quick-acting 
mechanism is rendered inoperative, and when it is at Y the brake 
on the vehicle concerned is wholly cut out of action. 

A further improvement introduced in the Westinghouse brake in 
1906 was designed to give quick action for service as well as emer- 
gency stops. In this the triple-valve is substantially the same as in 
the ordinary brake. The additional mechanism of the quick-acting 
portion is dispensed with, but instead, a small chamber, normally 
containing air at atmospheric pressure, is provided on each vehicle, 
and is so arranged that it is put into communication with the train- 
pipe by the first movement of the triple-valve. As soon, therefore, 
as the driver, by lowering the pressure in the train-pipe, causes the 
triple-valve in the foremost vehicle of the train to operate, a certain 
quantity of air rushes out of the train-pipe into the small chamber; 
a further local reduction in the pressure of the train-pipe in that 
vehicle is thereby effected, and this almost instantaneously actuates 
the triple-valve of the succeeding vehicle, and so on throughout 
the train. In this way, on a train 1800 ft. long, consisting of sixty 
30-ft. vehicles, the brake-blocks may be applied, with equal force, 
on the last vehicle about 2§ seconds later than on the first. 

Brake-blocks can be applied, without skidding the wheels, 
with greater pressure at high speeds than at low. Advantage is 
taken of this fact in the design of the Westinghouse 
" high-speed " brake, invented in 1894, which consists of *&*" 
attachments enabling the pressure in the train-pipe and sP ee / la,rm 
reservoirs to be increased at the will of the driver. The brake - 
increased pressure acting in the brake-cylinder increases in the same 
proportion the pressure of the brake-shoes against the wheels. 
Attached to the brake cylinder is a valve for automatically reducing 



416 



BRAKE 



the pressure therein proportionately to the reduction in speed, until 
the maximum pressure under which the brakes are operated in 
making ordinary stops is reached, when this valve closes and the 
maximum safe pressure for operating the brakes at ordinary speeds 
is retained until a stop is made. 

In the automatic vacuum-brake, the exhausting apparatus gener- 
ally consists of a combined large and small ejector (a form of jet- 
pump) worked by steam and under the control of the 
Automatic g r ; ver) though sometimes a mechanical air-pump, driven 
fcraj"""" from the crosshead of the locomotive, is substituted for 
' the small ejector. These ejectors, of which the small 

one is at work continuously while the large one is only employed 
when it is necessary to create vacuum quickly, e.g. to take off the 
brakes after a short stop, produce in the train-pipe a vacuum equal 
to about 20 in. of mercury, or in other words reduce the pressure 
within it to about one-third of an atmosphere. _ The train-pipe 
extends the whole length of the train and communicates under each 
vehicle with a cylinder, to the piston of which, by suitable rods and 
levers, the brake-shoes are connected. The communication between 
the train-pipe and the cylinder is controlled by a ball-valve, one form 
of which is shown in fig. 2. The release-valve is for the purpose of 



Steam 



unmoved; but with a sudden one the vacuum below the valvft 
is destroyed more quickly, and with the difference of pressure the 
diaphragm lifts the valve and admits air. A rapid-acting valve 
(fig. 3) is sometimes interposed between the train-pipe and the 
cylinder on each vehicle. In the normal or running position, a 
vacuum is maintained below the valve A and above the diaphragm 

B, while the chamber below B and above A is at atmospheric pressure.' 
For an emergency application of the brake, air is suddenly admitted 
to the train-pipe and thus to the lower side of A, and the pressure 
acting on the under side of B is sufficient to cause it to lift the valve 
A, and to admit air from the atmosphere, both to the brake-cylinder 
and the train-pipe, through the clappet-valve D, which also rises 
because of the difference of pressure on its two sides. In a graduated 
application, neither D nor A rises from its seat, but air from the 
train-pipe finds access to the brake-cylinder by passing around the peg 

C, which is so proportioned as to allow the necessary amount of air to 
enter the brake-cylinder, and so obtain simultaneous action of the 
brake throughout the train. When the handle E is turned so as to 
prevent the clappet D from rising, the rapid action is cut out and 
the brake acts as an ordinary vacuum automatic brake. A modi- 
fication of the device for obtaining accelerated action, described 

Guardt 
Vacuum Gauge 



Combination^] ector 




Drip Trap . 



Fig. 2. — Automatic Vacuum-Brake, showing its general arrangement. 



withdrawing the ball from its seat when it is necessary to take off 
the brakes by hand; it is made air-tight by a small diaphragm, the 
pressure of which, when there is vacuum in the pipe, pulls in the 
spindle and allows the ball to fall freely into its seat. When air is 
exhausted through the train-pipe it travels out from below the 
piston direct, and from above it past the ball, which is thus forced 
off its seat, to roll back again when the exhaustion is complete. In 
this state of affairs the piston is held in equilibrium and the brake- 
blocks are free of the wheels. To apply them, air is admitted to the 
train-pipe, either purposely by the guard or driver, or accidentally 
by the rupture of the train-pipe or coupling-hose between the vehicles. 
The air passes to the lower side of the piston, but is prevented from 
gaining access to the upper side by the ball-valve which blocks the 
passage; hence the pressure becomes different on the two sides of 
the piston, which in consequence is forced upwards and thus applies 
the brakes. They are released by the re-establishment of equilibrium 
(by the use of the large ejector if necessary) ; when this is done the 
piston falls and the brakes drop off. The general arrangement of 
the apparatus is shown in fig. 2. To render the application of the 
brakes nearly simultaneous throughout a long train, the valve in 
the guard's van is arranged to open automatically when the driver 
suddenly lets in air to the train-pipe. This valve has a small hole 
through its stem, and is secured at the top by a diaphragm to a small 
dome-like chamber, which is exhausted when a vacuum is created 
in the train-pipe. A gradual application destroys the vacuum in 
the chamber as quickly as in the pipe and the diaphragm remains 



above in connexion with the Westinghouse brake, is also applicable. 
Accelerating chambers, again containing air at atmospheric pressure, 
are provided on each vehicle and are connected with the train-pipe 
by valves which open as the vacuum in the latter begins to decrease 
with the operation of the driver's valve. The air thus admitted 
into the train-pipe effects a still further local reduction of the 
vacuum, which is sufficient to actuate the accelerating valve of each 
next succeeding vehicle and is thus rapidly propagated throughout 
the train. 

Famous tests of railway brakes were those made by Sir Douglas 
Galton and Mr George Westinghouse on the London, Brighton 
and South Coast railway, in England, in 1878, and by _ 

a committee of the Master Car Builders' Association, 2J# 

near Burlington, Iowa, in 1886 and 1887. The object 
of the former series (for accounts of which see Proc. Inst. Mech. 
Eng., 1878, 1879) was to determine the co-efficient of friction between 
the brake-shoe and the wheel, and between the wheel and rail at 
different velocities when the wheels were revolving and when skidded, 
i.e. stopped in their rotation and caused to slide. These experiments 
were the first of their kind ever undertaken.and for many years their 
results furnished most of the trustworthy data obtainable on the 
friction of motion. It was found that the co-efficient of friction 
between cast-iron shoes and steel -tired wheels increased as the speed 
of the train decreased, varying from o-iit at 55 m. an hour to 0-33 
when the train was just moving. It also decreased with the time 
during which the brakes were applied; thus at 20 m. an hour the 



BRAKELOND— BRAMAH 



4i7 



co-efficient was at the beginning 0-182, after ten seconds 0-133, 
after twenty seconds 0-099. Generally speaking, especially at 
moderate speeds, the decrease in the co-efficient of friction due t0 
time is less than the increase due to decrease of speed, although 
when the time is long the reverse may be true. When the wheels are 
skidded the retardation of the train is always reduced; therefore, 
for the greatest braking effect, the pressures on the brake-shoes 
should never be sufficient to cause the wheels to slide on the rails. 
The Burlington brake tests were undertaken to determine the 
practicability of using power brakes on long and heavy freight trains. 
In the 1886 tests there were five competitors — three buffer-brakes, 
one compressed-air brake, and one vacuum-brake. The tests com- 
prised stops with trains of twenty-five and fifty vehicles, at 20 and 




Fig. 3. — Rapid-acting Vacuum-Brake Valve. 

40 m. an hour, on the level and on gradients of I in 100. They 
demonstrated that the buffer-brakes were inadequate for long trains, 
and that considerable improvements in the continuous brakes, both 
compressed-air and vacuum, would be needed to make them act 
quickly enough to avoid excessive shocks in the rear vehicles. In 
1887 the trials of the year before were repeated by the same com- 
mittee, and at the same place. Trains of fifty vehicles, about 
2000 ft. long and fitted with each brake, were again provided, and 
there were again five competitors, but they all entered continuous 
brakes — three compressed-air brakes, one vacuum and one electric. 
The results of the first day's test of the train equipped with Westing- 
house brakes are shown in Table I., the distances in which are the 
feet run by the train after the brakes were set, and the times the 
seconds that elapsed from the application of the brakes to full stop. 



Table I.- 



-Stops of a Train of Fifty Empty Cars, 1887 — 
Automatic Air-Brakes. 



Speed in 
Miles per 
Hour. 


Distance in 
Feet. 


Time in 
Seconds. 


Equivalent Distance 
at 20 m. and 40 m. 


19J 
I9i 

36i 


186 

215 

588 


9i 
11 

17 


196 
233 


693 



The remarkable shortness of these stops is the more evident when 
they are compared with the best results obtained in 1886, as shown 
in Table II. 



Table II.- 



-Stops of a Train of Fifty Empty Cars, 1 886— 
A utomatic A ir-Brakes. 



Speed in 
Miles. 


Distance in 
Feet. 


Time in 
Seconds. 


Equivalent Distance 
at 20 m. and 40 m. 


23-5 
20-3 , 
40 

40 


424 

354 
922 

927 


i7i 
16 

225 

22j 


307 
340 


922 
927 



The time that elapsed between the application of the brakes on 
the engine and on the fiftieth vehicle was almost twice as great in 
1886 as in 1887, being in the latter tests only five to six seconds, and 
in 1887 the stops were made in less than two-thirds the distance 
required in 1886. Still, violent shocks were caused by the rear 
vehicles running against those in front, before the brakes on the 
former were applied with sufficient force to hold them, and these 
shocks were so severe as to make the use of the brakes in practice 
impossible on long trains. When the triple-valves were actuated 
electrically, however, the stops were still further improved, as shown 
in Table III. 

IV. 14 



Table III. — Stops of a Train of Fifty Empty Cars — 
Electric Application of Air-Brakes. . 


Speed in 
Miles. 


Distance in 
Feet. 


Time in 
Seconds. 


Equivalent Distance 
at 20 m. and 40 m. 


2i§ 
23 
38 
36i 


160 

183 

475 
460 


7 
8 

Hi 
14 


139 

138 


519 

545 



Although the same levers, shoes, rods and other connexions were 
used, there were no shocks in the fiftieth car of the train on any stop, 
whether on the level or on a gradient. The committee in charge 
reported that the best type of brake for long freight trains was one 
operated by air, in which the valves were actuated by electricity, but 
they expressed doubt of the practicability of using electricity on 
freight trains. The Westinghouse Company then proceeded to 
quicken the action of the triple-valve, operated by air only, so that 
stops with fifty-car trains could be made without shock, and without 
electrically operated valves; and they were so successful in this 
respect that, towards the end of the same year, 1887, with a train 
of fifty vehicles, stops were made without shock, fully equalling in 
quickness and shortness of distance run any that had been made 
at the trials by the electrically operated brakes. 

In 1889 some further tests were made by Sir Douglas Galton with 
the automatic vacuum-brake, on a practically level portion of the 
Manchester, Sheffield & Lincolnshire railway (now the Great Central) . 
The train was composed of an engine, tender and forty carriages, the 
total length over buffers being 1464 ft., and the total weight 574 tons, 
of which 423 tons were braked. At a speed of about 32 m. an hour 
this train was brought to a standstill in twelve seconds after the 
application of the brakes, in a distance of 342 ft. 

BRAKELOND, JOCELYN DE [fl. 1200), English monk, and 
author of a chronicle narrating the fortunes of the monastery 
of Bury St Edmunds between 11 73 and 1202. He is only 
known to us through his own work. He was a native of 
Bury St Edmunds; he served his novitiate under Samson of 
Tottington, who was at that time master of the novices, but 
afterwards sub-sacrist, and, from 1182, abbot of the house. 
Jocelyn took the habit of religion in 11 73, during the time of 
Abbot Hugo (11 57-1 180), through whose improvidence and 
laxity the abbey had become impoverished and the inmates dead 
to all respect for discipline. The fortunes of the abbey changed 
for the better with the election of Samson as Hugo's successor. 
Jocelyn, who became abbot's chaplain within four months of 
the election, describes the administration of Samson at consider- 
able length. He tells us that he was with Samson night and day 
for six years; the picture which he gives of his master, although 
coloured by enthusiastic admiration, is singularly frank and 
intimate. It is all the more convincing since Jocelyn is no 
stylist. His Latin is familiar and easy, but the reverse of classi- 
cal. , He thinks and writes as one whose interests are wrapped up 
in his hpuse; and the unique interest of his work lies in the 
minuteness with which it describes the policy of a monastic 
administrator who was in his own day considered as a model. 

Jocelyn has also been credited with an extant but unprinted 
tract on the election of Abbot Hugo (Harleian MS. 1005, fo. 
165); from internal evidence this appears to be an error. He 
mentions a (non-extant) work which he wrote, before the 
Cronica, on the miracles of St Robert, a boy whom the Jews of 
Bury St Edmunds were alleged to have murdered (1181). 
_ See the editions of the Cronica Jocelini de Brakelonda by T. Arnold 
(in Memorials of St Edmund's Abbey, vol. i. Rolls series', 1890), and 
by J. G. Rokewood (Camden Society, 1840); also Carlyle's Past 
and Present, book ii. A translation and notes are given in T. E. 
Tomlin's Monastic and Social Life in the. Twelfth Century in the 
Chronicle of Jocelyn de Brakelond (1844). There is also a translation 
of Jocelyn by Sir E. Clarke (1907). 

BRAMAH, JOSEPH (1748-1814), English engineer and in- 
ventor, was the son of a farmer, and was born at Stainborough, 
Yorkshire, on the 13th of April 1748. Incapacitated for agri- 
cultural labour by an accident to his ankle, on the expiry of his 
indentures he worked as a cabinet-maker in London, where he 
subsequently started business on his own account. His first 
patent for some improvements in the mechanism of water- 
closets was taken out in 1778. In 1784 he patented the lock 
known by his name, and in 1795 he invented the hydraulic 
press. For an important part of this, the collar which secured 
water-tightness between the plunger and the cylinder in which it 



418 



BRAMANTE^-BRAMWELL, LORD 



worked, he was indebted to Henry Maudslay, one of his workmen, 
who also helped him in designing machines for the manufacture 
of his locks. In 1806 he devised for the Bank of England a 
numerical printing machine, specially adapted for bank-notes. 
Other inventions of his included the beer-engine for drawing 
beer, machinery for making aerated waters, planing machines, 
and improvements in steam-engines and boilers and in paper- 
making machinery. In 1785 he suggested the possibility of 
screw propulsion for ships, and in 1802 the hydraulic transmission 
of power; and he constructed waterworks at Norwich in 1790 
and 1793. He died in London on the 9th of December 1814. 

BRAMANTE, or Bramante Lazzari (c. 1444-15 14), Italian 
architect and painter, whose real name was Donato d'Augnolo, 
was born at Monte-Asdrualdo in Urbino, in July 1444. He 
showed a great taste for drawing, and was at an early age placed 
under Fra Bartolommeo, called Fra Camavale. But though 
he afterwards gained some fame as a painter, his attention was 
soon absorbed by architecture. He appears to have studied 
under Scirro Scirri, an architect in his native place, and perhaps 
under other masters. He then set out from Urbino, and proceeded 
through several of the towns of Lombardy, executing works of 
various magnitudes, and examining patiently all remains of 
ancient art. At last, attracted by the fame of the great Duomo, 
he reached Milan, where he remained from 1476 to 1499. He 
seems to have left Milan for Rome about 1500. He painted 
some frescoes at Rome, and devoted himself to the study of the 
ancient buildings, both in the city and as far south as Naples. 
About this time the Cardinal Caraffa commissioned him to 
rebuild the cloister of the Convent della Pace. Owing to the 
celerity and skill with which Bramante did this, the cardinal 
introduced him to Pope Alexander VI. He began to be consulted 
on nearly all the great architectural operations in Rome, and 
executed for the pope the palace of the Cancelleria or chancery. 
Under Julius II., Alexander's successor, Bramante's talents 
began to obtain adequate sphere of exercise. His first large 
work was to unite the straggling buildings of the palace and the 
Belvedere. This he accomplished by means of two long galleries 
or corridors enclosing a court. The design was only in part 
completed before the death of Julius and of the architect. So 
impatient was the pope and so eager was Bramante, that the 
foundations were not sufficiently well attended to; great part of 
it had, therefore, soon to be rebuilt, and the whole is now so much 
altered that it is hardly possible to decipher the original design. 

Besides executing numerous smaller works at Rome and 
Bologna, among which is specially mentioned by older writers a 
round temple in the cloister of San Pietro-a-Montorio, Bramante 
was called upon by Pope Julius to take the first part in one of 
the greatest architectural enterprises ever attempted— the 
rebuilding of St Peter's. Bramante's designs were complete, 
and he pushed on the work so fast that before his death he 
had erected the four great piers and their arches, and com- 
pleted the cornice and the vaulting in of this portion. He also 
vaulted in the principal chapel. After his death on the nth of 
March 15 14, his design was much altered, in particular by 
Michelangelo. 

See Pungileoni, Memoire intorno alia vita ed alle opere di Bramante 
(Rome, 1836); H. Semper, Donato Bramante (Leipzig, 1879). 

BRAMPTON, HENRY HAWKINS, Baron (1817-1907), 
English judge, was born at Hitchin, on the 14th of September 
1817. He received his education at Bedford school. The son 
of a solicitor, he was early familiarized with legal principles. 
Called to the bar at the Middle Temple in 1843, he at once joined 
the old home circuit, and after enjoying a lucrative practice as 
a junior, took silk in 1859. His name is identified with many 
of the famous trials of the reign of Queen Victoria. He was 
engaged in the Simon Bernard case (of the Orsini plot celebrity), 
in that of Roupell v. Waite, and in the Overend-Gurney prosecu- 
tions. The two causes cilibres, however, in which Hawkins 
attained his highest legal distinction were the Tichborne trials 
and the great will case of Sugden v. Lord St Leonards. In both 
of these he was victorious. In the first his masterly cross- 
examination of the witness Baigent was one of the great features 



of the trial. He did a lucrative business in references and 
arbitrations, and acted for the royal commissioners in the 
purchase of the site for the new law courts. Blection petitions 
also formed another branch of his extensive practice. Hawkins 
was raised to the bench in 1876, and was assigned to the then 
exchequer division of the High Court, not as baron (an appellation 
which was being abolished by the Judicature Act) , but with the 
title of Sir Henry Hawkins. He was a great advocate rather 
than a great lawyer. His searching voice, his manner, and the 
variety of his facial expression, gave him an enormous influence 
with juries, and as a cross-examiner he was seldom, if ever, 
surpassed. He was an excellent judge in chambers, where he 
displayed a clear and vigorous grasp of details and questions 
of fact. His knowledge of the criminal law was extensive and 
intimate, the reputation he gained as a " hanging " judge making 
him a terror to evil-doers; and the court for crown cases re- 
served was never considered complete without his assistance. In 
1898 he retired from the bench, and was raised to the peerage 
under the title of Baron Brampton. He frequently took part 
in determining House of Lords appeals, and his judgments were 
distinguished by their lucidity and 'grasp. He held for many 
years the office of counsel to the Jockey Club, and as an active 
member of that body found relaxation from his legal and judicial 
duties at the leading race meetings, and was considered a capable 
judge of horses. In 1898 he was received into the Roman 
Catholic Church, and in 1903 he presented, in conjunction with 
Lady Brampton (his second wife), the chapel of SS. Augustine 
and Gregory to the Roman Catholic cathedral of Westminster, 
which was consecrated in that year. In 1904 he published his 
Reminiscences. He died in London on the 6th of October 1907, 
and Lady Brampton in the following year. 

BRAMPTON, a market town in the Eskdale parliamentary 
division of Cumberland, England, 9 m. E.N.E. of Carlisle, on a 
branch of the North Eastern railway. Pop. (1901) 2494. It is 
picturesquely situated in a narrow valley opening upon that of 
the Irthing. The town has an agricultural trade, breweries, and 
manufactures of cotton and tweeds. The neighbourhood is 
rich in historical associations. Two miles N.E. of Brampton is 
the castle of Naworth, a fine example of a Border fortress. It 
was built in the reign of Edward III., by a member of the family 
of Dacre, who for many generations had had their stronghold 
here. Overlooking a deep wooded ravine, with streams to the 
east and west, the great quadrangular castle was naturally 
defended except on the south, where it was rendered secure by a 
double moat and drawbridge. By marriage in 1577 with Lady 
Elizabeth Dacre it passed into the hands of William Howard, 
afterwards lord warden of the Marches, the " Belted Will " of 
Sir Walter Scott and the Border ballads, who acquired great 
fame by his victories over the Scottish moss-troopers. The 
castle, the walls of which have many secret passages and hiding- 
places, is inhabited, and in its hall are numerous fine pictures, 
including a portrait of Charles I. by Van Dyck. Not far distant 
is Lanercost Priory, where in 1169 an Augustinian monastery 
was established. In 1311 Robert Bruce and his army were 
quartered here, and the priory was pillaged in 1346 by David, 
king of Scotland. From this time its prosperity declined, and 
at its dissolution under Henry VIII. it consisted only of a prior 
and seven canons. The Early English church has a restored 
nave, but retains much fine carving. The chancel is ruined, but 
the interesting crypt is preserved. 

BRAMWELL, GEORGE WILLIAM WILSHERE BRAMWELL, 
Baron (1808-1892), English judge, was born in London on the 
12th of June 1808, being the eldest son of George Bramwell, 
of the banking firm of Dorrien, Magens, Dorrien & Mello. He 
was educated privately, and at the age of sixteen he entered 
Dorriens' bank. In 1830 he gave up this business for the 
law, being admitted as a student at Lincoln's Inn in 1830, and 
at the Inner Temple in 1836. At first he practised as a special 
pleader, but was eventually called to the bar at both Inns in 
1838. He soon worked his way into a good practice both in 
London and the home circuit, his knowledge of law and procedure 
. being so well recognized that in 1850 he was appointed a member 



BRAN— BRAND, JOHN 



419 



ef the etommon Law Procedure Commission, which resulted in 
the Common Law Procedure Act of 1852. This act he drafted 
jointly with his friend Mr (afterwards Mr Justice) Willes, and 
thus began the abolition of the system of special pleading. In 
1851 Lord Cranworth made Bramwell a queen's counsel, and the 
Inner Temple elected him a bencher — he had ceased to be a 
member of Lincoln's Inn in 1841. In 1853 he served on the 
royal commission to inquire into the assimilation of the mercantile 
laws of Scotland and England and the law of partnership, which 
had as its result the Companies Act of 1862. It was he who, 
during the sitting of this commission, suggested the addition of 
the word " limited " to the title of companies that sought to 
limit their liability, in order to prevent the obvious danger to 
persons trading with them in ignorance of their limitation of 
liability. As a queen's counsel Bramwell enjoyed a large 
and steadily increasing practice, and in 1856 he was raised to 
the bench as a baron of the court of exchequer. In .1867, 
with Mr Justice Blackburn and Sir John Coleridge, he was made 
a member of the judicature commission. In 187 1 he was one of 
the three judges who refused the seat on the judicial committee 
of the privy council to which Sir Robert Collier, in evasion of 
the spirit of the act creating the appointment, was appointed; 
and in 1876 he was raised to the court of appeal, where he sat 
till the autumn of 188 1. As a puisne judge he had been con- 
spicuous as a sound lawyer, with a strong logical mind unfettered 
by technicalities, but endowed with considerable respect for the 
common law. His rulings were always clear and decisive, 
while the same quality marked his dealings with fact, and, 
coupled with a straightforward, unpretentious manner, gave 
him great influence with juries. In the court of appeal he 
was perhaps not so entirely in his element as at nisi prius, but 
the same combination of sound law, strong common sense and 
clear expression characterized his judgments. His decisions 
during the three stages of his practical career are too numerous 
to be referred to particularly, although Ryder v. Wombwell 
(L. R. 3 Ex. 95); R. v. Bradshaw (14 Cox C. C. 84); Household 
Fire Insurance Company v. Grant (4 Ex. Div. 216); Slonor v. 
Fowle (13 App. Cas. 20), The Bank of England v. Vagliano 
Brothers (App. Cas. 1891) are good examples. Upon his retire- 
ment, announced in the long vacation of 1881, twenty-six judges 
and a huge gathering of the bar entertained him at a banquet in 
the Inner Temple hall. In December of the same year he was 
raised to the peerage, taking the title Baron Bramwell of Hever, 
from his home in Kent. In private life Bramwell had simple 
tastes and enjoyed simple pleasures. He was musical and fond 
of sports. He was twice married: in 1830 to Jane (d. 1836), 
daughter of Bruno Silva, by whom he had one daughter, and in 
1861 to Martha Sinden. He died on the 9th of May 1892. 

His younger brother, Sir Frederick Bramwell (1818-1903), 
was a well-known consulting engineer and " expert witness." 

At all times Lord Bramwell had been fond of controversy and 
controversial writing, and he wrote constant letters to The 
Times over the signature B. (he also signed himself at different times 
Bramwell, G. B. and L. L.). He joined in 1882 the Liberty and 
Property Defence League, and some of his writings after that date 
took the form of pamphlets published by that society. 

BRAN, in Celtic legend, the name of (1) the hero of the Welsh 
Mabinogi of Branwen, who dies in the attempt to avenge his 
sister's wrongs; he is the son of Llyr ( = the Irish sea-god Ler), 
identified with the Irish Bran mac Allait, Allait being a synonym 
of Ler; (2) the son of Febal, known only through the 8th-century 
Irish epic, The Voyage of Bran (to the world below) ; (3) the dog 
of Ossian's Fingal. Bran also appears as a historical name, 
Latinized as Brennus. See Kuno Meyer and D. Nutt, The 
Voyage of Bran (London, 1895). 

BRAN, the ground husk of wheat, oats, barley or other cereals, 
used for feeding cattle, packing and other purposes (see Flour). 
The word occurs in French bren or bran, in the dialects of other 
Romanic languages, and also in Celtic, cf. Breton brenn, Gaelic 
bran. The New English Dictionary considers these Celtic forms 
to be borrowed from French or English. In modern French 
bren means filth, refuse, and this points to some connexion with 
Celtic words, e.g. Irish brean, manure. If so, the original meaning 



would be refuse. " Bran-new," i.e. quite new, is now the 
common form of " brand-new," that which is fresh from the 
" brand," the branding-iron used for marking objects, &c. 

BRANCH (from the Fr. branche, late Lat. branca, an animal's 
paw), a limb of a tree; hence any offshoot, e.g. of a river, railway, 
&c, of a deer's antlers, of a family or genealogical tree, and 
generally a subdivision or department, as in " a branch of learn- 
ing." The phrase, to destroy " root and branch," meaning to 
destroy utterly, taken originally from Malachi iv. 1, was made 
famous in 1641 by the so-called " Root and Branch " Bill and 
Petition for the abolition of episcopal government, in which 
petition occurred the sentence, " That the said government, 
with all its dependencies, roots and branches, be destroyed." 
Among technical senses of the word " branch " are: the certificate 
of proficiency given to pilots by Trinity House; and in siege-craft 
a length of trench forming part of a zigzag approach. 

BRANCO, or Parima, a river of northern Brazil and tributary 
of the Rio Negro, formed by the confluence of the Takutu, or 
" Upper Rio Branco," and Uraricoera, about 3 N. lat. and 
6o° 28' W. long., and flowing south by west to a junction 
with the Negro. It has rapids in its upper course, but the 
greater part of its length of 348 m. is navigable for steamers 
of light draught. The Takutu rises in the Roraima and Co'irrit 
ranges on the Guiana frontier, while the Uraricoera rises in the 
Serra de Parima, on the Venezuelan frontier, and has a length 
of 360 m. before reaching the Branco. These are white water 
rivers, from which the Branco (white) derives its name, and at 
its junction with the Negro the two differently-coloured streams 
flow side by side for some distance before mingling. 

BRANCOVAN, or Brancoveanu, the name of a family which 
has played an important part in the history of Rumania. It was 
of Servian origin and was connected with the family of Branko 
or Brankovich. Constantine Brancovan, the most eminent 
member of the family, was born in 1654, and became prince of 
Walachia in 1689. In consequence of his anti-Turkish policy of 
forming an alliance first with Austria and then with Russia, he 
was denounced to the Porte, deposed from his throne, brought 
under arrest to Constantinople and imprisoned (17 10) in the 
fortress of Yedi Kuleh (Seven Towers) . Here he was tortured by 
the Turks, who hoped thus to discover the fortune of £3,000,000, 
which Constantine was alleged to have amassed. He was be- 
headed with his four sons on the 26th of August 17 14. His 
faithful friend Enake Vacarescu shared his fate. Constantine 
Brancovan became, through his tragic death, the hero of 
Rumanian popular ballads. His family founded and endowed the 
largest hospital in Walachia, the so-called Spital Brancovanescu. 

See O. G. Lecca, Familiile Boeresti Romdne (Bucharest, 1899), 
p. 90, sqq. (M. G.) 

BRAND, JOHN (1744-1806), English antiquary, was born on 
the 19th of August 1744 at Washington, Durham, where his 
father was parish clerk. His early years were spent at Newcastle- 
on-Tyne with his uncle, a cordwainer, to whom he was apprentice 
in his fourteenth year. Showing promise, however, at Newcastle 
grammar school, friends interested themselves in him and assisted 
him to go to Oxford. It was not, however, until his twenty- 
eighth year that he matriculated at Lincoln College, but before 
this he had been ordained, holding in succession the curacies of 
Bolam, Northumberland, of St Andrew's, Newcastle, and of 
Cramlington, 8 m. from the county town. He graduated in 
1775 and two years later was elected fellow of the Society of 
Antiquaries. Having for a short time been under-usher at the 
Newcastle grammar school, the duke of Northumberland, a 
former patron, gave him in 1784 the rectory of the combined 
parishes of St Mary-at-Hill and St Mary Hubbard, London. 
Appointed secretary to the Society of Antiquaries in the same 
year, he was annually re-elected until his death in 1806. He was 
buried in the chancel of his church. His most important work is 
Observations on Popular Antiquities: including the whole of Mr 
Bourne's " Antiquitates V ul gar es" with addenda to every chapter 
of that work. This was published in London in 1777, and after 
Brand's death, a new edition embodying the MSS. left by him, 
was published by Sir Henry Ellis in 1813. Brand also published 



420 



BRAND, SIR J. H.— BRANDENBURG 



a poem entitled: On Illicit Love, written among the ruins of 
Godstow Nunnery, near Oxford (1775, Newcastle); The History 
and Antiquities of Newcastle-upon-Tyne (2 vols., London, 1789), 
and many papers in the Archaeologia. 

BRAND, SIR JOHN HENRY (1823-1888), president of the 
Orange Free State, was the son of Sir Christoffel Brand, speaker 
of the House of Assembly of the Cape Colony. He was born at 
Cape Town on the 6th of December 1823, and was educated at 
the South African College in that city. Continuing his studies at 
Leiden, he took the degree of D.C.L. in 1845. He was called to 
the English bar from the Inner Temple in 1849, and practised as 
an advocate in the supreme court of the Cape of Good Hope 
from that year until 1863. In 1858 he was appointed professor of 
law in the South African College. He was elected president of 
the Orange Free State in 1863, and subsequently re-elected for 
five years in 1869, 1874, 1879 and 1884. In 1864 he resisted the 
pressure of the Basuto on the Free State boundary, and after 
vainly endeavouring to induce Moshesh, the Basuto chief, to 
keep his people within bounds, he took up arms against them in 
1865. This first war ended in the treaty of Thaba Bosigo, signed 
on the 3rd of April 1866; and a second war, caused by the 
treachery of the Basuto, ended in the treaty of Aliwal North, 
concluded on the 12th of February 1869. In 1871 Brand was 
solicited by a large party to become president of the Transvaal, 
and thus unite the two Dutch republics of South Africa; but as 
the project was hostile to Great Britain he declined to do so, and 
maintained his constant policy of friendship towards England, 
where his merits were recognized in 1882 by the honour of the 
G.C.M.G. He died on the 14th of July 1888. (See Orange 
Free State: History.) 

BRANDE, WILLIAM THOMAS (1 788-1866), English chemist, 
was born in London on the nth of January 1788. After leaving 
Westminster school, he was apprenticed, in 1802, to his brother, 
an apothecary, with the view of adopting the profession of 
medicine, but his bent was towards chemistry, a sound know- 
ledge of which he acquired in his spare time. In 181 2 he was 
appointed professor of chemistry to the Apothecaries' Society, 
and delivered a course of lectures before the Board of Agriculture 
in place of Sir Humphry Davy, whom in the following year he 
succeeded in the chair of chemistry at the Royal Institution, 
London. His Manual of Chemistry, first published in 1819, 
enjoyed wide popularity, and among other works he brought out 
a Dictionary of Science, Literature and Art in 1842, on a new 
edition of which he was engaged when he died at Tunbridge 
Wells on the nth of February 1866. 

BRANDENBURG, the name of a margraviate and electorate 
which played an important part in German history, and after- 
wards grew into the kingdom of Prussia. During the early years 
of the Christian era, the district was inhabited by the Semnones, 
and afterwards by various Slavonic tribes, who were partially 
subdued by Charlemagne, but soon regained their independence. 
The history of Brandenburg begins when the German king, 
Henry the Fowler, defeated the Havelli, or Hevelli, and took 
their capital, Brennibor, from which the name Brandenburg is 
derived. It soon came under the rule of Gero, margrave of the 
Saxon east mark, who pressed the campaign against the Slavs 
with vigour, while Otto the Great founded bishoprics at Havel- 
berg and Brandenburg. When Gero died in 965, his mark was 
divided into two parts, the northern portion, lying along both 
banks of the middle Elbe, being called the north or old mark. 
and forming the nucleus of the later margraviate of Branden- 
burg. After O+to the Great died, the Slavs regained much of 
their territory, Brandenburg fell again into their hands, and a 
succession of feeble margraves ruled only the district west of the 
Elbe, together with a small district east of that river. 

A new era began in 1106 when Lothair, count of Supplinburg, 
became duke of Saxony. Aided by Albert the Bear, count of 
Ballenstadt, he renewed the attack on the Slavs, and 
Bear. * n lI 34 appointed Albert margrave of the north mark. 

The new margrave continued the work of Lothair, and 
about 1140 made a treaty with Pribislaus, the childless duke of 
Brandenburg, by which he was recognized as the duke's heir. 



Otto III. 



He took at once the title margrave of Brandenburg, but when 
Pribislaus died in 1150, a stubborn contest followed with Jazko, 
a relation of the late duke, which was terminated in n 57 in 
Albert's favour. Albert was the real founder of Brandenburg. 
Under his rule Christianity and civilization were extended, 
bishoprics were restored and monasteries founded. The country 
was colonized with settlers from the lower Rhineland, land was 
brought under cultivation, forts were built, German laws and 
customs introduced, and gradually the woods and marshes 
were converted into lands of comparative fertility. 

When Albert died in n 70, Brandenburg fell to his eldest son, 
Otto I. (c. 1130-1184), who compelled the duke of Pomerania to 
own his supremacy, and slightly increased by conquest the area 
of the mark. Otto's son, Otto II., was the succeeding margrave, 
and having quarrelled with his powerful neighbour, Ludolf, 
archbishop of Magdeburg, was forced to own the archbishop's 
supremacy over his allodial lands. He died in 1205, and was 
followed by his step-brother, Albert II. (c. n 74-1 2 20), who 
assisted the emperor Otto IV. in various campaigns, but later 
transferred his allegiance to Otto's rival, Frederick of Hohen- 
staufen, afterwards the emperor Frederick II. His sons, John I. 
and Otto III., ruled Brandenburg in common until the death of 
John in 1266, and their reign was a period of growth and pros- 
perity. Districts were conquered or purchased from 
the surrounding dukes; the marriage of Otto with 
Beatrice, daughter of Wenceslaus, king of Bohemia, in 1 253, added 
upper Lusatia to Brandenburg; and the authority of the 
margraves was extended beyond the Oder. Many monasteries 
and towns were founded, among them Berlin; the work of 
Albert the Bear was continued, and the prosperity of Branden- 
burg formed a marked contrast to the disorder which prevailed 
elsewhere in Germany. Brandenburg appears about this time to 
have fallen into three divisions — the old mark lying west of the 
Elbe, the middle mark between the Elbe and the Oder, and the 
new mark, as the newly conquered lands beyond the Oder began 
to be called. When Otto died in 1267, the area of the mark had 
been almost doubled, and the margraves had attained to an 
influential position in the Empire. The Sachsenspiegel, written 
before 1235, mentions the margrave as one of the electors, by 
virtue of the office of chamberlain, which had probably been 
conferred on Albert the Bear by the German king Conrad III. 

In 1258 John and Otto had agreed upon a division of their 
lands, but the arrangement only took effect on Otto's death 
in 1267, when John's son, John II., received the 
electoral dignity, together with the southern part 
of the margraviate, which centred around Stendal, and Otto's 
son, John III., the northern or Saltzwedel portion. John II.'s 
brother, Otto IV., who became elector in 1281, had passed his 
early years in struggles with the archbishop of Magdeburg, 
whose lands stretched like a wedge into the heart of Brandenburg. 
In 1280 he was wounded in the head with a dart, and as he 
retained there a part of the weapon for a year, he was called 
" Otto with the, dart." He secured the appointment of his 
brother Eric as archbishop of Magdeburg in 1283, and was 
afterwards engaged in various feuds. Songs attributed to him 
are found in F. H. von der Hagen's Minnesinger. Otto was 
succeeded in 1309 by his nephew, Valdemar, who, assisted by 
other members of his family, conquered Pomerellen, which 
he shared with the Teutonic order in 13 10, and held his own 
in a struggle with the kings of Poland, Sweden and Denmark 
and others, over the possession of Stralsund. 

In order to pay for these wars, and to meet the expenses 
of a splendid court, the later margraves had sold various rights 
to the towns and provinces of Brandenburg, and so aided the 
development of local government. John III. of Saltzwedel had 
shared his possessions with his brothers, but in 1303 they were 
reunited by his nephew Hermann, who purchased lower Lusatia 
in the same year. Hermann's daughter Agnes married the 
elector Valdemar, and on the death of her only brother , John VI . , 
in 13 1 7, the possessions of the Saltzwedel branch of the family 
passed to Valdemar, together with Landsberg and the Saxon 
Palatinate, which had been purchased from Albert the 



Otto IV. 



BRANDENBURG 



421 



Degenerate, landgrave of Thuringia. Valdemar thus gathered 
the whole of the mark under his rule, together with upper and 
lower Lusatia, and various outlying districts. He died childless 
in 1310, and was succeeded by his nephew Henry II., who died 
in 1320, when the Ascanian family, as the descendants of Albert 
the Bear were called, from the Latinized form of the name of 
their ancestral castle of Aschersleben, became extinct. 

Brandenburg now fell into a deplorable condition, portions 
were seized by neighbouring princes, and the mark itself was 
disputed for by various claimants. In 1323 King 
iw«e/s- Lcmi s IV. took advantage of this condition to bestow 
dynasty, the mark upon his young son, Louis, and thus Branden- 
burg was added to the possessions of the Wittelsbach 
family, although Louis did not receive the extensive lands of 
the Ascanian margraves. Upper and lower Lusatia, Landsberg, 
and the Saxon Palatinate had been inherited by female members 
of the family, and passed into the hands of other princes, the 
old mark was retained by Agnes, the widow of Valdemar, who 
was married again to Otto II., duke of Brunswick, and the 
king was forced to acknowledge these claims, and to cede districts 
to Mecklenburg and Bohemia. During the early years of the 
reign of Louis, who was called the margrave Louis IV. or V., 
Brandenburg was administered by Bertold, count of Henneberg, 
who established the authority of the Wittelsbachs in the middle 
mark, which, centring round Berlin, was the most important 
part of the margraviate. The quarrel between King Louis 
and Pope John XXII. was inimical to the interests of Branden- 
burg, which was ravaged by the Poles, torn by the strife of 
contending clerical factions, and alternately neglected and 
oppressed by the margrave. Trade and commerce were at a 
standstill, agriculture was neglected, the privileges and estates 
of the margrave passed into private hands, the nobles were 
virtually independent, and the towns sought to defend them- 
selves by means of alliances. During the struggle between the 
families of Wittelsbach and Luxemburg, which began in 1342, 
there appeared in Brandenburg an old man who claimed to be 
the margrave Valdemar. He was gladly received by the king 
of Poland, and other neighbouring princes, welcomed by a large 
number of the people, and in 1348 invested with the margraviate 
by King Charles IV., who eagerly seized this opportunity to deal 
a blow at his enemy. This step compelled Louis to make peace 
with Charles, who abandoned the false Valdemar, invested 
Louis and his step-brothers with Brandenburg, and in return 
was recognized as king. Louis recovered the old mark in 1348, 
drove his opponent from the land, and in 1350 made a treaty 
with his step-brothers, Louis the younger and Otto, at Frankfort- 
on-Oder, by which Brandenburg was handed over to Louis 
the younger and Otto. Louis, who then undertook the govern- 
ment, made peace with his neighbours, finally defeated the 
false Valdemar, and was recognized by the Golden Bull of 
1356 as one of the seven electors. The emperor Charles IV. 
took advantage of a family quarrel over the possessions of Louis 
the elder, who died in 1361, to obtain a promise from Louis the 
younger and Otto, that the margraviate should come to his own 
son, Wenceslaus, in case the electors died childless. Louis 
the younger died in 1365, and when his brother Otto, who had 
married a daughter of Charles IV., wished to leave Brandenburg 
to his own family Charles began hostilities; but in 1373 an 
arrangement was made, and Otto, by the treaty of Fiirstenwalde, 
abandoned the margraviate for a sum of 500,000 gold gulden. 

Under the Wittelsbach rule, the estates of the various provinces 
of Brandenburg had obtained the right to coin money, to build 
fortresses, to execute justice, and to form alliances 
control w ' tn Iore ig n states. Charles invested Wenceslaus 
with the margraviate in 1373, but undertook its 
administration himself, and passed much of his time at a castle 
which he built at Tangermiinde. He diminished the burden of 
taxation, suppressed the violence of the nobles, improved 
navigation on the Elbe and Oder, and encouraged commerce 
by alliances with the Hanse towns, and in other ways. He 
caused a Landbook to be drawn up in 1375, in which are recorded 
all the castles, towns and villages of the land with their estates 



and incomes. When Charles died in 1378, and Wenceslaus 
became German and Bohemian king, Brandenburg passed to 
the new king's half-brother Sigismund, then a minor, and a 
period of disorder ensued. Soon after Sigismund came of age, 
he pledged a part of Brandenburg to his cousin Jobst, margrave 
of Moravia, to whom in 1388 he handed over the remainder of 
the electorate in return for a large sum of money, and as the 
money was not repaid, Jobst obtained the investiture in 1397 
from King Wenceslaus. Sigismund had also obtained the new 
mark on the death of his brother John in 1396, but sold this 
in 1402 to the Teutonic order. Jobst paid very little attention 
to Brandenburg, and the period was used by many of the noble 
families to enrich themselves at the expense of the poorer and 
weaker towns, to plunder traders, and to carry on feuds with 
neighbouring princes. When in 1410 Sigismund and Jobst 
were rivals for the German throne, Sigismund, anxious to obtain 
another vote in the electoral college, declared the bargain with 
Jobst void, and empowered Frederick VI. of Hohenzollern, 
burgrave of Nuremberg, to exercise the Brandenburg vote at 
the election. (See Frederick I., Elector oe Brandenburg.) 
In 141 1 Jobst died and Brandenburg reverted to Sigismund, 
who appointed Frederick as his representative to govern the 
margraviate, and a further step was taken when, on the 30th of 
April 1415, the king invested Frederick of Hohenzollern and his 
heirs with Brandenburg, together with the electoral privilege 
and the office of chamberlain, in return for a payment of 400,000 
gold gulden, but the formal ceremony of investiture was 
delayed until the 18th of April 141 7, when it took place at 
Constance. 

During the century which preceded the advent of the Hohen- 
zollerns in Brandenburg its internal condition had become 
gradually worse and worse, and had been accompanied condition 
by a considerable loss of territory. The central power before the 
had become weakened and the central organization Hohen- 
relaxed, while the electorate had lost most of the zo//e ™ 
advantages which formerly distinguished it from other 
German fiefs. Under the rule of the earliest margraves, it was the 
official side of their position that was prominent, and it was not 
forgotten that they were technically only the representatives 
of the emperor. But in the 13th century this feeling began to 
disappear, and Brandenburg enjoyed an independence and 
carried out an independent policy in a way that was not paralleled 
by any other German state. The emperor was still suzerain 
indeed, but his relations with the mark were so insignificant that 
they exercised practically no influence on its development; 
and so the power of the Ascanian margraves was virtually 
unlimited. This independence was enhanced by the fact that 
few great nobles had followed Albert the Bear in his work of 
conquest, and that consequently there were few large lordships 
with their crowd of dependents. The towns, the village com- 
munities and the knights held their lands and derived their 
rights directly from the margraves. The towns and villages 
had generally been laid out by contractors or locatores, men 
not necessarily of noble birth, who were installed as hereditary 
chief magistrates of the communities, and received numerous 
encouragements to reclaim waste lands. This mode of coloniza- 
tion was especially favourable to the peasantry, who seem in 
Brandenburg to have retained the disposal of their persons and 
property at a time when villenage or serfdom was the ordinary 
status of their class elsewhere. The dues paid by these contractors 
in return for the concessions formed the main source of the 
revenue of the margraves. Gradually, however, the expenses 
of warfare, liberal donations to the clergy, and the maintenance of 
numerous and expensive households, compelled them to pledge 
these dues for sums of ready money. This proceeding gave the 
barons and knights an opportunity to buy out the village magis- 
trates and to replace them with nominees of their own. Thus the 
condition of the peasants grew worse, and their freedom was practi- 
cally destroyed when the emperor Louis IV. recognized the juris- 
diction of the nobles over their estates. Henceforth the power 
of the nobles steadily increased at the expense of the peasants, 
who soon sank into servitude. Instead of communicating 



422 



BRANDENBURG 



directly with the margrave through his burgraves and bailiffs, 
or vogts, the village communities came to be represented by the 
nobles who had obtained possession of their lands. Many of the 
towns were forced into the same position. Others were able 
to maintain their independence, and to make use of the pecuniary 
needs of the margraves to become practically municipal republics. 
Their strength, however, was perhaps more usefully shown in their 
ability to resist the nobles, a proceeding which saved industry 
and commerce from extinction at a time of unbridled lawlessness. 
In the pecuniary embarrassments of the margraves also originated 
the power of the Stande, or estates, consisting of the nobles, 
the clergy and the towns. The first recorded instance of the 
Stande co-operating with the rulers occurred in 1170; but it 
was not till 1280 that the margrave solemnly bound himself not 
to raise a bede or special voluntary contribution without the 
consent of the estates. In 1355 the Stande secured the appoint- 
ment of a permanent councillor, without whose concurrence 
the decrees of the margraves were invalid. In the century 
which followed the extinction of the Ascanian house, liberty 
degenerated into licence, and the country was given over to 
anarchy. Only the most powerful towns were able to maintain 
their independence; others, together with the clergy, regularly 
paid blackmail to the neighbouring nobles. Under these con- 
ditions it is no wonder that the electorate not only completely 
lost its political importance, but also suffered a considerable 
diminution of territory. Upper and lower Lusatia, the new mark 
of Brandenburg, and other outlying districts had been shorn 
away, and the electorate now consisted of the old mark, the 
middle mark with Priegnitz, Uckermark and Sternberg, a total 
area of not more than 10,000 sq.m. 

Such was the condition and extent of Brandenburg in 141 1 
when Frederick of Holienzollern became the representative of 
Frederick Ki n 8 Sigismund therein. Entering the electorate with 
ofHohea- a strong force in June 141 a, his authority was quickly 
zoiiera, recognized in the middle mark, but the nobles of the 
old mark and of Priegnitz refused to follow this example. 
The two succeeding years were skilfully used by Frederick to 
make peace with the neighbouring princes, and having thus isolated 
his domestic enemies, he turned his arms against them early in 
1414. Their strongholds were stormed, and in a few weeks their 
leaders were either prisoners or fugitives. A general peace was 
then declared at Tangermiinde which enabled Frederick to leave 
the mark to the rule of his wife, Elizabeth, and to turn his 
attention elsewhere. Returning to Brandenburg as elector in 
1416, the last flickers of the insurrection were extinguished; 
and when Frederick was invested at Constance in April 141 7 
his authority over the mark was undisputed. His next difficulty 
was with Pomerania, which had been nominally under the 
suzerainty of Brandenburg since 1181. The revival of this 
claim by the elector provoked an invasion of the mark by an 
army of Pomeranians with their allies in 1420, when Frederick 
inflicted a severe defeat upon them at Angermiinde; but in 
1424 a temporary coolness between the elector and the emperor 
Sigismund led to a renewal of the attack which Frederick was 
unable to repulse. This reverse, together with the pressure of 
other business, induced him to leave Brandenburg in January 
1426, after handing over its government to his eldest son, John. 
John, called the " Alchemist," who was born in 1403, had been 
disappointed in his hope of obtaining the vacant electoral duchy 
of Saxe- Wittenberg in 1423. Lacking the diplomatic and military 
qualities of his father, his difficulties were augmented by the 
poverty of the country, and the evils which Frederick had sup- 
pressed quickly returned. The feeling of security vanished, 
the towns banded themselves together for defensive purposes, 
the rights of the margrave were again pledged to provide money, 
and in 1432 the land was ravaged by the Hussites. John never 
attained to the electoral dignity; for, in 1437, his father in 
arranging a division of his territories decided that Brandenburg 
should pass to his second and fourth sons, both of whom were 
named Frederick. The elder of the two took up the government 
at once, whereupon John left the mark for south Germany, where 
he remained until his death in 1464. 



Frederick II., who became elector on his father's death in 
September 1440, was born on the 19th of November 141 3, and 
earned the surname of " Iron " through his sternness 
to his country's enemies. He had little difficulty 1L 
in repressing the turbulence of the nobles which had 
been quickened into life during the regency of his brother, but 
found it less easy to deal with the towns. Three strong leagues 
had been formed among them about 143 1, and the spirit of 
municipal independence was most prominently represented 
by the neighbouring and allied towns of Berlin and Coin. In 
his conflict with the towns over his refusal to ratify all their 
privileges the elector's task was lightened by a quarrel between 
the magistrates and the burghers of Berlin, which lie was called 
in to decide in 1442. He deposed the governing oligarchy, 
changed the constitution of the town, forbade all alliances and 
laid the foundations of a castle. The inhabitants soon chafed 
under these restrictions. A revolt broke out in 1447, but the 
power of the elector overawed the people, who submitted their 
case to the estates, with the result that the arrangement of 1442 
was re-established. In 1447 Frederick was compelled to cede 
the old mark and Priegnitz to his younger brother, Frederick, 
under whose feeble rule they quickly fell into disorder. In 1463, 
however, when the younger Frederick died childless, the elector 
united them again with his own possessions and took measures 
to suppress the prevailing anarchy. In his dealings with neigh- 
bouring rulers Frederick pursued a peaceful and conciliatory 
policy. In 1442 he obtained some small additions to his territory, 
and the. right of succession to the duchy of Mecklenburg in' 
case the ducal family should die out. In 1445 an old feud with 
the archbishop of Magdeburg was settled, and in 1457 a treaty 
of mutual succession was made with the houses of Saxony and 
Hesse. Cottbus and Peitz in Lusatia were acquired, and retained 
after a quarrel with George Podiebrad, king of Bohemia, and the 
new mark of Brandenburg was purchased from the Teutonic 
order in 1454. An attempt, however, to secure the duchy of 
Pomerania-Stettin failed, and the concluding years of this reign 
were troubled by warfare with the Pomeranians. 

The general success of Frederick's rule was secured by the 
sedulous care with which he confined himself to the work of 
government. He is said to have refused the thrones of Poland 
and Bohemia; and although he made pilgrimages to the Holy 
Land and to Rome, his interest in ecclesiastical questions 
was mainly directed towards quickening the religious life of 
his people. He obtained important concessions from Pope 
Nicholas V. with regard to the appointment of bishops and other 
ecclesiastical matters in 1447, and in general maintained cordial 
relations with the papacy. About 1467 his only son, John, died, 
and increasing infirmity led him to contemplate abdication. 
An arrangement was made with his brother, Albert Achilles, 
to whom early in 1470 the mark was handed over, and Frederick 
retired to Plassenburg where he died on the roth of February 147 1. 

Albert appeared in Brandenburg early in the same year, and 
after receiving the homage of his people took up the struggle 
with the Pomeranians, which he soon brought to a 
satisfactory conclusion; for in May 1472 he not only Achitt s 
obtained the cession of several districts, but was 
recognized as the suzerain of Pomerania and as its future ruler. 
The expenses of this war led to a quarrel with the estates. A 
subsidy was granted which the elector did not regard as adequate, 
and by a dexterous use of his power he established his right to 
take an excise on beer. Albert's most important contribution 
to the history of Brandenburg was the issue on the 24th of 
February 1473 of the Dispesitio Achillea. By this instrument 
the elector decreed that the electoral mark should pass in its 
entirety to his eldest son, an establishment of primogeniture 
which had considerable influence on the future development of 
the country. He then entrusted the government to his eldest 
son, John, and left Brandenburg. Handicapped by poverty, 
John had to face attacks from two quarters. The Pomeranians, 
inspired by the declaration of the emperor Frederick III. that 
their land was a direct fief of the Empire, and aided by Matthias 
Corvinus, king of Hungary, took up arms; and a quarrel broke 



BRANDENBURG 



423 



Joachim. 



out with John, duke of Sagan, over the possessions of John's 
brother-in-law, Henry XI., duke of Glogau. To deal with these 
difficulties Albert returned to Brandenburg in 1478, and during 
his stay drove back the Pomeranians, and added Crossen and 
other parts of duke Henry's possessions to the electorate. Again 
left in charge of the country, John beat back a fresh attack made 
by John of Sagan in 1482 ; and he became elector on his father's 
death in March i486. He added the county of Zossen to his 
possessions in 1490, and in 1493 made a fresh treaty with the 
duke of Pomerania. Although he brought a certain degree of 
order into the finances, his poverty and the constant inroads of 
external enemies prevented him from seriously improving the 
condition of the country. John, who was called " Cicero," 
either on account of his eloquence, or of his knowledge of Latin, 
was interested in learning, welcomed Italian scholars to the 
electorate, and strove to improve the education of his people. 
He died at Arneburg on the 9th of January 1499, and was 
succeeded by his son Joachim I. 

When Joachim undertook the government Of Brandenburg 
he had to deal with an amount of disorder almost as great as 
that which had taxed the energies of Frederick I. a 
century before. Highway robbery was general, the 
lives and property of traders were in continual jeopardy, and 
the machinery for die enforcement of the laws was almost at a 
standstill. About 1504 an attack of unusual ferocity on some 
Frankfort traders aroused the elector's wrath, and during the 
next few years the execution of many lawbreakers and other 
stern measures restored some degree of order. In this and in 
other ways Joachim proved himself a sincere friend to the towns 
and a protector of industry. Following the economic tendencies 
of the time he issued sumptuary laws and encouraged manu- 
factures; while to suppress the rivalry among the towns he 
established an order of precedence for them. Equally important 
was his work in improving the administration of justice, and in 
this direction he was aided by scholars from the university which 
he had founded at Frankfort-on-Oder in 1506. He gave a new 
organization to the highest court of justice, the Kammergericht, 
secured for himself an important voice in the choice of its 
members, and ordered that the local law should be supplemented 
by the law of Rome. He did not largely increase the area of 
Brandenburg, but in 1524 he acquired the county of Ruppin, 
and in 1529 he made a treaty at Grimnitz with George and 
Barnim XL, dukes of Pomerania, by which he surrendered the 
vexatious claim to suzerainty in return for a fresh promise of 
the succession in case the ducal family should become extinct. 
Joachim's attitude towards the teaching of Martin Luther which 
had already won many adherents in the electorate, was one of 
unrelenting hostility. The Jews also felt the weight of his 
displeasure, and were banished in 1510. 

Ignoring the Dispositio Achillea, the elector bequeathed 
Brandenburg to his two sons. When he died in July 1535 the 
elder, Joachim II., became elector, and obtained the 
old and middle marks,while the younger, John, received 
the new mark. John went definitely over to the side 
of the Lutherans in 1538, while Joachim allowed the reformed 
doctrines free entrance into his dominions in 1539. The elector, 
however, unlike his brother, did not break with the forms of the 
Church of Rome, but established an ecclesiastical organization 
independent of the pope, and took up a position similar to that 
of King Henry VIII. in England. Many of the monasteries were 
suppressed, a consistory was set up to take over the functions 
of the bishops and to act as the highest ecclesiastical court of 
the country. In 1541 the new ecclesiastical system was con- 
firmed by the emperor Charles V. With regard to this policy 
the elector was probably influenced by considerations of greed. 
The bishoprics of Brandenburg, Havelberg and Lebus were 
secularized; their administration was entrusted to members 
of the elector's family; and their revenues formed a welcome 
addition to his impoverished exchequer. Nor did Joachim 
neglect other opportunities for adding to his wealth and posses- 
sions. In 1537 he had concluded a treaty with Frederick III., 
duke of Liegnitz, which guaranteed to the Hohenzollerns the 



Joachim 
II. 



John 
George. 



succession to the Silesian duchies of Liegnitz, Brieg and Wohlau 
in the event of the ducal family becoming extinct; this arrange- 
ment is important as the basis of the claim made by Frederick 
the Great on Silesia in 1740. The treaty was declared invalid 
by the German king, Ferdinand I.; but the elector insisted on 
its legality, and in 1545 strengthened his position by arranging 
a double marriage between members of his own family and that 
of Duke Frederick. Of more immediate consequence was an 
arrangement made in 1569 with the representatives of Joachim's 
kinsman, Albert Frederick, duke of Prussia, after which the 
elector obtained the joint investiture of the duchy of Prussia from 
Sigismund II., king of Poland, and was assured of the succession 
if the duke's family became extinct. Joachim's luxurious habits, 
his partiality for adventurers, and his delight in building, led 
him to incur such a heavy expenditure that after pledging many 
of his lands and rights he was compelled in 1540 to appeal for 
help to the estates. Taking advantage of his difficulties, the 
estates voted him a sum of money as the price cf valuable con- 
cessions, the most important of which was that the elector 
should make no alliance without their consent. Fresh liabilities 
were soon incurred, and in spite of frequent contributions from 
the estates Joachim left at his death in January 1571 a heavy 
burden of debt to his son and successor, John George. 

The elector's death was followed ten days later by that of his 
brother, John, and as John left no sons the whole of Brandenburg, 
together with the districts of Beeskow and Storkow 
which had been added by purchase to the new mark, 
were united under the rule of his nephew, John George. 
Born on the nth of September 1525 this prince had served in 
the field under Charles V., and, disliking his father's policy and 
associates, had absented himself from Berlin, and mainly confined 
his attention to administering the secularized bishopric of 
Brandenburg which he had obtained in 1 560. When he became 
elector he hastened to put his ideas into practice. His father's 
favourites were exiled; foreigners were ousted from public 
positions and their places taken by natives; and important 
economies were effected, which earned for John George the 
surname of Oekonom, or steward. To lighten the heavy burden 
of debt left by Joachim the elector proposed a tax on wheat and 
other cereals. Some opposition was shown, but eventually the 
estates of both divisions of the mark assented; only, however 
at the price of concessions to the nobles, predominant in the diet, 
which thrust the peasantry into servitude. Thus the rule of 
John George was popular with the nobles, and to some extent 
with the towns. Protestant refugees from France and the 
Netherlands were encouraged to settle in Brandenburg, and a 
period of peace was beneficial to a land, the condition of which 
was still much inferior to that of other parts of Germany. In 
religion the elector was a follower of Luther, whose doctrines were 
prevalent among his people. He had accepted the Formula 
Concordiae, a Lutheran document promulgated in June 1580, 
and sought to prevent any departure from its tenets. His 
dislike of Calvinism, or his antipathy to external complications, 
however, prevented him from taking any serious steps to defend 
Protestantism from the attacks of the counter-reformation. 
He did indeed join the league of Torgau, which voted assistance 
to Henry IV. of France in 1591 ; but he refused to aid the United 
Provinces, or even to give assistance to his eldest son, Joachim 
Frederick, administrator of the archbishopric of Magdeburg, 
whose claim to sit and vote in the imperial diet was contested, 
or to his grandson, John George, whose election to the bishopric 
of Strassburg was opposed by a Roman Catholic minority in the 
chapter. This indifference to the welfare of the Protestants 
added to the estrangement between the elector and his eldest son, 
which was further accentuated when John George, ignoring the 
Dispositio Achillea, bequeathed the new mark to one of his 
younger sons. He died on the 8th of January 1598. 

Joachim Frederick, who now became elector, was born on the 
27th of January 1546. Since 1553 he had held the bishopric of 
Havelberg, since 1555 that of Lebus; he had been adminis- 
trator of Magdeburg since 1566, and of Brandenburg since 
1571. Resigning these dignities in 1598, he contested his father's 



424 



BRANDENBURG 



John 
Slgis- 
muaJ. 



will, and was successful in preventing a division of the electorate. 
An agreement with George Frederick, the childless margrave of 
Ansbach and Bayreuth, paved the way for an 
Frederick, arrangement with the elector's younger brothers, who 
after the margrave's death in April 1603, shared 
his lands in Franconia, and were compensated in other ways 
for surrendering all claims on Brandenburg. This agreement, 
known as the Gera Bond, ratified the Disposiiio Achillea. By 
George Frederick's death, Joachim became administrator of 
the duchy of Prussia, ruled nominally by the weak-minded 
Albert Frederick, but he had some difficulty in asserting his 
position. In Brandenburg he made concessions to the nobles 
at the expense of the peasantry, and admitted the right of the 
estates to control taxation. In religious matters he was con- 
vinced of the necessity of a union between Lutherans and 
Calvinists, and took steps to bring this about. Public opinion, 
however, in Brandenburg was too strong for him, and he was 
compelled to fall back upon the Lutheran Formula and the 
religious policy of his father. Joachim seems to have been a 
wise ruler, who improved in various ways the condition of the 
mark. He married Catherine, daughter of John, margrave of 
Brandenburg-Ciistrin, and when he died, on the 18th of July 
1608, was succeeded by his eldest son John Sigismund. 

The new elector, born on the 8th of November 1572, had 
married in 1594 Anna, daughter of Albert Frederick of Prussia, 
a union which not only strengthened the pretensions 
of the electors of Brandenburg to the succession in 
that duchy, but gave to John Sigismund a claim on 
the duchies of Cleves, Julich and Berg, and other 
Rhenish lands should the ruling family become extinct. In 
March 1609 the death of Duke John William left these duchies 
without a ruler, and by arrangement they were occupied jointly 
by the elector and by his principal rival, Wolfgang, son of Philip 
Louis, count palatine of Neuburg. This proceeding aroused 
some opposition, and, complicated by religious considerations 
and by the excited state of European politics, almost precipitated 
a general war. However, in November 1614 the dispute was 
temporarily settled by the treaty of Xanten. Brandenburg 
obtained the duchy of Cleves with the counties of Mark and 
Ravensberg, but as the Dutch and Spanish garrisons were not 
withdrawn, these lands were only nominally under the elector's 
rule. In 1609, John Sigismund had joined the Evangelical 
Union, probably to win support in the Rhineland, and the same 
consideration was doubtless one reason why, in 1613, he forsook 
the Lutheran doctrines of his family, and became an adherent 
of the reformed, or Calvinist, faith. This step aroused grave 
discontent in the electorate, and, quickly abandoning his 
attempts to proselytize, the elector practically conceded religious 
liberty to his subjects. Over the Cleves- Julich succession, John 
Sigismund had incurred heavy expenses, and the public debt 
had again mounted up. He was thus obliged to seek aid from 
the estates, and in return for grants to make concessions to the 
nobles. The elector spent much of his time in Prussia striving 
to assert his authority in that duchy, and in August 161 8, accord- 
ing to the arrangement of 1569, became duke by the death of 
Albert Frederick. He only enjoyed this dignity for a short time, 
as he died on the 23rd of December 1619. He was succeeded 
by his eldest son, George William. 

The new elector, born on the 3rd of November 1597, proved 
a weak and incapable ruler. He had married Elizabeth, daughter 
of Frederick IV., elector palatine of the Rhine, and 
wwuua. s ' ster °f the elector Frederick V., afterwards king of 
Bohemia, and before his accession had acted as his 
father's representative in Cleves. Although a Protestant he 
was under the influence of Adam, count of Schwarzenberg, who 
was a Roman Catholic of imperialist sympathies. As a result 
the elector remained neutral during the early years of the Thirty 
Years' War in spite of his relationship with Frederick of the 
Palatinate, and the obvious danger to his Rhenish lands. This 
attitude was not successful. Brandenburg was ravaged imparti- 
ally by both parties, and in 1627 George William attacked his 
brother-in-law, Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden, who was using 



Prussia as a base of operations for his war against Poland. This 
campaign was short and inglorious for Brandenburg, and the 
elector was soon compelled to make peace. Although alarmed 
by the edict of restitution of 1629, George William took no steps 
to help the Protestants. In 1631, however, Gustavus Adolphus 
marched on Berlin, compelled the elector to cede the fortress of 
Spandau, and to aid him with men and money. The Branden- 
burg troops then assisted the Swedes until after the death of 
Gustavus in 1632, and the Swedish defeat at Nordlingen in 1634, 
when the elector assented to the treaty of Prague, which was 
made in May 1635 between the emperor Ferdinand II. and John 
George I., elector of Saxony. The imperialists did nothing, 
however, to drive the Swedes from Brandenburg, and the 
unfortunate land was entirely at the mercy of the enemy. This 
was the principal reason why the elector was unable to annex 
Pomerania when its last duke, Bogislaus XIV., died in 1637. 
In 1638 George William transferred his residence to Konigsberg, 
leaving Schwarzenberg to administer the electorate. Although 
his harsh measures aroused some irritation, the count did some- 
thing to rid the land of the Swedes and to mitigate its many evils; 
but its condition was still very deplorable when George William 
died at Konigsberg on the 1st of December 1640, leaving an only 
son, Frederick William. The most important facts in the internal 
history of Brandenburg during the 16th century were the 
increase in the power of the estates, owing chiefly to the con- 
tinuous pecuniary needs of the electors; the gradual decline in 
the political importance of the towns, due mainly to intestine 
feuds; and the lapse of the peasantry into servitude. These 
events gave a preponderance of power to the nobles, but con- 
currently a number of circumstances were silently preparing 
the way for a great increase of authority on the part of the ruler. 
The substitution of the elector for the pope as head of the church; 
the introduction of Roman law with its emphasis on a central 
authority and a central administration; the determined and 
successful efforts to avoid any partition of the electorate; and 
the increasing tendency of the separate sections of the diet to 
act independently; all tended in this direction. This new order 
was heralded in 1604 by the establishment of a council of state, 
devoted to the interests of the elector, which strengthened his 
authority, and paved the way for a bureaucratic government. 

When Frederick William, the " Great Elector," became ruler 
of Brandenburg in 1640 he found the country in a very deplor- 
able condition. Trade and agriculture were almost p a ri k 
destroyed, and the inhabitants, compelled to support wmiam, 
the Swedish army of occupation, suffered also from the 
the disorderly conduct of the native soldiers. Although "° reat „ 
the young elector spent the two first years of his reign * or ' 
mainly in Prussia, he was by no means forgetful of Brandenburg, 
and began resolutely to root out the many evils which had sprung 
up during the feeble rule of his father. The powers of Schwarzen- 
berg were curtailed; the state council was restored; and the 
licence of the soldiers was restrained, while their numbers were 
reduced. Then turning his attention to the Swedes a truce was 
arranged, and soon afterwards, in return for an indemnity, they 
agreed to evacuate the electorate. Having returned to Branden- 
burg in 1643, Frederick William remained neutral during the 
concluding years of the Thirty Years' War, and set to work to 
organize an army and to effect financial reforms. About the 
same time diplomatic methods freed Cleves, Mark and 
Ravensberg from foreign troops, but the estates of these lands 
gained a temporary victory when the elector attacked their 
privileges. However, in 1647 his title was formally admitted 
by Wolfgang, count palatine of Neuburg. 

The terms of the treaty of Westphalia in 1648 are the best 
commentary on the general success of the elector's policy. 
Although he was obliged to give up his claim to the western part 
of Pomerania in favour of Sweden, he secured the eastern part 
of that duchy, together with the secularized bishoprics of 
Halberstadt, Minden and Kammin, and other lands, the whole 
forming a welcome addition to the area of Brandenburg. He 
was also promised the archbishopric of Magdeburg when its 
administrator, Augustus, duke of Saxe-Weissenfels, should die. 



BRANDENBURG 



4^5 



This event happened in 1680 when he secured the lands of the 
archbishopric. The elector did not, however, take possession 
of the newly-acquired territories at once. Fresh difficulties 
arose with Sweden, and it was not until 1653 that eastern 
Pomerania was freed from her soldiers. Meanwhile a new 
quarrel had broken out with Wolfgang of Neuburg. In 1650 
Frederick William attacked his rival, but a variety of circum- 
stances, among others a change of government in the Netherlands, 
and the resistance of the estates of Cleves, thwarted his plans, 
and he was compelled to listen to the mediating powers, and to 
acquiesce in the status quo. 

Profiting by these reverses the elector then undertook a series 
of internal reforms, tending to strengthen the central authority, 
and to mitigate the constant lack of money, which was perhaps 
his chief obstacle to success; a work in which he was aided by 
George, count of Waldeck (1620-1692), who became his chief 
adviser about this time. In 1651 the powers of the state council 
were extended to include all the lands under the elector's rule; 
and a special committee was appointed to effect financial 
economies, and so to augment the electoral resources. In 
imperial politics Frederick William supported the election of 
Ferdinand, son of the emperor Ferdinand III., as king of the 
Romans in 1653; but when the emperor failed to fulfil his 
promises, influenced by Waldeck, he acted in opposition to the 
imperial interests, and even formed a plan for a great alliance 
against the Habsburgs. These projects were disturbed by the 
war which broke out in 1655 between Sweden and Poland. In 
this struggle the elector fought first on one side and then on the 
other; but the important consequences of his conduct belong 
rather to the history of the duchy of Prussia (q.v.). The transfer 
of the elector's support from Sweden to Poland in 1656 was 
followed by the fall from power of Waldeck, who was succeeded 
by Otto von Schwerin (1616-1679), under whose influence the 
elector's relations with the emperor became more cordial. 

The increase in the prestige of Brandenburg was due chiefly 
to his army, which was gradually brought to a high state of 
efficiency. A proper organization was established to superintend 
the pay and maintenance of the soldiers, and they were com- 
manded by experienced officers, among others by Georg 
Derfflingen (1606-1695), and Otto von Sparr (1605-1668). The 
general poverty, however, made the estates reluctant to support 
a standing army, and after the peace of Oliva in 1660, it was 
reduced to about 3500 men. The continual difficulties with the 
estates of his different dominions had harassed and hampered 
the elector, and the general peace which followed the treaty of 
Oliva offered a favourable opportunity to curtail their powers. 
Undaunted by two previous rebuffs he attacked the estates of 
Cleves, and by a display of force gained a substantial victory. 
Some important privileges were annulled, and he obtained a 
considerable sum of money. The Landtag of Brandenburg was 
not cowed so easily into submission, but an increase of revenue 
was obtained, and the stubborn struggle which ensued in Prussia 
ended in a victory for the ruler. This increased income enabled 
the elector to take a more considerable part in European politics. 
In 1663 he assisted the imperialists in their struggle with the 
Turks; in 1666 the dispute over Cleves, Mark and Ravensberg 
was finally settled, and Brandenburg were confirmed in the 
possession of these lands; and in the same year a reconciliation 
was effected with Sweden. Several disputes which threatened 
to disturb the peace of the Empire were settled through his 
mediation, and he compelled the citizens of Magdeburg to do 
homage to him. In religious matters he interceded with the 
emperor and the diet for the Protestants, and sought, but without 
success, to bring about a reconciliation between Lutherans and 
Calvinists in Brandenburg. 

The elector's relations with Louis XIV. of France are full of 
interest. After the conclusion of the war of devolution in 1667, 
he allied himself with Louis, and together they agreed to support 
the candidature of Wolfgang of Neuburg for the vacant Polish 
throne. In 1668, moreover, he refused to join the triple alliance 
against France, but soon afterwards became aware of the danger 
to his country from the aggressive policy of Louis. The United 



Provinces were bound to him by religious interests, political 
considerations, and family ties alike, and he could not be in- 
different when their position was threatened by France. In spite 
of tempting offers from Louis, he was the first to join the Dutch 
when they were attacked by Louis in 1672, and conducted an 
ineffectual campaign on the Rhine until June 1673, when he was 
forced to make peace. In July 1674, however, he joined the 
Empire, the United Provinces and Spain, and in return for a 
subsidy, fought against France in Alsace. Meanwhile Louis had 
instigated the Swedes to invade Brandenburg, which had been 
left to the care of John George II., prince of Anhalt-Dessau. 
Hastening from Franconia to defend the electorate, Frederick 
William gained a complete victory over a superior number of 
the enemy at Fehrbellin on the 28th of June 1675, a great and 
glorious day for the arms of Brandenburg. Aided by the 
imperialists and the Danes, he followed up this success, and 
cleared Brandenburg and Pomerania of the Swedes, capturing 
Stettin in 1677 and Stralsund in 1678, while an attack made by 
Sweden on Prussia was successfully repelled. The general peace 
of Nijmwegen was followed by the treaty of St Germain-en-Laye 
in June 1679 between Sweden and Brandenburg. Owing, 
however, to the insistence of Louis XIV. and the indifference, 
or weakness, of the emperor Leopold I., the elector was forced 
to restore western Pomerania to Sweden, in return for the pay- 
ment of 300,000 crowns by France. This'feebleness on the part 
of his ally induced Frederick William to listen more readily to 
the overtures of Louis, and in 1679, and again in 1681, he bound 
himself to support the interests of France. He had, moreover, 
a further grievance against the emperor as Leopold refused to 
recognize his right to the Silesian duchies of Liegnitz, Brieg and 
Wohlau, which had been left without a ruler in 1675. About 
1684, however, the foreign policy of Brandenburg underwent 
another change. Disliking the harshness shown by Louis to the 
Protestants, the elector concluded an alliance with William, 
prince of Orange, in August 1685; and entered into more friendly 
relations with the emperor. Further incensed against France 
by the revocation of the edict of Nantes in 1685, he made an 
alliance with Leopold in January 1686, agreeing in return for 
a subsidy to send troops against the Turks. Soon afterwards he 
received Schwiebus to compensate him for abandoning his claim 
on the Silesian duchies, and in a secret treaty made promises 
of support to Leopold. The great elector died in May 1688, 
leaving his territories to his eldest son, Frederick. 

The remarkable services of Frederick William to his country 
can best be judged by comparing its condition in 1640 with that 
in 1688. At his accession the greatter part of his territory was 
occupied by strangers and devastated by war, and in European 
politics Brandenburg was merely an appendage of the empire. 
Its army was useless; its soil was poor; its revenue was insignifi- 
cant. At his death the state of Brandenburg-Prussia was a 
power to be reckoned with in all European combinations. 
Inferior to Austria alone among the states of the Empire, it was 
regarded as the head of the German Protestantism; while the fact 
that one-third of its territory lay outside the Empire added to 
its importance. Its area had been increased to over 40,000 
sq. m.; its revenue had multiplied sevenfold; and its small 
army was unsurpassed for efficiency. The elector Jiad overthrown 
Sweden and inherited her position on the Baltic, and had offered 
a steady and not ineffectual resistance to the ambition of France. 

While thus winning for himself a position in the councils of 
Europe, Frederick William was not less active in strengthening 
the central authority within his own dominions. He found 
Brandenburg a constitutional state, in which the legislative 
power was shared between the elector and the diet; he left it 
to his successor substantially an absolute monarchy. Many 
circumstances assisted to bring about this change, among the 
chief of which were the want of harmonious action on the part 
of the estates, and the decline in the political power of the towns. 
The substitution of a permanent excise for the subsidies granted 
from time to time by the estates also tended to increase his 
independence, and the officials or Steuerrathe, appointed by him 
to collect this tax in the towns, gradually absorbed many bf 



4-26 



BRANDENBURG 



the administrative functions of the local authorities. The nobles 
and prelates generally preferred to raise their share of the revenue 
by the old method of a bede, or contribution, thus weakening 
the remaining bond between them and the burghers. 

In matters of general administration Frederick William showed 
himself a prudent and careful ruler, and laid the foundation of 
the future greatness of Prussia in almost every department. 
The wounds inflicted by the Thirty Years' War were in a great 
measure healed, and the finances and credit of the state were 
established on a firm basis. Agriculture and commerce were 
improved and encouraged by a variety of useful measures, and 
in this connexion the settlement of a large number of Flemings, 
and the welcome extended to French Protestants, both before 
and after the revocation of the edict of Nantes, were of incalcul- 
able service. A small but efficient navy was founded, and strict 
economy, together with increasing resources, enabled a dis- 
ciplined army to be maintained. Education was not neglected, 
a trading company was established, and colonies were founded 
on the west coast of Africa. In religious matters Calvinists and 
Lutherans were placed upon an equality, but the elector was 
unablei to impress his own spirit of tolerance upon the clergy, 
who were occupied with ecclesiastical squabbles while the state 
of education and of public morals left much to be desired. The 
condition of the peasantry, however, during this reign reached 
its lowest point, and the " recess," or charter, of 1653 practically 
recognizes the existence of villenage. While the nobles had been 
losing power with regard to the ruler they had been increasing 
it at the expense of the peasants. The Thirty Years' War afforded 
them frequent opportunities of replacing the village Schulzen, 
or magistrates, with officials of their own; and the fact that their 
share of taxation was wholly wrung from the peasants made the 
burden of the latter much heavier than that of the townsmen. 

The new elector, Frederick III., followed in general the policy 
of his father. Having persuaded his step-brothers to surrender 
the principalities bequeathed to them by the great 
Frederick e i ec t r, he assisted William of Orange to make his 
descent on England; then in 1688 allied himself with 
other German princes against Louis XIV., and afterwards 
fought for the Empire against both France and Turkey. Before 
he became elector Frederick had promised the emperor that he 
would restore Schwiebus, and he was now called upon to fulfil 
this engagement, which after some murmuring he did in 1695. 
This fact, however, together with some slights put upon him at 
the peace of 1697, led him to look with less favour upon imperial 
interests. Frederick's chief adviser about this time was Eberhard 
Danckelmann (1643-1722)", whose services in continuing the 
reforming work of the great elector were very valuable; but 
having made many enemies, the electress Sophia among them, 
he fell from power in 1697, and was imprisoned for several years. 
The most important work of the elector was to crown the labours 
of his father by securing the kingly title for himself and his 
descendants. Broached in 1692 this matter was brought up 
again in 1698 when the emperor and his ministers, faced with 
the prospect of a fight over the Spanish succession, were anxious 
to conciliate Brandenburg. It was at length decided that the 
title should be taken from Prussia rather than from Brandenburg 
as the former country lay outside the Empire, and in return 
Frederick promised to assist Leopold with 8000 men. The 
coronation ceremony took place at Konigsberg on the 18th of 
January 1701. The territorial additions to Brandenburg during 
this reign were few and unimportant, but the comparative wealth 
and prosperity enabled the elector to do a good deal for education, 
and to spend some money on buildings. In 1694 the university 
of Halle was founded; academies for arts and sciences were 
established, and Berlin was greatly improved. The subsequent 
history of Brandenburg is merged in that of Prussia (q.v.). 

Bibliography. — H. Brosien, Geschichte der Mark Brandenburg 
im Mittelalter (Leipzig, 1887); G- G. Kiister, Bibliotheca historica 
Brandenburgensis (Breslau, 1743); and Accessiones (Breslau, 1768), 
and Collectio opusculorum historiam marchicam illustrantium 
(Breslau, 1731— 1733) ; A. Voss and G. Stimming, Vorgeschichtliche 
Alterthiimer aus der Mark Brandenburg (Berlin, 1886-1890); F. 
Voigt, Geschichte des brandenburgisch-preussischen Staats (Berlin, 



1878); E. Berner, Geschichte des preussischen Staats (Berlin, 1890- 
1891); A. F. Riedel, Codex diplomaticus Brandenburgensis (Berlin, 
1838-1865); J. Heidemann, Die Reformation in der Mark Branden- 
burg (Berlin, 1889) ; Forschungen zur brandenburgischen und 
preussischen Geschichte, edited by R. Koser (Leipzig, 1888 fol.); 
T. Carlyle, History of Frederick the Great, vol. i. (London, 1858); 
J.G.Droysen, Geschichte der preussischen Politik (Berlin, 1855-1886) ; 
E. Lavisse, Etude sur une des origines de la monarchic prussienne 
(Paris, 1875) ; B. Gebhardt, Handbuch der deutschen Geschichte, 
Band ii. (Leipzig, 1901). (A. W. H.*) 

BRANDENBURG, the central and one of the largest provinces 
of Prussia, consisting of a part of the former electorate of 
Brandenburg from which it derives its name. With the other 
territories of the elector of Brandenburg, it was merged in 1701 
in the kingdom of Prussia, and when the administration of 
Prussia was reformed in 1815, Brandenburg became one of the 
provinces of Prussia. The boundaries of the new province, 
however, differed considerably from those of the old district. 
The old mark, the district on the left bank of the Elbe, was added 
to the province of Saxony, and in return a district to the south, 
taken from the kingdom of Saxony, was added to the pro- 
vince of Brandenburg. It has an area of 15,382 sq. m., and is 
divided into the two governments of Potsdam and Frankfort- 
on-Oder; the capital, Berlin, forming a separate jurisdiction. 
The province is a sandy plain interspersed with numerous fertile 
districts and considerable stretches of woodland, mostly pine and 
fir. Its barrenness was formerly much exaggerated, when it 
was popularly described as the " sandbox of the Holy Roman 
Empire." It is generally well watered by tributaries of its two 
principal rivers, the Elbe and the Oder, and is besides remarkable 
for the number of its lakes, of which it contains between 600 and 
700. The mineral products comprise lignite, limestone, gypsum, 
alum and potter's earth; barley and rye are the usual cereals; 
fruits and vegetables are abundant; and considerable quantities 
of hemp, flax, hops and tobacco are raised. The breeding of 
sheep receives much attention, and the province exports wool in 
considerable quantity. Bees are largely kept, and there is an 
abundance of game. The rivers and lakes also furnish fish, 
particularly carp, of excellent quality. The climate is cold and 
raw in winter, excessively hot in summer, and there are 
frequently violent storms of wind. The manufacturing industry 
of the province is both varied and extensive, but is for the most 
part concentrated in the principal towns. The most important 
branches are the spinning and weaving of wool and cotton, the 
manufacturing of paper, and the distillation of brandy. Pop. 
(1895) 2,821,695; (1905) 3,529,839. 

BRANDENBURG, a town of Germany, capital of the district 
and province of same name, on the river Havel, 36 m. S.W. 
from Berlin, on the main line to Magdeburg and the west. Pop. 
(1905) 51,251, including 3643 military. The town is enclosed by 
walls, and is divided into three parts by the river — the old town 
on the right and the new town on the left bank, while on an 
island between them is the " cathedral town," — and is also called, 
from its position, " Venice." Many of the houses are built on 
piles in the river. There are five old churches (Protestant), all 
more or less noteworthy. These are the Katharinenkirche (nave 
1381-1401, choir c. 1410, western tower 1583-1585), a Gothic 
brick church with a fine carved wooden altar and several interest- 
ing medieval tombs; the Petrikirche (14th century Gothic); the 
cathedral (Domkirche), originally a Romanesque basilica (11 70), 
but rebuilt in the Gothic style in the 14th century, with a good 
altar-piece (1465), &c, and noted for its remarkable collection of 
medieval vestments; the Gothardskirche, partly Romanesque 
(1160), partly Gothic (1348); the Nikolaikirche (12th and 13th 
centuries), now no longer used. There is also a Roman Catholic 
church. Of other buildings may be mentioned the former town 
hall of the " old town " (Altstadt Rathaus), built in the 13th and 
14th centuries, now used as government offices; the new Real- 
gymnasium; and the town hall in the Neustadt, before which, in 
the market-place, stands a Rolandssaule, a colossal figure 18 ft. 
in height, hewn out of a single block of stone. A little north of 
the town is the Marienberg, or Harlungerberg, on which the 
heathen temple of Triglaff and afterwards the church and convent 
of St Mary were built. On the top stands a lofty monument 



BRANDER— BRANDING 



427 



to the soldiers from the Mark who fell in the wars of 1864, 
1866 and 1870-71. The town has a considerable trade, with 
manufactures of woollens, silks, linens, hosiery and paper, as well 
as breweries, tanneries, boat-building and bicycle factories. 

Brandenburg, originally Brennaburg (Brennabor) or Brendan- 
burg, was originally a town of the Slavic tribe of the Hevelli, 
from whom it was captured (927-928) by the German king 
Henry I. In 948 Otto I. founded a bishopric here, which was 
subordinated first to the archdiocese of Mainz, but from 968 
onwards to the newly created archbishopric of Magdeburg. It 
was, however, destroyed by the heathen Wends in 983, and was 
only restored when Albert the Bear recaptured the town from 
them in 1153. In 1539 the bishop of Brandenburg, Matthias 
von Jagow, embraced the Lutheran faith, and five years 
later the Protestant worship was established in the cathedral. 
The see was administered by the elector of Brandenburg until 
1598 and then abolished, its territories being for the most part 
incorporated in the electoral domains. The cathedral chapter, 
however, survived, and though suppressed in 18 10, it was restored 
in 1824. It consists of twelve canons, of whom three only are 
spiritual, the other nine prebends being held by noblemen; all 
are in the gift of the king of Prussia. 

The " old " and " new " towns of Brandenburg were for 
centuries separate towns, having been united under a single 
municipality so late as 171 7. 

See Schillmann, Geschichte der Stadt Brandenburg (Brandenburg, 
1874-1882). 

BRANDER, GUSTAVUS (1720-1787), English naturalist, who 
came of a Swedish family, was born in London in 1720, and was 
brought up as a merchant, in which capacity he achieved success 
and became a director of the Bank of England. His leisure time 
was occupied in scientific pursuits, and at his country residence 
at Christchurch in Hampshire he became interested in the fossils 
so abundant in the clays of Hordwell and Barton. A set of 
these was presented by him to the British Museum, and they 
were described by D. C. Solander in the beautifully illustrated 
work entitled Fossilia Hantoniensia collecta, et in Musaeo Britan- 
nico deposita a Gustavo Brander (London, 1766). Brander was 
elected F.R.S. in 1754, and he was also a trustee of the British 
Museum. He died on the 21st of January 1787. 

BRANDES, GEORG MORRIS COHEN (1842- ), Danish 
critic and literary historian, was born in Copenhagen on the 
4th of February 1842. He became a student in the university 
in 1859, and first studied jurisprudence. From this, however, his 
maturer taste soon turned to philosophy and aesthetics. In 1862 
he won the gold medal of the university for an essay on The 
Nemesis Idea among the Ancients. Before this, indeed since 1858, 
he had shown a remarkable gift for verse-writing, the results of 
which, however, were not abundant enough to justify separate 
publication. Brandes, indeed, did not collect his poems till so late 
as 1898. At the university, which he left in 1864, Brandes was 
much under the influence of the writings of Heiberg in criticism 
and Soren Kierkegaard in philosophy, influences which have 
continued to leave traces on his work. In 1866 he took part in 
the controversy raised by the works of Rasmus Nielsen in a 
treatise on " Dualism in our Recent Philosophy." From 1865 
to 1 87 1 he travelled much in Europe, acquainting himself with 
the condition of literature in the principal centres of learning. 
His first important contribution to letters was his Aesthetic 
Studies (1868), in which, in several brief monographs on Danish 
poets, his maturer method is already foreshadowed. In 1870 
he published several important volumes, The French Aesthetics 
of Our Days, dealing chiefly with Taine, Criticisms and Portraits, 
and a translation of The Subjection of Women of John Stuart Mill, 
whom he had met that year during a visit to England. Brandes 
now took his place as the leading critic of the north of Europe, 
applying to local conditions and habits of thought the methods 
of Taine. He became docent or reader in Belles Lettres at the 
university of Copenhagen, where his lectures were the sensation 
of the hour. On the professorship of Aesthetics becoming vacant 
in 1872, it was taken as a matter of course that Brandes would 
be appointed. But the young critic had offended many sus- 



ceptibilities by his ardent advocacy of modern ideas; he was 
known to be a Jew, he was convicted of being a Radical, he was 
suspected of being an atheist. The authorities refused to elect 
him, but his fitness for the post was so obvious that the chair 
of Aesthetics in the university of Copenhagen remained vacant, 
no one else daring to place himself in comparison with Brandes. 
In the midst of these polemics the critic began to issue the most 
ambitious of his works, Main Streams in the Literature of the 
Nineteenth Century, of which four volumes appeared between 
1872 and 1875 (English translation, 1901-1905). The brilliant 
novelty of this criticism of the literature of the chief countries 
of Europe at the beginning of the 19th century, and his descrip- 
tion of the general revolt against the pseudo-classicism of the 
18th century, at once attracted attention outside Denmark. The 
tumult which gathered round the person of the critic increased 
the success of the work, and the reputation of Brandes grew 
apace, especially in Germany and Russia. Among his later 
writings must be mentioned the monographs on Soren Kierke- 
gaard (1877), on Esaias Tegntr (1878), on Benjamin Disraeli 
(1878), Ferdinand Lassalle (in German, 1877), Ltidvig Holberg 
(1884), on Henrik Ibsen (1899) and on Anatole France (1905). 
Brandes has written with great fulness on the main contemporary 
poets and novelists of his own country and of Norway, and he 
and his disciples have long been the arbiters of literary fame in 
the north. His Danish Poets (1877), containing studies of Carsten 
Hauch, Ludwig Bodtcher, Christian Winther, and Paludan- 
Miiller, his Men of the Modern Transition (1883), and his Essays 
(1889), are volumes essential to the proper study of modern 
Scandinavian literature. He wrote an excellent book on Poland 
(1888; English translation, 1903), and was one of the editors of 
the German version of Ibsen. In 1877 Brandes left Copenhagen 
and settled in Berlin, taking a considerable part in the aesthetic 
life of that city. His political views, however, made Prussia 
uncomfortable for him, and he returned in 1883 to Copenhagen, 
where he found a whole new school of writers and thinkers eager 
to receive him as their leader. The most important of his recent 
works has been his study of Shakespeare (1897-1898), which was 
translated into English by William Archer, and at once took a 
high position. It was, perhaps, the most authoritative work on 
Shakespeare, not principally intended for an English-speaking 
audience, which had been published in any country. He was 
afterwards engaged on a history of modern Scandinavian litera- 
ture. In his critical work, which extends over a wider field than 
that of any other living writer, Brandes has been aided by 
a singularly charming style, lucid and reasonable, enthusiastic 
without extravagance, brilliant and coloured without affectation. 
His influence on the Scandinavian writers of the 'eighties was very 
great, but a reaction, headed by Holger Drachmann, against 
his " realistic " doctrines, began in 1885 (see Denmark: Litera- 
ture). In 1900 he collected his works for the first time in a com- 
plete and popular edition, and began to superintend a German 
complete edition in 1902. 

His brother Edvard Brandes (b. 1847), also a well-known 
critic, was the author of a number of plays, and of two psycho- 
logical novels: A Politician (1889), and Young Blood (1899). 

BRANDING (from Teutonic brinnan, to burn), in criminal law 
a mode of punishment; also a method of marking goods or 
animals; in either case by stamping with a hot iron. The 
Greeks branded their slaves with a Delta, A, for AoOXos. 
Robbers and runaway slaves were marked by the Romans with 
the letter F (fur, fugitivus) ; and the toilets in the mines, and 
convicts condemned to figure in gladiatorial shows, were branded 
on the forehead for identification. Under Constantine the face 
was not permitted to be so disfigured, the branding being on 
the hand, arm or calf. The canon law sanctioned the punishment, 
and in France galley-slaves could be branded " TF " (travaux 
force's) until 1832. In Germany, however, branding was illegal. 
The punishment was adopted by the Anglo-Saxons, and the 
ancient law of England authorized the penalty. By the Statute 
of Vagabonds (1547) under Edward VI. vagabonds, gipsies and 
brawlers were ordered to be branded, the first two with a large 
V on the breast, the last with F for " fraymaker." Slaves, too, 



428 



BRANDIS— BRANDY 



who ran away were branded with S on cheek or forehead. This 
law was repealed in 1636. From the time of Henry VII. branding 
was inflicted for all offences which received benefit of clergy (q.v.), 
but it was abolished for such in 1822. In 1698 it was enacted 
that those convicted of petty theft or larceny, who were entitled 
to benefit of clergy, should be " burnt in the most visible part of 
the left cheek, nearest the nose." This special ordinance was 
repealed in 1707. James Nayler, the mad Quaker, who in the 
year 1655 claimed to be the Messiah, had his tongue bored 
through and his forehead branded B for blasphemer. 

In the Lancaster criminal court a branding-iron is still pre- 
served in the dock. It is a long bolt with a wooden handle at 
one end and an M (malefactor) at the other. Close by are two 
iron loops for firmly securing the hands during the operation. 
The brander, after examination, would turn to the judge and 
exclaim, " A fair mark, my lord." Criminals were formerly 
ordered to hold up their hands before sentence to show if they 
had been previously convicted. 

Cold branding or branding with cold irons became in the 
18th century the mode of nominally inflicting the punishment 
on prisoners of higher rank. " When Charles Moritz, a young 
German, visited England in 1782 he was much surprised at this 
i. 11s torn, and in his diary mentioned the case of a clergyman who 
had fought a duel and killed his man in Hyde Park. Found 
guilty of manslaughter he was burnt in the hand, if that could 
be called burning which was done with a cold iron " (Markham's 
Ancient Punishments of Northants, 1886). Such cases led to 
branding becoming obsolete, and it was abolished in 1820 except 
in the case of deserters from the army. These were marked with 
the letter D, not with hot irons but by tattooing with ink or 
gunpowder. Notoriously bad soldiers were also branded with 
BC (bad character). By the British Mutiny Act of 1858 it was 
enacted that the court-martial, in addition to any other penalty, 
may order deserters to be marked on the left side, 2 in. below 
the armpit, with the letter J), such letter to be not less than 1 in. 
long. In 1879 this was abolished. 

See W. Andrews, Old Time Punishments (Hull, 1890) ; A. M. Earle, 
Curious Punishments of Bygone Days (London, 1896). 

BRANDIS, CHRISTIAN AUGUST (1 790-1867), German 
philologist and historian of philosophy, was born at Hildesheim 
and educated at Kiel University. In 181 2 he graduated at 
Copenhagen, with a thesis Commentationes Eleaticae (a collection 
of fragments from Xenophanes, Parmenides and Melissus) . For 
a time he studied at Gottingen, and in 181 5 presented as his 
inaugural dissertation at Berlin his essay Von dem Begriff der 
Geschichte der Philosophie. In 18 16 he refused an extraordinary 
professorship at Heidelberg in order to accompany B. G. Niebuhr 
to Italy as secretary to the Prussian embassy. Subsequently 
he assisted I. Bekker in the preparation of his edition of Aristotle. 
In 182 1 he became professor of philosophy in the newly founded 
university of Bonn, and in 1823 published his Aristotelius et 
Theophrasti Metaphysica. With Boeckh and Niebuhr he edited 
the Rheinisches Museum, to which he contributed important 
articles on Socrates (1827, 1829). In 1836-1839 he was tutor 
to the young king Otho of Greece. His great work, the Handbuch 
der Geschichte der griechisch-rom. Philos. (1835-1866; republished 
in a smaller and more systematic form, Gesch. d. Enlwickelungen 
d. griech. Philos., 1862-1866), is characterized by sound criticism. 
Brandis died on the 21st of July 1867. 

See Trendelenburg, Zur Erinnerung an C. A. B. (Berlin, 1868). 

BRANDON, a city and port of entry of Manitoba, Canada, on 
the Assiniboine river, and the Canadian Pacific and Canadian 
Northern railways, situated 132 m. W. of Winnipeg, 1184 ft. 
above the sea. Pop. (1891) 3778; (1907) 12,519. It is in one 
of the finest agricultural sections and contains a government 
experimental farm, grain elevators, saw and grist mills. It was 
first settled in 1881, and incorporated as a city in 1882. 

BRANDON, a market town in the Stowmarket parliamentary 
division of Suffolk, England, on the Little Ouse or Brandon 
river, 865 m. N.N.E. from London by the Ely-Norwich line of 
the Great Eastern railway. Pop. (1901) 2327. The church of 
St Peter is Early English with earlier portions; there is a free 



grammar school founded in 1646; and the town has some 
carrying trade by the Little Ouse in corn, coal and timber. 
Rabbit skins of fine texture are dressed and exported. Extensive 
deposits of flint are worked in the neighbourhood, and the work 
of the " flint-knappers " has had its counterpart here from the 
earliest eras. of man. Close to Brandon, but in Norfolk across 
the river, at the village of Weeting, are the so-called Grimes' 
Graves, which, long supposed to show the foundations of a 
British village, and probably so occupied, were proved by exca- 
vation to have been actually neolithic flint workings. The pits, 
though almost completely filled up (probably as they became 
exhausted), were sunk through the overlying chalk to the depth 
of 20 to 60 ft., and numbered 254 in all. Passages branched out 
from them, and among other remains picks of deer-horn were 
discovered, one actually bearing in the chalk which coated it 
the print of the workman's hand. 

BRANDY, an alcoholic, potable spirit, obtained by the dis- 
tillation of grape wine. The frequently occurring statement 
that the word " brandy " is derived from the High German 
Brannlwein is incorrect, inasmuch as the English word (as 
Fairley has pointed out) is quite as old as any of its continental 
equivalents. It is simply an abbreviation of the Old English 
brandewine, brand-wine or brandy wine, the word " brand " being 
common to all the Teutonic languages of northern Europe, mean- 
ing a thing burning or that has been burnt. John Fletcher's 
Beggar's Bush (1622) contains the passage, " Buy brand wine "; 
and from the Roxburgh Ballads (1650) we have " It is more fine 
than brandewine." The word " brandy " came into familiar 
use about the middle of the 17 th century, but the expression 
" brandywine " was retained in legal documents until 1702 
(Fairley). Thus in 1697 (View Penal Laws, 173) there occurs 
the sentence, " No aqua vitae or brandywine shall be imported 
into England." The British Pharmacopoeia formerly defined 
French brandy, which was the only variety mentioned (officially 
spiritus vini gallici), as " Spirit distilled from French wine; it has 
a characteristic flavour, and a light sherry colour derived from 
the cask in which it has been kept." In the latest edition the 
Latin title spiritus vini gallici is retained, but the word French 
is dropped from the text, which now reads as follows: " A 
spirituous liquid distilled from wine and matured by age, and 
containing not less than 36! % by weight or 43 1 % by volume 
of ethyl hydroxide." The United States Pharmacopoeia (1905), 
retains the Latin expression spiritus vini gallici (English title 
Brandy), defined as " an alcoholic liquid obtained by the dis- 
tillation of the fermented, unmodified juice of fresh grapes." 

Very little of the brandy of commerce corresponds exactly to 
the former definition of the British Pharmacopoeia as regards 
colouring matter, inasmuch as trade requirements necessitate 
the addition of a small quantity of caramel (burnt sugar) colouring 
to the spirit in the majority of cases. The object of this is, as 
a rule, not that of deceiving the consumer as to the apparent 
age of the brandy, but that of keeping a standard article of 
commerce at a standard level of colour. It is practically 
impossible to do this without having recourse to caramel colour- 
ing, as, practically speaking, the contents of any cask will always 
differ slightly, and often very appreciably, in colour intensity 
from the contents of another cask, even though the age and 
quality of the spirits are identical. 

The finest brandies are produced in a district covering an area 
of rather less than three million acres, situated in the departments 
of Charente and Charente Inferieure, of which the centre is the 
town of Cognac. It is generally held that only brandies produced 
within this district have a right to the name " cognac." The 
Cognac district is separated into district zones of production, 
according to the quality of the spirit which each yields. In the 
centre of the district, on the left bank of the Charente, is the 
Grande Champagne, and radiating beyond it are (in order of merit 
of the spirit produced) the Petite Champagne, the Borderies (or 
Premiers Bois), the Fins Bois, the Bons Bois, the Bois Ordinaires, 
and finally the Bois communs dits a terroir. Many hold that the 
brandy produced in the two latter districts is not entitled to 
the name of " cognac, " but this is a matter of controversy, as 



BRANDY 



429 



is also the question as to whether another district called the 
Grande Fine Champagne, namely, that in the immediate neigh- 
bourhood of the little village of Juillac-le-Coq, should be added to 
the list. The pre-eminent quality of the Cognac brandies is largely 
due to the character of the soil, the climate, and the scientific 
and systematic cultivation of the vines. For a period — from the 



which increases with age, furfural, which decreases, and small 
quantities of other matters of which we have as yet little 
knowledge. 

The table gives analyses, by the present author (excepting 
No . 3 , which is by F. Lusson) , of undoubtedly genuine commercial 
cognac brandies of various ages. 



Genuine Cognac Brandies. 
(Excepting the alcohol, results are expressed in grammes per 100 litres of absolute alcohol.) 



Age, &c. 



Alcohol 
% by vol. 



Total 
Acid. 



Non-volatile 
Acid. 



Esters. 



" Higher 
Alcohols." 



Aldehyde. 



Furfural. 



New 1904 .... 
New, still heated by steam coil 

New 

Five years old, 1900 vintage 
1875 vintage, pale 



1. 

12. 

4- 

5- . . . .. . 

j 6. 1848 vintage, brown 



6i-7 
56-3 
677 

577 
467 

38-5 



45 
22 

5i 
92 

144 
254 



5 
4 

37 

37 

109 



82 
61 
158 
125 
177 
190 



125 
100 

.152 
261 



3 
6 

55 
32 



2-3 

1-2 

1-3 

1-0 
2-1 



Note. — In the above table the acid is expressed in terms of acetic acid, the esters are expressed as ethyl acetate, and the aldehyde 
as acetaldehyde. The " Higher Alcohol " figures do not actually represent these substances, but indicate the relative coloration 
obtained with sulphuric acid when compared with an iso-butyl standard under certain conditions. 



middle ' seventies to the 'nineties of the 19th century — the cognac 
industry was, owing to the inroads of the phylloxera, threatened 
with almost total extinction, but after a lengthy series of experi- 
ments, a system of replanting and hybridizing, based on the 
characteristics of the soils of the various districts, was evolved, 
which effectually put a stop to the further progress of the disease. 
In 1907 the area actually planted with the vine in the Cognac 
district proper was about 200,000 acres, and the production of 
cognac brandy, which, however, varies widely in different years, 
may be put down at about five million gallons per annum. The 
latter figure is based on the amount of wine produced in the two 
Charentes (about forty-five million gallons in 1905). 

Brandy is also manufactured in numerous other districts in 
France, and in general order of commercial merit may be men- 
tioned the brandies of Armagnac, Marmande, Nantes and Anjou. 
The brandies commanding the lowest prices are broadly known 
as the Tro is-S ix de Monlpellier. In a class by themselves are the 
Eaux-de-vic de Marc, made from the wine pressings or from the 
solid residues of the stills. Some of these, particularly those made 
in Burgundy, have characteristic qualities, and are considered 
by many to be very fine. The consumption is chiefly local. 
Brandy of fair quality is also made in other wine-producing 
countries, particularly in Spain, and of late years colonial 
(Australian and Cape) brandies have attracted some attention. 
The comsumption of brandy in the United Kingdom amounts to 
about two million gallons. 

Brandy, in common with other potable spirits, owes its flavour 
and aroma to the presence of small quantities of substances 
termed secondary or by-products (sometimes "impurities"). 
These are dissolved in the ethyl alcohol and water which form 
over 99 % of the spirit. The nature and quantity of all of these 
by-products have not yet been fully ascertained, but the know- 
ledge in this direction is rapidly progressing. Ch. Ordonneau 
fractionally distilled 100 litres of 25-year-old cognac brandy, 
and obtained the following substances and quantities thereof: — 

Grammes in 
100 Litres. 

Normal propyl alcohol 40-0 

Normal butyl alcohol 218-6 

Amyl alcohol 83-8 

Hexyl alcohol 0-6 

Heptyl alcohol 1-5 

Ethyl acetate 35-0 

Ethyl propionate, butyrate and caproate . . 3-0 

Oenanthic ether (about) 4-0 

Aldehyde 3'0 

Acetal traces 

Amines traces 

Most of the above substances, in fact probably all of them, 
excepting the oenanthic ether, are contained in other spirits, 
such as whisky and rum. The oenanthic ether (ethyl pelar- 
gonate) is one of the main characteristics which enable us 
chemically to differentiate between brandy and other distilled 
liquors. Brandy also contains a certain quantity of free acid, 



Storage and Maturation. — Brandy is stored in specially selected 
oak casks, from which it extracts a certain quantity of colouring 
matter and tannin, &c. Commercial cognac brandies are gener- 
ally blends of different growths and vintages, the blending being 
accomplished in large vats some little time prior to bottling. 
The necessary colouring and sweetening matter is added in the 
vat. In the case of pale brandies very little colouring and 
sweetening are added, the usual quantity being in the neighbour- 
hood of I to 1 %. Old " brown brandies," which are nowadays 
not in great demand, require more caramel and sugar than do 
the pale varieties. The preparation of the "liqueur," as the 
mixed caramel and sugar syrup is termed, is an operation requir- 
ing much experience, and the methods employed are kept strictly 
secret. Fine " liqueur " is prepared with high-class brandy, 
and is stored a number of years prior to use. Brandy, as is well 
known, improves very much with age (for chemical aspects of 
maturation see Spirits), but this only holds good when the spirit 
is in wood, for there is no material appreciation in quality after 
bottling. It is a mistake to believe, however, that brandy 
improves indefinitely, even when kept in wood, for, as a matter 
of fact, after a certain time — which varies considerably according 
to the type of brandy, the vintage, &c. — there is so much evapora- 
tion of alcohol that a number of undesirable changes come about. 
The brandy begins to " go back," and becomes, as it is called, 
" worn " or " tired." It is necessary, therefore, that the bottling 
should not be deferred too long. Sometimes, for trade reasons, 
it is necessary to keep brandy in cask for a long period, and 
under these conditions the practice is to keep a series of casks, 
which are treated as follows: — The last cask is kept filled by 
occasionally adding some spirit from the cask next in order, 
the latter is filled up by spirit taken from the third cask from the 
end, and so on, until the first cask in the row is reached. The 
latter is filled up or " topped " with some relatively fresh spirit. 

Brandy is much employed medicinally as a food capable of 
supplying energy in a particularly labile form to the body, as 
a stimulant, carminative, and as a hypnotic. 

Adulteration. — A good deal has been written about the pre- 
paration of artificial brandy by means of the addition of essential 
oils to potato or beetroot spirit, but it is more than doubtful 
whether this practice was really carried on on a large scale 
formerly. What undoubtedly did occur was that much beet, 
potato or grain spirit was used for blending with genuine grape 
spirit. Prosecutions under the Food and Drugs Act, by certain 
English local authorities in the year 1904, resulted in the practical 
fixation of certain chemical standards which, in the opinion of 
the present writer, have, owing to their arbitrary and unscientific 
nature, resulted in much adulteration of a type previously 
non-existent. There is no doubt that at the present time 
artificial esters and higher alcohols, &c, are being used on an 
extensive scale for the preparation of cheap brandies, and the 
position, in this respect, therefore, has not been inproved. 
Where formerly fraud was practically confined to the blending 



43° 



BRANDYWINE— BRANKS 



of genuine brandy with spirit other than that derived from the 
grape, it is now enhanced by the addition of artificial essences 
to the blend of the two spirits. (P. S.) 

BRANDYWINE, the name of a stream in Pennsylvania and 
Delaware, U.S.A., which runs into the Delaware river a few 
miles east of Wilmington, Delaware. It is famous as the scene of 
the battle of Brandywine in the American War of Independence, 
fought on the nth of September 1777 about 10 m. north-west of 
Wilmington, and a few miles inside the Pennsylvania border. 
Sir William Howe, the British commander-in-chief, while opposed 
to Washington's army in New Jersey, had formed the plan of 
capturing Philadelphia from the south side by a movement by 
sea to the head of Delaware Bay. But contrary winds and 
accidents delayed the British transports so long that Washington, 
who was at first puzzled, was able to divine his opponents' 
intentions in time; and rapidly moving to the threatened point 
he occupied a strong entrenched position at the fords over the 
Brandywine, 25 m. south-west of Philadelphia. Here on the 
nth of September the British attacked him. Howe's plan, 
which was carefully worked out and exactly executed, was to 
deliver an energetic feint attack against the American front, 
to take a strong column 12 m. up the stream, and crossing 
beyond Washington's right to attack his entrenchments in rear. 
Washington was successfully held in play during the movement, 
and General Sullivan, the commander of the American right 
wing, misled by the conflicting intelligence which reached him 
from up-stream, was surprised about noon by definite information 
as to the approach of Cornwallis on his right rear. Changing 
front " right back " in the dense country, he yet managed to 
oppose a stubborn resistance to the flanking attack, and with 
other troops that were hurried to the scene his division held its 
ground for a time near Birmingham meeting-house. But Howe 
pressed his attack sharply and drove back the Americans for 
2 m. ; the holding attack of the British right was converted into 
a real one, and by nightfall Washington was in full retreat north- 
ward toward Chester, protected by General Greene and a steady 
rear-guard, which held off Howe's column for the necessary time. 
The British Were too exhausted to pursue, and part of Howe's 
force was inextricably mixed up with the advancing troops of 
the frontal attack. The American loss in killed, wounded and 
prisoners was about 1000; that of the British less than 600. 
Howe followed up his victory, and on the 27th of September 
entered Philadelphia. 

BRANFORD, a township, including a borough of the same 
name, in New Haven county, Connecticut, U.S.A., at the mouth 
of the Branford river and at the head of a short arm of Long 
Island Sound, about 7 m. E.S.E. of New Haven. Pop. of the 
township (1890) 4460; (1900) 5706 (1968 foreign-born) ;(i 910) 
6047; of the borough (1910) 2560. The borough is served by 
the New York, New Haven & Hartford railway, and by an 
electric line connecting with New Haven. A range of rocky hills 
commands fine views of the Sound, the shore is deeply indented, 
the harbour and bays are dotted with islands, and the harbour 
is deep enough for small craft, and these natural features attract 
many visitors during the summer season. In Branford is the 
James Blackstone Memorial library (1896), designed by Solon 
Spencer Beman (b. 1853) in the Ionic style (the details being 
taken from the Erechtheum at Athens). On the interior of the 
dome which covers the rotunda are a series of paintings by Oliver 
Dennett Grover (b. 1861) illustrating the evolution of book- 
making, and between the arches are medallion portraits, by the 
same artist, of New England authors — Longfellow, Emerson, 
Hawthorne, Lowell, Bryant, Whittier, Holmes and Mrs Stowe. 
The library was erected by Timothy B. Blackstone (1829-1900), 
a native of Branford, and president of the Chicago & Alton 
railway from 1864 to 1899 — as a memorial to his father, a 
descendant of William Blackstone (d. 1675), the New England 
pioneer. The principal industries of Branford are the manu- 
facture of malleable iron fittings, locks and general hardware, 
the quarrying of granite, and oyster culture. 

The territory of Totoket (now the township of Branford) was 
purchased from the Indians by the New Haven Plantation, in 



December 1638, for eleven coats of trucking cloth and one coat 
of English cloth, but with the reservation for a few Indians of 
what is still known as Indian Neck. In 1640 the general court 
of New Haven granted it to the Rev. Samuel Eaton (iS96?-i66s), 
a brother of Theophilus Eaton, on condition that he brought 
friends from England to settle it. As Eaton went to England 
and did not return, Totoket was granted in 1644 to settlers 
mostly from Wethersfield, Conn., on condition that they should 
organize a church state after the New Haven model and join 
the New Haven Jurisdiction. The settlement was made in 
the same year, and about two years later several new families 
came from Southampton, Long Island, under the leadership of 
the Rev. Abraham Pierson (c. 1608-1678), an ardent advocate of 
the church state, who was chosen pastor at Totoket. The present 
name of the township, derived from Brentford, England, was 
adopted about 1645. After the members of the New Haven 
Jurisdiction had submitted to Connecticut, Pierson, in 1666-1667, 
led the most prominent citizens of Branford to New Jersey, 
where they were leaders in founding Newark. The borough of 
Branford was incorporated in 1893. 

See E. C. Baldwin, Branford Annals, in Papers of New Haven 
Colony Historical Society (New Haven, 1882 and 1888). 

BRANGWYN, FRANK (1867- ), English painter, was born 
at Bruges, and received his first instruction from his father, the 
owner of an establishment for church embroideries and kindred 
objects, who took a leading part in the Gothic revival under 
Pugin. When the family moved to England, Brangwyn attracted 
the attention of William Morris by a drawing on which he was 
engaged at South Kensington museum. He worked for some 
time in Morris's studio, and then travelled more than once to the 
East, whereby his sense of colour and the whole further develop- 
ment of his art became deeply influenced. Indeed, the impres- 
sions he then received, and his love of Oriental decorative art — 
tiles and carpets — exercised a greater influence on him than any 
early training or the works of any European master. His whole 
tendency is essentially decorative: a colour-sense of sumptuous 
richness is wedded to an equally strong sense of well-balanced, 
harmonious design. These qualities, together with a summary 
suppression of the details which tie a subject to time and place, 
give his compositions a nobly impressive and universal character, 
such as may be seen in his decorative panel " Modern Commerce " 
in the ambulatory of the Royal Exchange, London. Among 
other decorative schemes executed by him are those for "L'Art 
nouveau" in the rue de Provence, Paris; for the hall of the 
Skinners' Company, London; and for the British room at the 
Venice International Exhibition, 1905. The Luxembourg 
museum has his " Trade on the Beach "; the Venice municipal 
museum, the "St Simon Stylites"; the Stuttgart gallery, the 
" St John the Baptist "; the Munich Pinakothek, the " Assisi "; 
the Carnegie Institute in Pittsburg, his " Sweetmeat Seller "; 
the Prague gallery, his " Turkish Boatmen "; and the National 
Gallery of New South Wales, " The Scoffers." Brangwyn 
embarked successfully in many fields of applied art, and made 
admirable designs for book decoration, stained glass, furniture, 
tapestry, metal-work and pottery. He devoted himself exten- 
sively to etching, and executed many plates of astonishing vigour 
and dramatic intensity. He was elected associate of the Royal 
Academy in 1904. 

BRANKS. (probably akin to Irish brancas, a halter; Ger. 
Pranger, fetter, pillory), or Scolding-Bridle, a contrivance 
formerly in use throughout England and Scotland for the 
punishment of scolding women. It is said to have originated in 
the latter country. It seems to have never been a legalized form 
of punishment; but corporations and lords of manors in England, 
town councils, kirk-sessions and barony courts in Scotland 
assumed a right to inflict it. While specially known as the 
" Gossip's or Scold's Bridle " the branks was also used for women 
convicted of petty offences, breaches of the peace, street-brawling 
and abusive language. It was the equivalent of the male punish- 
ments of the stocks and pillory. In its earliest form it consisted 
of a hoop head-piece of iron, opening by hinges at the side so as 
to enclose the head, with a flat piece of iron projecting inwards 



BRANT, J.— BRANTOME 



so as to fit into the mouth and press the tongue down. Later 
it was made, by a multiplication of hoops, more like a cage, the 
front forming a mask of iron with holes for mouth, nose and eyes. 
Sometimes the mouth-plate was armed with a short spike. With 
this on her head the offending woman was marched through the 
streets by the beadle or chained to the market-cross to be gibed 
at by passers. The date of origin is doubtful. It was used at 
Edinburgh in 1567, at Glasgow in 1574, but not before the 17th 
century in any English town. A brank in the church of Walton- 
on-Thames, Surrey, bears date 1633; while another in a private 
collection has the crowned cipher of William III. The Ashmolean 
Museum at Oxford, the Scottish National Museum of Antiquities 
at Edinburgh, the towns of Lichfield, Shrewsbury, Leicester 
and Chester have examples of the brank. As late as 1856 it 
was in use at Bolton-le-Moors, Lancashire. 

See W. Andrews, Old Time Punishments (Hull, 1890); A. M. 
Earle, Curious Punishments of Bygone Days (Chicago, 1896). 

BRANT, JOSEPH (1742-1807), American Indian chief of the 
Mohawk tribe, known also by his Indian name, Thayendanegea, 
was born on the banks of the Ohio river in 1742. In early youth 
he attracted the attention of Sir William Johnson, who sent him 
to be educated by Dr Eleazar Wheelock at Lebanon, Conn., in 
Moor's Indian charity school, in which Dartmouth College had 
its origin. He took part, on the side of the English, in the French 
and Indian War, and in 1763 fought with the Iroquois against 
Pontiac. Subsequently he settled at Canajoharie, or Upper 
Mohawk Castle (in what is now Montgomery county, New York), 
where, being a devout churchman, he devoted himself to 
missionary work, and translated the Prayer Book and St Mark's 
Gospel into the Mohawk tongue (1787). When Guy Johnson 
(1 740-1 788) succeeded his uncle, Sir William, as superintendent 
of Indian affairs in 1774, Brant became his secretary. At the 
outbreak of the War of Independence, he remained loyal, was 
commissioned colonel, and organized and led the Mohawks and 
other Indians allied to the British against the settlements on 
the New York frontier. He took part in the Cherry Valley 
Massacre, in the attack on Minisink and the expedition of General 
St Leger which resulted in the battle of Oriskany on the 6th of 
August 1777. After the war he discouraged the continuance of 
Indian warfare on the frontier, and aided the commissioners of 
the United States in securing treaties of peace with the Miamis 
and other western tribes. Settling in Upper Canada, he again 
devoted himself to missionary work and in 1786 visited England, 
where he raised funds with which was erected the first Episcopal 
church in Upper Canada. His character was a peculiar compound 
of the traits of an Indian warrior — with few rivals for daring 
leadership — and of a civilized politician and diplomat of the 
more conservative type. He died on an estate granted him by 
the British government on the banks of Lake Ontario on the 24th 
of November 1807. A monument was erected to his memory 
at Brantford, Ontario, Canada (named in his honour) in 1886. 

See W. L. Stone, Life of Joseph Brant (2 vols., New York, 1838; 
new ed., Albany, 1865) ; Edward Eggleston and Elizabeth E. Seelye, 
Brant and Red Jacket in " Famous American Indians " (New York, 
1879); and a Memoir (Brantford, 1872). 

BRANT, SEBASTIAN (1457-1521), German humanist and 
satirist, was born at Strassburg about the year 1457. He studied 
at Basel, took the degree of doctor of laws in 1489, and for some 
time held a professorship of jurisprudence there. Returning to 
Strassburg, he was made syndic of the town, and died on the 
10th of May 1521. He first attracted attention in humanistic 
circles by his Latin poetry, and edited many ecclesiastical and 
legal works; but he is now only known by his famous satire, 
Das Narrenschiff '(1494), a work the popularity and influence 
of which were not limited to Germany. Under the form of an 
allegory — a ship laden with fools and steered by fools to the fools' 
paradise of Narragcnia — Brant here lashes with unsparing vigour 
the weaknesses and vices of his time. Although, like most of the 
German humanists, essentially conservative in his religious views, 
Brant's eyes were open to the abuses in the church, and the 
Narrenschiff was a most effective preparation for the Protestant 
Reformation. Alexander Barclay's Ship of Fools (1500) is a 
free imitation of the German poem, and a Latin version by 



43 1 

Jacobus Locher (1497) was hardly less popular than the German 
original. There is also a large quantity of other " fool literature." 
Nigel, called Wireker (fl. 1190), a monk of Christ Church Priory, 
Canterbury, wrote a satirical Speculum stultorum, in which the 
ambitious and discontented monk figured as the ass Brunellus, 
who wanted a longer tail. Brunellus, who has been educated at 
Paris, decides to found an order of fools, which shall combine the 
good points of all the existing monastic orders. Cock Lovell's 
Bote (printed by Wynkyn de Worde, c. 1510) is another imitation 
of the Narrenschiff. Cock Lovell is a fraudulent currier who 
gathers round him a rascally collection of tradesmen. They sail 
off in a riotous fashion up hill and down dale throughout England. 
Brant's other works, of which the chief was a version of Freidank's 
Bescheidenheit (1508), are of inferior interest and importance. 

Brant's Narrenschiff has been edited by F. Zarncke (1854); by 
K. Goedeke (1872) ; and by F. Bobertag (Kiirschner's Deutsche 
Nationattiteratur, vol. xvi., 1889). A modern German translation 
was published by K. Simrock in 1872. On the influence of Brant 
in England see especially C. H. Herford, The Literary Relations of 
England and Germany in the 16th Century (1886). 

BRANTFORD, a city and port of entry of Ontario, Canada, 
on the Grand river, and on the Grand Trunk, and Toronto, 
Hamilton & Buffalo railways. The river is navigable to within 
2\ m. of the town; for the remaining distance a canal has been 
constructed. Agricultural implements, plough, engine, bicycle 
and stove works, potteries and large railway shops constitute 
the important industrial establishments. It contains an institute 
for the education of the blind, maintained by the provincial 
government, and a women's college. The city is named in honour 
of the Mohawk Indian chief, Joseph Brant (Thayendanegea), 
who settled in the neighbourhood after the American War 
of Independence, in which he had led the Six Nations (Iroquois) 
on the British side. The amalgamated tribes of the Six Nations 
still make it their headquarters, and a monument to Brant has 
been erected in Victoria Square. Brantford is one of the most 
flourishing industrial towns of the province, and its population 
rose from 9616 in 1881 to 20,713 in 1907. 

BRANTINGHAM, THOMAS DE (d. 1394), English lord 
treasurer and bishop of Exeter, came of a Durham family. 
An older relative, Ralph de Brantingham, had served Edward II. 
and Edward III., and Thomas was made a clerk in the treasury. 
Edward III-, obtained preferment for him in the church, and from 
1361 to 1368 he was employed in France in responsible positions. 
He was closely associated with William of Wykeham, and while 
the latter was in power as chancellor, Brantingham was lord 
treasurer (1369-1371, and 1377-1381), being made bishop of 
Exeter in 1370. He continued to play a prominent part in 
public affairs under Richard II., and in 1389 was again lord 
treasurer for a few months. He died in 1394 and was buried 
in Exeter cathedral. 

BRANT6ME, PIERRE DE BOURDEILLE, Seigneur and 
Abbe de (c. 1540-1614), French historian and biographer, was 
born in Perigord about 1 540. He was the third son of the baron 
de Bourdeille. His mother and his maternal grandmother were 
both attached to the court of Marguerite of Valois, and at her 
death in 1549 he went to Paris, and later (1555) to Poitiers, to 
finish his education. He was given several benefices, the most 
important of which was the abbey of Brantome (see below), but 
he had no inclination for an ecclesiastical career. At an early 
age he entered the profession of arms. He showed himself 
a brave soldier, and was brought into contact with most of 
the great leaders who were seeking fame or fortune in the 
wars that distracted the continent. He travelled much in 
Italy; in Scotland, where he accompanied Mary Stuart (then 
the widow of Francis I.); in England, where he saw Queen 
Elizabeth (1561, 1579); in Morocco (1564); and in Spain and 
Portugal. He fought on the galleys of the order of Malta, and 
accompanied his great friend, the French commander Philippe 
Strozzi (grandson of Filippo Strozzi, the Italian general, and 
nephew of Piero), in his expedition against Terceira, in which 
Strozzi was killed (1582). During the wars of religion under 
Charles IX. he fought in the ranks of the Catholics, but he 
allowed himself to be won over temporarily by the ideas of the 



432 



BRANTOME— BRASIDAS 



reformers, and though he publicly separated himself from 
Protestantism it had a marked effect on his mind. A fall from 
his horse compelled him to retire into private life about 1589, 
and he spent his last years in writing his Memoirs of the illustrious 
men and women whom he had known. He died on the 15th of July 
1614. 

Brantome left distinct orders that his manuscript should 
be printed; a first edition appeared, however, late (1665-1666) 
and not very complete. Of the later editions the most valuable 
are: one in 15 volumes (1740); another by Louis Jean Nicolas 
Monmerque (1780-1860) in 8 volumes (1821-1824), reproduced 
in Buchan's Pantheon litteraire; that of the -Bibliotheque elzi- 
virienne, begun (1858) by P. Merimee and L. Lacour, and finished, 
with vol. xiii., only in 1893; and Lalanne's edition for the 
Societe de l'Histoire de France (12 vols., 1864-1896). Brantome 
can hardly be regarded as a historian proper, and his Memoirs 
cannot be accepted as a very trustworthy source of information. 
But he writes in a quaint conversational way, pouring forth his 
thoughts, observations or facts without order or system, and 
with the greatest frankness and naivete\ His works certainly 
gave an admirable picture of the general court-life of the time, 
with its unblushing and undisguised profligacy. There is not 
a homme ittustre or a dame galanle in all his gallery of portraits 
who is not stained with vice; and yet the whole is narrated 
with the most complete unconsciousness that there is anything 
objectionable in their conduct. 

The edition of L. Lalanne has great merit, being the first to indicate 
the Spanish, Italian and French sources on which Brantome drew, 
but it did not utilize all the existing MSS. It was only after Lalanne's 
death that the earliest were obtained for the Bibliotheque Nationale. 
At Paris and at Chantilly (Musee Conde) all Brant6me's original 
MSS., as revised by him several times, are now collected (see the 
Bibliotheque de I'ecole des Charles, 1904), and a new and definitive 
edition has therefore become possible. Brant6me's poems (which 
amount to more than 2200 verses) were first published in 1881 ; see 
Lalanne's edition. 

BRANTOME, a town of south-western France, in the depart- 
ment of Dordogne, 20 m. N. by W. of Perigueux by steam- 
tramway. Pop. (1906) 1230. The town is built, in great part, 
on an island in the river Dronne. It is well known for the remains 
of an abbey founded by Charlemagne about 770 and afterwards 
destroyed by the Normans. The oldest existing portion is a 
square tower dating from the nth century, built upon a rock 
beside the church which it overlooks. It communicates by a 
staircase with the church, a rectangular building partly Roman- 
esque, partly Gothic, to the west of which are the remains of a 
cloister. The abbey buildings date from the 18th century, and 
now serve as hotel-de-ville, magistrature and schools. Caves in 
the neighbouring rocks were inhabited by the monks before the 
building of the abbey; one of them, used as an oratory, con- 
tains curious carvings, representing the Last Judgment and the 
Crucifixion. In the middle of the 16th century Pierre de Bour- 
deille came into possession of the abbey, from which he took the 
'name of Brantome. 

Brantome has some old houses and a church of the 15th 
century, which was once fortified and is now used as a market. 
Truffles are the chief article of commerce; and there are quarries 
of freestone in the neighbourhood. The dolmen which is known 
as Pierre-Levee, to the east of the town, is the most remarkable 
in Perigord. 

BRANXHOLM, or Branksome, a feudal castle, now modern- 
ized, and an ancient seat of the Buccleuchs, on the Teviot, 
3 m. S.W. of Hawick, Roxburgh, Scotland. It was at Branksome 
Hall that Sir Walter Scott laid the scene of The Lay of the Last 
Minstrel. 

BRANXTON, or Brankston, a village of Northumberland, 
England, io| m. E. by N. of Kelso, and 2 m. E.S.E. of Coldstream, 
and 10 m. N.W. of Wooler. It was on Branxton Hill, immedi- 
ately south of the village, that the battle of Flodden (q.v.) was 
fought between the English and the Scots on the 9th of September 
1513. During the fight the Scots centre pushed as far as 
Branxton church, but " the King's Stone," which lies N.W. of 
the church and is popularly supposed to mark the spot where 
James IV. fell, is some three-quarters of a mile from the scene 



of the battle; it is believed in reality to mark the sepulchre 
of a chieftain, whose name had already perished in the 16th 
century. Branxton church, dedicated to St Paul, was rebuilt 
in 1849 in Norman style. Of the older building nothing 
remains save the chancel arch. 

BRAOSE, WILLIAM DE (d. 1211), lord of Brecknock, Radnor 
and Limerick, spent the early part of his life fighting the Welsh 
in Radnorshire. He was high in King John's favour, received a 
large number of honours, and was even given the custody of 
Prince Arthur. But John and he quarrelled, probably over 
money (1207). In 1208 John began to suspect the fidelity of the 
whole family, and William had to fly to Ireland. After a number 
of attempted reconciliations, he was outlawed (1210) and died 
at Corbeil (12 n). It is said that his wife and son were starved 
to death by John. 

See Foedera, i. 107; Histoire des dues (ed. Michel), Wendover; 
Kate Norgate's John Lackland. 

A descendant, William de Braose (d. 1326), lord of Gower, 
was a devoted follower of Edward I., and in 1299 was summoned 
to parliament as baron de Braose; and his nephew Thomas 
de Braose (d. 1361) also distinguished himself in the wars and 
was summoned as baron de Braose in 1342. This latter barony 
became extinct in 1399; but a claim to the barony of William 
de Braose, which, as he had no son, fell into abeyance between 
his two daughters and co-heirs, Alina (wife of Lord Mowbray) 
and Joan (wife of John de Bohun), or their descendants, may 
still be traced by careful genealogists in various noble English 
families. 

BRASCASSAT, JACQUES RAYMOND (1804-1867), French 
painter, was born at Bordeaux, and studied art in Paris, where 
in 1825 he won a prix de Rome with a picture (" Chasse de 
Meleagre ") now in the Bordeaux gallery. He went to Italy 
and painted a number of landscapes which were exhibited 
between 1827 and 1835; but subsequently he devoted himself 
mainly to animal-painting, in which his reputation as an artist 
was made. His " Lutte de taureaux " (1837), in the musie 
at Nantes, and his " Vache attaquee par des loups " (1845), 
in the Leipzig museum, were perhaps the best of his pictures; 
but he was remarkable for his accuracy of observation and 
correct drawing. He was elected a member of the Institute 
in 1846. He died at Paris on the 28th of February 1867. 

BRAS D'OR, a landlocked and tideless gulf or lake of high 
irregular outline, 50 m. long by 20 m. broad, almost separating 
Cape Breton Island (province of Nova Scotia, Canada) into 
two parts. A ship canal across the isthmus (about 1 m. wide) 
completes the severance of the island. The entrance to the 
gulf is on the N.E. coast of the island, and it is connected with 
the Atlantic by the Great and Little Bras d'Or channels, which 
are divided by Boulardeire Island. One channel is 25 m. long 
and from J m. to 3 m. broad, but is of little depth, the other 
(used by shipping) is 22 m. long, 1 to if m. wide, and has a depth 
of 60 fathoms. The gulf or lake is itself divided into two basins, 
the inner waters being known as the Great Bras d'Or Lake. 
The waters are generally from 12 to 60 fathoms deep, but in 
the outer basin (known as the Little Bras d'Or Lake) are sound- 
ings said to reach nearly 700 ft. The shores of the gulf are very 
picturesque and well wooded and have attracted many tourists. 
Sea fishing (cod, mackerel, &c.) is the chief industry. The 
name is said to be a corruption of an Indian word, but it assumed 
its present form during the French occupation of Cape Breton 
Island. 

BRASDOR, PIERRE (1721-1799), French surgeon, was born 
in the province of Maine. He took his degree in Paris as master 
of surgery in 1752, and was appointed regius professor of anatomy 
anddirector of the Academy of Surgery. He was a skilful operator, 
whose name was long attached to a ligature of his invention; 
and he was an ardent advocate of inoculation. He died in Paris 
on the 28th of September 1799. 

BRASIDAS (d.422 B.C.), a Spartan officer during the first 
decade of the Peloponnesian War. He was the son of Tellis and 
Argileonis, and won his first laurels by the relief of Methone, 
which was besieged by the Athenians (431 B.C.). During the 



BRASS 



433 



following year he seems to have been eponymous ephor (Xen. 
Hell. ii. 3, 10), and in 429 he was sent out as one of the three 
commissioners (<ruuj3oi;Xoi) to advise the admiral Cnemus. As 
trierarch he distinguished himself in the assault on the Athenian 
position at Pylos, during which he was severely wounded (Thuc. 
iv. 11. 12). 

In the next year, while Brasidas mustered a force at Corinth 
for a campaign in Thrace, he frustrated an Athenian attack on 
Megara (Thuc. iv. 70-73), and immediately afterwards marched 
through Thessaly at the head of 700 helots and 1000 Pelopon- 
nesian mercenaries to join the Macedonian king Perdiccas. 
Refusing to be made a tool for the furtherance of Perdiccas's 
ambitions, Brasidas set about the accomplishment of his main 
object, and, partly by the rapidity and boldness of his movements, 
partly by his personal charm and the moderation of his demands, 
succeeded during the course of the winter in winning over the 
important cities of Acanthus, Stagirus, Amphipolis and Torone 
as well as a number of minor towns. An attack on Eion was 
foiled by the arrival of Thucydides, the historian, at the head 
of an Athenian squadron. In the spring of 423 a truce was con- 
cluded between Athens and Sparta, but its operation was at once 
imperilled by Brasidas's refusal to give up Scione, which, the 
Athenian partisans declared, revolted two days after the truce 
began, and by his occupation of Mende shortly afterwards. An 
Athenian fleet under Nicias and Nicostratus recovered Mende 
and blockaded Scione, which fell two years later (421 B.C.). 
Meanwhile Brasidas joined Perdiccas in a campaign against 
Arrhabaeus, king of the Lyncesti, who was severely defeated. 
On the approach of a body of Illyrians, who, though summoned 
by Perdiccas, unexpectedly declared for Arrhabaeus, the Mace- 
donians fled, and Brasidas's force was rescued from a critical 
position only by his coolness and ability. This brought to a head 
the quarrel between Brasidas and Perdiccas, who promptly 
concluded a treaty with Athens, of which some fragments have 
survived (I.G. i. 42). 

In April 422 the truce with Sparta expired, and in the same 
summer Cleon was despatched to Thrace, where he stormed 
Torone and Galepsus and prepared for an attack on Amphipolis. 
But a carelessly conducted reconnaissance gave Brasidas the 
opportunity for a vigorous and successful sally. The Athenian 
army was routed with a loss of 600 men and Cleon was slain. 
On the Spartan side only seven men are said to have fallen, but 
amongst them was Brasidas. He was buried at Amphipolis 
with impressive pomp, and for the future was regarded as the 
founder (oi/aor^s) of the city and honoured with yearly games 
and sacrifices (Thuc. iv. 78-v. 11). At Sparta a cenotaph was 
erected in his memory near the tombs of Pausanias and Leonidas, 
and yearly speeches were made and games celebrated in their 
honour, in which only Spartiates could compete (Paus. iii. 14). 

Brasidas united in himself the personal courage characteristic 
of Sparta with those virtues in which the typical Spartan was 
most signally lacking. He was quick in forming his plans and 
carried them out without delay or hesitation. With an oratorical 
power rare amongst the Lacedaemonians he combined a con- 
ciliatory manner which everywhere won friends for himself and 
for Sparta (Thuc. iv. 81). 

See in particular Thucydides, ii.-v. ; what Diodorus xii. adds is 
mainly oratorical elaboration or pure invention. A fuller account 
will be found in the histories of Greece (e.g. those of Grote, Beloch, 
Busolt, Meyer) and in G. Schimmelpfeng, De Brasidae Spartani 
rebus gestis atque ingenio (Marburg, 1857). 

BRASS, a river, town and district of southern Nigeria, British 
West Africa. The Brass river is one of the deltaic branches of 
the Niger, lying east of the Rio Nun or main channel of the river. 
From the point of divergence from the main stream to the sea 
the Brass has a course of about 100 m., its mouth being in 
6° 20' E., 4° 35' N. Brass town is a flourishing trading settle- 
ment at the mouth of the river. It is the headquarters of a dis- 
trict commissioner and the seat of a native court. Its most 
conspicuous building is a fine church, the gift of a native chief. 
The capital of the Brass tribes is Nimbe, 30 m. up river. 

The Brass river, called by its Portuguese discoverers the Rio 
Bento, is said to have received its English name from the brass 



rods and other brass utensils imported by the early traders in 
exchange for palm-oil and slaves. The Brass natives, of the pure 
negro type, were noted for their savage character. In 1856 their 
chiefs concluded a treaty with Great Britain agreeing to give 
up the slave-trade in exchange for a duty on the palm-oil 
exported. Finding their profitable business as middlemen 
between the up-river producer and the exporter threatened by 
the appearance of European traders, they made ineffective 
complaints to the British authorities. The establishment of the 
Royal Niger Company led to further loss of trade, and on the 
29th of January 1895 the natives attacked and sacked the 
company's station at Akassa on the Rio Nun, over forty 
prisoners being killed and eaten as a sacrifice to the fetish gods. 
In the following month a punitive expedition partially destroyed 
Nimbe, and a heavy fine was paid by the Brass chiefs. Since 
then the country has settled down under British administration. 
The trade regulations of which complaint had been made were 
removed in 1900 on the establishment of the protectorate of 
Southern Nigeria (see Nigeria). 

Valuable information concerning the country and people will be 
found in the Report by Sir John Kirk on the Disturbances at Brass 
{Africa, No. 3, 1896). 

BRASS (0. Eng. braes), an alloy consisting mainly if not 
exclusively of copper and zinc; in its older use the term was 
applied rather to alloys of copper and tin, now known as bronze 
(q.v.). Thus the brass of the Bible was probably bronze, and so 
also was much of the brass of later times, until the distinction 
between zinc and tin became clearly recognized. The Latin 
word aes signifies either pure copper or bronze, not brass, but 
the Romans comprehended a brass compound of copper and zinc 
under the term orichalcum or aurichalcum, into which Pliny 
states that copper was converted by the aid of cadmia (a mineral 
of zinc). 

In England there is good evidence of the manufacture of 
brass with zinc at the end of the 16th century, for Queen 
Elizabeth by patent granted to William Humfrey and Christopher 
Schutz the exclusive right of working calamine and making 
brass. This right subsequently devolved upon a body called the 
" Governors, Assistants and Societies of the City of London of 
and for the Mineral and Battery Works," which continued to 
exercise its functions down to the year 1 7 10. 

When a small percentage of zinc is present, the colour of brass 
is reddish, as in tombac or red brass, which contains about 10 %. 
With about 20 % the colour becomes more yellow, and a series 
of metals is obtained which simulate gold more or less closely; 
such are Dutch metal, Mannheim gold, similor and pinchbeck, the 
last deriving its name from a London clockmaker, Christopher 
Pinchbeck, who invented it in 1732. Ordinary brass contains 
about 30 % of zinc, and when 40 % is present, as in Muntz, 
yellow or patent metal (invented by G. F. Muntz in 1832), the 
colour becomes a full yellow. When the proportion of zinc is ■ 
largely increased the colour becomes silver-white and finally 
grey. The limit of elasticity increases with the percentage of 
zinc, as also does the amount of elongation before fracture, the 
maximum occurring with 30 %. The tenacity increases with the 
proportion of zinc up to a maximum with 45 %; then it decreases 
rapidly, and with 50% the metals are fragile. By varying the 
proportion between 30 and 43 % a series of alloys may be pre- 
pared presenting very varied properties. The most malleable 
of the series has an elongation of about 60 %, with a tensile 
strength of 17-5 tons per sq. in. Increase in the proportion of 
zinc gives higher tensile strength, accompanied, however, by a 
smaller percentage of elongation and a materially increased 
tendency to produce unsound castings. The quality of copper- 
zinc alloys is improved by the addition of a small quantity of 
iron, a fact of which advantage is taken in the production of 
Aich's metal and delta metal. Of the latter there are several 
varieties, modified in composition to suit different purposes. 
Some of them possess high tensile strength and ductility. They 
are remarkably resistant to corrosion by sea-water, and are well 
suited for screw-propellers as well as for pump-plungers, pistons 
and glands. Heated to a dull red delta metal becomes malleable 



4-34 



BRASSES— BRASSEUR DE BOURBOURG 



and can be worked under the hammer, press or stamps. By 
such treatment an ultimate tensile strength of 30 tons per sq. in. 
may be obtained, with an elongation of 32 % in 2 in. and a con- 
traction of area of 30%. 

In the arts brass is a most important and widely used alloy. 
As compared with copper its superior hardness makes it wear 
better, while being more fusible it can be cast with greater 
facility. It is readily drawn into fine wire, and formed into 
rolled sheets and rods which are machined into a huge number 
of useful and ornamental articles. It is susceptible of a fine 
polish, but tarnishes with exposure to the air; the brilliancy of 
the surface can, however, be preserved if the metal is thoroughly 
cleansed by " dipping " in nitric acid and " lacquered " with a 
coating of varnish consisting of seed-lac dissolved in spirit. 

BRASSES, MONUMENTAL, a species of engraved sepulchral 
memorials which in the early part of the 13th century began to 
take the place of tombs and effigies carved in stone. Made of 
hard latten or sheet brass, let into the pavement, and thus 
forming no obstruction in the space required for the services of 
the church, they speedily came into general use, and continued 
to be a favourite style of sepulchral memorial for three centuries. 
Besides their great value as historical monuments, they are 
interesting as authentic contemporary evidence of the varieties 
of armour and costume, or the peculiarities of palaeography 
and heraldic designs, and they are often the only authoritative 
records of the intricate details of family history. Although the 
intrinsic value of the metal has unfortunately contributed to the 
wholesale spoliation of these interesting monuments, they are 
still found in remarkable profusion in England, and they were at 
one time equally common in France, Germany and the Low 
Countries. In France, however, those that survived the troubles 
of the 1 6th century were totally swept away during the reign of 
terror, and almost the only evidence of their existence is now 
supplied by the collection of drawings bequeathed by Gough to 
the Bodleian library. The fine memorials of the royal house of 
Saxony in the cathedrals of Meissen and Freiberg are the most 
artistic and striking brasses in Germany. Among the 13th- 
century examples existing in German churches are the full-length 
memorials of Yso von Welpe, bishop of Verden (1231), and of 
Bernard, bishop of Paderborn (1340). Many fine Flemish 
specimens exist in Belgium, especially at Bruges. Only two or 
three examples, and these of late date, are known in Scotland, 
among which are the memorials of Alexander Cockburn (1564) 
at Ormiston; of the regent Murray (1569) in the collegiate 
church of St Giles, Edinburgh; and of the Minto family (1605) 
in the south aisle of the nave of Glasgow cathedral. England is 
the only country which now possesses an extensive series of 
these interesting memorials, of which it is calculated that there 
may be about 4000 still remaining in the various churches. 
They are most abundant in the eastern counties, and this fact 
has been frequently adduced in support of the opinion that they 
were of Flemish manufacture. But in the days when sepulchral 
brasses were most in fashion the eastern counties of England were 
full of commercial activity and wealth, and nowhere do the en- 
graved memorials of civilians and prosperous merchants more 
abound than in the churches of Ipswich, Norwich, Lynn and 
Lincoln. Flemish brasses do occur in England, but they were 
never numerous, and they are readily distinguished from those 
of native workmanship. The Flemish examples have the figures 
engraved in the centre of a large plate, the background filled in 
with diapered or scroll work, and the inscription placed round 
the edge of the plate. The English examples have the figures 
cut out to the outline and inserted in corresponding cavities in 
the slab, the darker colour of the stone serving as a background. 
This is not an invariable distinction, however, as " figure- 
brasses " of Flemish origin are found both at Bruges and in 
England. But the character of the engraving is constant, the 
Flemish work being more florid in design, the lines shallower, 
and the broad lines cut with a chisel-pointed tool instead of the 
lozenge-shaped burin. The brass of Robert Hallum, bishop of 
Salisbury, the envoy of Henry V. to the council of Constance, 
who died and was interred there in 1416, precisely resembles 



the brasses of England in the peculiarities which distinguish 
them from continental specimens. Scarcely any of the brasses 
which now exist in England can be confidently referred to the 
first half of the 13th century, though several undoubted examples 
of this period are on record. The full-sized brass of Sir John 
d'Aubernon at Stoke d'Abernon in Surrey (c. 1277) has the 
decorations of the shield filled in with a species of enamel. 
Other examples of this occur, and the probability is, that, in 
most cases, the lines of the engraving were filled with colouring- 
matter, though brass would scarcely bear the heat requisite to 
fuse the ordinary enamels. A well-known 13th-century example 
is that of Sir Roger de Trumpington (c. 1290), who accompanied 
Prince Edward in his expedition to Palestine and is represented 
cross-legged. About half a dozen instances of this peculiarity 
are known. The 14th-century brasses are much more numerous, 
and present a remarkable variety in their details. The finest 
specimen is that of Nicholas Lord Burnell (1315) in the church of 
Acton Burnell, Shropshire. In the 15th century the design and 
execution of monumental brasses had attained their highest 
excellence. The beautiful brass of Thomas Beauchamp, earl of 
Warwick (d. 1401) , and his wife Margaret, which formerly covered 
the tomb in St Mary's church, Warwick, is a striking example. 
One of the best specimens of plate armour is that of Sir Robert 
Stantoun (1458) in Castle Donnington church, Leicestershire, 
and one of the finest existing brasses of ecclesiastics is that of 
Abbot de la Mare of St Albans. It is only in the 16th century 
that the engraved representations become portraits. Previous to 
that period the features were invariably represented convention- 
ally, though sometimes personal peculiarities were given. A 
large number of brasses in England are palimpsests, the back of 
an ancient brass having been engraved for the more recent 
memorial. Thus a brass commemorative of Margaret Bulstrode 
(1540) at Hedgerley, on being removed from its position, was 
discovered to have been previously the memorial of Thomas 
Totyngton, abbot of St Edmunds, Bury (1312). The abbey was 
only surrendered to Henry VIII. in 1539, so that before the year 
was out the work of spoliation had begun, and the abbot's brass 
had been removed and re-engraved to Margaret Bulstrode. In 
explanation of the frequency with which ancient brasses have 
thus been stolen and re-erected after being engraved on the 
reverse, as at Berkhampstead, it may be remarked that all the 
sheet brass used in England previous to the establishment of a 
manufactory at Esher by a German in 1649, na d to be imported 
from the continent. 

Authorities. — (1) General : Manual for the Study of Monumental 
Brasses (Oxford, 1848); Boutell's Monumental Brasses of England, 
engravings on wood, folio (London, 1849); Manual of Monumental 
Brasses, by H. Haines (2 vols. 8vo, 1861) ; Waller's Series of Monu- 
mental Brasses in England (London and Oxford, Parkers, 1863) ; 
Monumental Brasses, by H. W. Macklin (8vo, 1890); The Brasses 
of England, by H. W. Macklin (8vo, London, 1907). (2) English 
Counties : Cotman's Engravings of the most Remarkable of the Sepul- 
chral Brasses of Norfolk (4to, London, 1813-1816; and second 
edition, with plates and notes by Meyrick, Albert Way and Sir Harris 
Nicholas (2 vols, folio, London, 1839); Illustrations of Monumental 
Brasses in Cambridge (4to, Camden Society, 1846); Monumental 
Brasses of Northamptonshire, by F. Hudson (folio, 1853) i The 
Monumental Brasses of Wiltshire, by G. Kite (8vo, London, i860); 
A rchitectural and Historical Notes of the Churches of Cambridgeshire, 
by A. C. Hill (8vo, 1880) ; Monumental Brasses of Cornwall, by 
E. H. W. Dunken (4to, London, 1882); Monumental Brasses of 
Worcestershire and Herefordshire, ed. by C. T. Davis (1884) ; Kentish 
Brasses, by W. D. Belcher (4to, London, 1888) ; List of Monumental 
Brasses in the County of Norfolk, by the Rev. E. Farrer (Norwich, 
1 890) ; The Monumental Brasses of Lancashire and Cheshire, by 
James Thornby (8vo, Hull, 1893); Monumental Brasses in the 
Bedfordshire Churches, by Grace Isherwood (8vo, London, 1906), 
a large collection of rubbings of special interest and value. (3) 
Foreign: Monumental Brasses and Incised Slabs in Belgium (8vo, 
1849); Books of Facsimiles of Monumental Brasses of the Continent 
of Europe, folio (1884), by the Rev. W. F. Creeny. 

BRASSEUR DE BOURBOURG, CHARLES ETIENNE (1814- 
1874), Belgian ethnographer, was born at Bourbourg, near 
Dunkirk, on the 8th of September 1814. He entered the Roman 
Catholic priesthood, was professor of ecclesiastical history in the 
Quebec seminary in 1845, vicar-general at Boston in 1846, and 
from 1848 to 1863 travelled as a missionary, chiefly in Mexico 



BRASSES, MONUMENTAL 



Plate I. 



w 


R a y ^ S I R 


e 


6 




•\~= 


© 


^ Afil ^ 


C;' 


>» 






tf 






CD 




"-.'. 


a 




D 


j 






« 




gy.W / 


* 

s 






.^JjSShu]) 




m 


s 










to 


* ft 


/TBre 




IS 


« 


< I 






3 


Q 










3 
O 




> 


^ 












3 




< 


03 


"3 




X) 


D 












a 


> 


1S ,V 'ffl T 


57 


a 




< 






ST 


q sj; i o' :■ u 


'- 





Iw-iarrt tows (MHjfiB (Wmrtl.fflUrelhB 
Urlwjgot qm otonjrtf tot3ami*H 5 *»8 




Fig. 



i. — Sir John D'Abernon, 12 
Stoke D'Abernon Surrey. 



Fig. 2. — Margaret de Camoys. 13 10 
Trotton, Sussex. 



Fig. 3— Henry de Grofhurst, c. 1.330 Fig. 4. — Sir Nicholas Burnell, 1382. 

Horsemonden, Kent. Acton Burnell, Shropshire. 





gnp« q" pafff? ftp ji ^0% Citf t dlprtwtriSb »»fcsi)« (mrp 
W tlwnr jinr cl)«lrtf <j 6c Jrf ataire mr fl)rw amm 
hit in Oir $K ororjf Snno ffl©bt|t m &ir jifiJolxEUiagrliftr 
totii QnUmw Cl<t topj\«">fM° but mtflnio Cf<T Iji" 



Fig. 5. — Margaret Lady Cobham, 
7385. Cobham, Kent. 

Figs. 1 and 6 from Waller's Monumental Brasses. 

IV. 434. 



Fig. <>.— Sir John Corp and F.leanor, his grand-daughter, 
i3Qij 1361- Stoke Fleming, Devonshire. 




Fig. 7. — Sir Symon de Felbrigge and Margaret his wife. 
1400. Felbrigge, Norfolk. 



Figs, 5 and 7 from Boutell's Monumental Brasses. Figs. 2, 3, and 4 by permission of the Monumental Brass Society. 



PLATE II. 



BRASSES, MONUMENTAL 




Fig. i. — Thomas de Beauchamp, Earl of Warwick and Lady, 

1406 and 1401. St. Mary's Church, Warwick. 





-Thomas Cranley, Archbishop of Dublin, 
1417. New College, Oxford. 



^ 




® n ^wwLwm i^toWu^MWWiMWtB , 




y^Wm&fSslWB0v er m m&mmwi&amma&M&\ 



Fig. 3. — Sir William Vernon and Lady, 1467. 
Tong Church, Shropshire. 



js<tity Jo ,6 j(jj afe 6rgt rjia a yjm*ty/JbpBa»s 6~j/ff / 



VNDER THIS MONVWENT EYETH THE BODY OF DAME Mar= 

caret the moste deere wife of s"george chvte 
Kpight and davchter and sole heyre of Thomas 
WeLFORDOF WlSTESTON ESQVIER DECEASED WHOSE 
P1ETO AND VERTVES DESERVE TO SVRV1VE IN THE MEMO 
RIE OF MEN VNTIU.THIS HER BOD1E SHALL LIVE AGAIN E 
REVNITED TO HER BLESSED SOWLE TO UVE V? HER REDEE 

mer for ever. she had by her saide hv5hand 1 davchrs 
oneue. Anne and Trancis which FrancpsdvedYftrst 
daye of her birth her said mother following mer the 

NEXT DAVE AFTER BBNGE THENtNTH DAYE OFJVNE^WNlbrt 




Fig 4- — John Shelley, Esq., 1526, and his wife Elizabeth, 1513. 
Clapham, Sussex. 



Fig. 5. — Dame Margaret Chute, 1614. 
Mardon, Herefordshire. 



Fig. 6. — Sir Edward Filmer and Lady, 1638. 
East Sutton, Kent. 



Tigs. 1, 2, 3, and 6 from Waller's Monumental Brasses. 



Figs. 4 and 5 by permission of the Monumental Brass Society. 



BRASSEY— BRASSO 



435 



and Central America. He gave great attention to Mexican 
antiquities, published in 1857-1859 a history of Aztec civilization, 
and from 1861 to 1864 edited a collection of documents in the 
indigenous languages. In 1863 he announced the discovery of 
a key to Mexican hieroglyphic writing, but its value is very 
questionable. In 1 864 he was archaeologist to theFrench military 
expedition in Mexico, and his Monuments anciens du Mexique 
was published by the French Government in 1866. Perhaps his 
greatest service was the publication in 1861 of a French transla- 
tion of the Popol Vuh, a sacred book of the Quiche Indians, 
together with a Quiche grammar, and an essay on Central 
American mythology. In 187 1 he brought out his Bibliotheque 
Mexico-Guatemalienne, and in 1869-1870 gave the principles of 
his decipherment of Indian picture-writing in his Manuscril 
Troano, Uudes sur le systeme graphique et la langue des Mayas. 
He died at Nice on the 8th of January 1874. His chief merit is 
his diligent collection of materials; his interpretations are 
generally fanciful. 

BRASSEY, THOMAS (1805-1870), English railway contractor, 
was born at Buerton, near Chester, on the 7th of November 1805. 
His father, besides cultivating land of his own, held a large farm 
of the marquess of Westminster; his ancestors, according to 
family tradition, having been settled for several centuries at 
Bulkeley, near Malpas, Cheshire, before they went to Buerton 
in 1663. Thomas Brassey received an ordinary commercial 
education at a Chester school. At the age of sixteen he was 
apprenticed to a surveyor, and on the completion of his term 
became the partner of his master, eventually assuming the sole 
management of the business. In the local surveys to which he 
devoted his attention during his early years he acquired the 
knowledge and practical experience which were the necessary 
foundation of his great reputation. His first engagement as 
railway contractor was entered upon in 1835, when he undertook 
the execution of a portion of the Grand Junction railway, on the 
invitation of the distinguished engineer Joseph Locke, who soon 
afterwards entrusted him with the completion of the London and 
Southampton railway, a task which involved contracts to the 
amount of £4,000,000 sterling and the employment of a body of 
3000 men. At the same time he was engaged on portions of 
several other lines in the north of England and in Scotland. In 
conjunction with his partner, W. Mackenzie, Brassey undertook, 
in 1840, the construction of the railway from Paris to Rouen, of 
which Locke was engineer. He subsequently carried out the 
extension of the same line. A few years later he was engaged with 
his partner on five other French lines, and on his own account 
on the same number of lines in England, Wales and Scotland. 
Brassey was now in control of an industrial army of 75,000 men, 
and the capital involved in his various contracts amounted to 
some £36,000,000. But his energy and capacity were equal to 
still larger tasks. He undertook in 185 1 other works in England 
and Scotland; and in the following year he engaged in the 
construction of railways in Holland, Prussia, Spain and Italy. 
One of his largest undertakings was the Grand Trunk railway of 
Canada, 1100 m. in length, with its fine bridge over the St 
Lawrence. In this work he was associated with Sir M. Peto and 
E. L. Betts. In the following years divisions of his industrial 
army were found in almost every country in Europe, in India, 
in Australia and in South America. Besides actual railway 
works, he originated and maintained a great number of sub- 
ordinate assistant establishments, coal and iron works, dock- 
yards, &c, the direction of which alone would be sufficient to 
strain the energies of an ordinary mind. His profits were, of 
course, enormous, but prosperity did not intoxicate him; and 
when heavy losses came, as sometimes they did, he took them 
bravely and quietly. Among the greatest of his pecuniary 
disasters were those caused by the fall of the great Barentin 
viaduct on the Rouen and Havre railway, and by the failure 
of Peto and Betts. Brassey was one of the first to aim at im- 
proving the relations between engineers and contractors, by 
setting himself against the corrupt practices which were common. 
He resolutely resisted the "scamping" of work and the 
bribery of inspectors, and what he called the " smothering of 



the engineer "; and he did much in this way to bring about 
a better state of things. Large-hearted and generous to a 
rare degree, modest and simple in his taste and manners, he 
was conscious of his power as a leader in his calling, and knew 
how to use it wisely and for noble ends. Honours came to him 
unsought. The cross of the Legion of Honour was conferred 
on him. From Victor Emmanuel he received the cross of 
the Order of St Maurice and St Lazarus; and from the emperor 
of Austria the decoration of the Iron Crown, which it is said had 
not before been given to a foreigner. He died at St Leonards 
on the 8th of December 1870. His life and labours are com- 
memorated in a volume by Sir Arthur Helps (1872). 

He left three sons, of whom the eldest, Thomas (b. 1836), 
was knighted and afterwards (1886) created Baron Brassey. 
Lord Brassey, who was educated at Rugby and Oxford, entered 
parliament as a liberal in 1865, and devoted himself largely 
to naval affairs. He was civil lord of the admiralty (1880-1883), 
and secretary to the admiralty (1883-1885); and both before 
and after his elevation to the peerage did important work on 
naval and statistical inquiries for the government. In 1893-1895 
he was president of the Institution of Naval Architects. In 
1894 he was a lord-in-waiting, and from 1895 to 1900 was governor 
of Victoria. In 1908 he was appointed lord warden of the Cinque 
Ports. His voyages in his yacht " Sunbeam " from 1876 onwards, 
with his first wife (d. 1887), who published an interesting book 
on the subject, took him all over the world. Lord Brassey 
married a second time in 1890. Among other publications, his 
inauguration of the Naval Annual (1886 onwards), and his 
volumes on The British Navy, are the most important. His 
eldest son Thomas, who edited the Naval Annual (1890-1904), 
and unsuccessfully contested several parliamentary constitu- 
encies, was born in 1862. 

BRASSO (Ger. Kronstadt; Rumanian, Brasov), a town of 
Hungary, in Transylvania, 206 m. S.E. of Kolozsv&r by rail. 
Pop. (1900) 34,511. It is the capital of the comitat (county) 
of the same name, also known as Burzenland, a fertile country 
inhabited by an industrious population of Germans, Magyars 
and Rumanians. Brasso is beautifully situated on the slopes 
of the Transylvanian Alps, in' a narrow valley, shut in by moun- 
tains, and presenting only one opening on the north-west towards 
the Burzen plain. The town is entirely dominated by the Zinne 
of Kapellenberg, a mountain rising 1276 ft. above the town 
(total altitude 3153 ft.), from which a beautiful view is obtained 
of the lofty mountains around and of the carefully cultivated 
plain of the Burzenland, dotted with tastefully built and well- 
kept villages. On the summit of the mountain is one of the 
numerous monuments erected in 1896 in different parts of the 
country to commemorate the thousandth anniversary of the 
foundation of the Hungarian state. It is known as Arpad's 
Monument, and consists of a Doric column erected on a circular 
pedestal, which supports the bronze figure of a warrior from the 
time of Arp&d. 

Brass6 consists of the inner town, which is the commerci&J 
centre, and the suburbs of Blumenau, Altstadt and Obere Vor- 
stadt or Bolgirszeg, inhabited respectively by Germans, Magyars 
and Rumanians. To the east of the inner town rises the Schloss- 
berg, crowned by the citadel, which was erected in 1553, and 
constitutes the principal remaining fragment of the old fortifica- 
tions with which Brass6 was encircled. The most interesting 
building in the town is the Protestant church, popularly called 
the Black Church, owing to its smoke-stained walls, caused 
by the great fire of 1689. This church, the finest in Transylvania, 
is a Gothic edifice with traces of Romanesque influence, and 
was built in 1385-1425. In the square in front of it is the statue 
of Johannes Honterus (1498-1549), " the apostle of Tran- 
sylvania," who was born in Brass6, and established here the 
first printing-press in Transylvania. In the principal square 
of the inner town stands the town hall, built in 1420 and restored 
in the 18th century, with a tower 190 ft. high. Brasso is the 
most important commercial and manufacturing town of Tran- 
sylvania. Lying near the frontier of Rumania, with easy access 
through the Tomos pass, it developed from the earliest time an 



436 



BRATHWAIT— BRATLANDSDAL 



active trade with that country and with the whole of the Balkan 
states. Its chief industries are iron and copper works, wool- 
spinning, turkey-red dyeing, leather goods, paper, cement and 
petroleum refineries. The timber industry in all its branches, 
with a speciality for the manufacture of the wooden bottles 
largely used by the peasantry in Hungary and in the Balkan 
states, as well as the dairy industry, and ham-curing are also 
fully developed. A peculiarity of Brasso, which constitutes a 
survival of the old methods of trade with the Balkan states, 
is the number of money-changers who ply their trade at small 
movable tables in the market-place and in the open street. 
Brasso is the most populous town of Transylvania, and its 
population is composed in about equal numbers of Germans, 
Magyars and Rumanians. The town, especially on market 
days, presents an animated and picturesque aspect. Here are 
seen Germans, Szeklers, Magyars, Rumanians, Armenians and 
Gipsies, each of them wearing their distinctive national costume, 
and talking and bargaining in their own special idiom. 

Amongst the places of interest round Brasso is the watering- 
place Zaizon, 15 m. to the east, with ferruginous and iodine 
waters; while about 17 m. to the south-west lies the pretty 
Rumanian village of Zernest, where in 1690 the Austrian general 
Heussler was defeated and taken prisoner by Imre (Emerich) 
Tokoly, the usurper of the Transylvanian throne. 

Brasso was founded by the Teutonic Order in 1211, and soon 
became a flourishing town. Through the activity of Honterus 
it played a leading part in the introduction of the Reformation 
in Transylvania in the 16th century. The town was almost com- 
pletely destroyed by the big fire of 1689. During the revolution 
of 1848-1849 it was besieged by the Hungarians under General 
Bern from March to July 1849, and several engagements between 
the Austrian and the Hungarian troops took place in its neigh- 
bourhood. 

BRATHWAIT, RICHARD (1588-1673), English poet, son of 
Thomas Brathwait, was born in 1588 at his father's manor of 
Burneshead, near Kendal, Westmorland. He entered Oriel 
College, Oxford, in 1604, and remained there for some years, 
pursuing the study of poetry and Roman history. He removed 
to Cambridge to study law and afterwards to London to the 
Inns of Court. Thomas Brathwait died in 1610, and the son 
went down to live on the estate he inherited from his father. 
In 1617 he married Frances Lawson of Nesham, near Darlington. 
On the death of his elder brother, Sir Thomas Brathwait, in 1618, 
Richard became the head of the family, and an important 
personage in the county, being deputy-lieutenant and justice 
of the peace. In 1633 his wife died, and in 1639 he married 
again. His only son by this second marriage, Sir Strafford 
Brathwait, was killed in a sea-fight against the Algerian pirates. 
Richard Brathwait's most famous work is Barnabae Itinerarium 
or Barnabees Journall [1638], by " Corymbaeus," written in 
English and Latin rhyme. The title-page says it is written for 
the " travellers' solace " and is to be chanted to the old tune of 
" Barnabe." The story of '' drunken Barnabee's" four journeys 
to the north of England contains much amusing topographical 
information, and its gaiety is unflagging. Barnabee rarely visits 
a town or village without some notice of an excellent inn or a 
charming hostess, but he hardly deserves the epithet " drunken." 
At Banbury he saw the Puritan who has become proverbial, 
" Hanging of his cat on Monday 
For killing of a Mouse on Sunday." 

Brathwait's identity with " Corymbaeus " was first established 
by Joseph Haslewood. In his later years he removed to Catterick, 
where he died on the 4th of May 1673. Among his other works 
are: The Golden Fleece (161 1), with a second title-page announ- 
cing " sonnets and madrigals," and a treatise on the Art of Poesy, 
which is not preserved; The Poets Willow; or the Passionate 
Shepheard (1614); The Prodigals Teares (1614); The Schollers 
Medley, or an intermixt Discourse upon Historicall and Poeticall 
relations (1614), known in later editions as a Survey of History 
(1638, &c); a collection of epigrams and satires entitled A 
Strappado for the Divell (1615), with which was published in- 
congruously Loves Labyrinth (edited, 1878, by J. W. Ebsworth); 



Natures Embassie; or, the wildemans measures; danced naked 
by twelve satyr es (1621), thirty satires finding antique parallels 
for modern vices ; with these are bound up The Shepheards Tales 
(1621), a collection of pastorals, one section of which was re- 
printed by Sir Egerton Brydges in 181 5; two treatises on 
manners, The English Gentleman (1630) and The English Gentle- 
woman (1631); Anniversaries upon his Panarete (1634), a poem 
in memory of his wife; Essaies upon the Five Senses (1620); 
The Psalmes of David . . . and other holy Prophets, paraphras'd 
in English (1638); A Comment upon Two Tales of . . . Jejfray 
Chaucer (1665; edited for the Chaucer Soc. by C. Spurgeon, 
1901). Thomas Hearne, on whose testimony (MS. collections 
for the year 1713, vol. 47, p. 127) the authorship of the Itine- 
rarium chiefly rests, not inappropriately called him " the scribler 
of those times," and the list just given of his works, published 
under various pseudonyms, is by no means complete. 

A full bibliography is given in Joseph Haslewood's edition of 
Barnabee's Journall (ed. W. C. Hazlitt, 1876). See also J. Corser, 
Collectanea (Chetham Soc, 1860, &c). 

BRATIANU (or Bratiano), ION C. (1821-1891), Rumanian 
statesman, was born at Pitesci in Walachia on the 2nd of June 
1821. He entered the Walachian army in 1838, and visited 
Paris in 1841 for purposes of study. Returning to Walachia, 
he took part, with his friend C. A. Rosetti and other prominent 
politicians, in the Rumanian rebellion of 1848, and acted as 
prefect of police in the provisional government formed in that 
year. The restoration of Russian and Turkish authority shortly 
afterwards drove him into exile. He took refuge in Paris, and en- 
deavoured to influence French opinion in favour of the proposed 
union and autonomy of the Danubian principalities. In 1854, 
however, he was sentenced to a fine of £120 and three months' 
imprisonment for sedition, and later confined in a lunatic 
asylum; but in 1856 he returned home with his brother, Dimitrie 
Bratianu, afterwards one of his foremost political opponents. 
During the reign of Prince Cuza (1859-1866), Bratianu figured 
prominently as one of the Liberal leaders. He assisted in 1866 
in the deposition of Cuza and the election of Prince Charles of 
Hohenzollern, under whom' he held several ministerial appoint- 
ments during the next four years. He was arrested for complicity 
in the revolution of 1870, but soon released. In 1876, aided 
by C. A. Rosetti, he formed a. Liberal cabinet, which remained 
in power until 1888. For an account of his work in connexion 
with the Russo-Turkish War of 1877, the Berlin congress, the 
establishment of the Rumanian kingdom, the revision of the 
constitution, and other reforms, see Rumania. After 1883 
Bratianu acted as sole leader of the Liberals, owing to a quarrel 
with C. A. Rosetti, his friend and political ally for nearly forty 
years. His long tenure of office, without parallel in Rumanian 
history, rendered Bratianu extremely unpopular, and at its 
close his impeachment appeared inevitable. But any proceed- 
ings taken against the minister would have involved charges 
against the king, who was largely responsible for his policy; 
and the impeachment was averted by a vote of parliament in 
February 1890. Bratianu died on the 16th of May 1891. Besides 
being the leading statesman of Rumania during the critical years 
1876-1888, he attained some eminence as a writer. His French 
political pamphlets, Memoire sur I'empire d'Autriche dans la 
question d'Orient (1855), Reflexions sur la situation (1856), 
Memoire sur la situation de la Moldavie depuis le traite de Paris 
(1857), and La Question religieuse en Roumanie (1866), were all 
published in Paris. 

For his other writings and speeches see Din Scrierile §i cuvintarile 
lui I. C. Bratianu, 1821-1891 (Bucharest, 1903, &c.), edited with a 
biographical introduction by D. A. Sturza. A brief anonymous 
biography, Ion C. Bratianu, appeared at Bucharest in 1893. 

BRATLANDSDAL {i.e. Bratland valley), a gorge of southern 
Norway in Stavanger amt (county), formed by the Bratland 
river, a powerful torrent issuing into Lake Suldal. A remarkable 
road traverses the gorge by means of cuttings and a tunnel, 
and the scenery is among the most magnificent in Norway. It 
is usually approached from Stavanger by way of Sand and Lake 
Suldal, and the road divides above the gorge, branches run- 
ning north to Odde and south-east through Telemarken. The 



BRATTISHING— BRAY, SIR R. 



437 



junction of the roads is near Breifond, 13 m. above Naes at the 
mouth of the river, on the west shore of, Lake Roldal, which 
is fed by the snowfield to the west, north and east, and is drained 
by the Bratland river. 

BRATTISHING, or Brandishing (from the Fr. breteche), in 
architecture, a sort of crest or ridge on a parapet, or species 
of embattlement. The term, however, is generally employed 
to describe the ranges of flowers which form the crests of so 
many parapets in the Tudor period. 

BRATTLEBORO, a village of Windham county, Vermont, 
U.S.A., in a township (pop. 1910, 7541) of the same name, in the 
south-east part of the state, 60 m. N. of Springfield, Massa- 
chusetts, on the Connecticut river. Pop. (1890) 5467; (1900) 
5297 (686 foreign-born); (1910) 6517. It is served by the Central 
Vermont and the Boston & Maine railways. Situated in a hilly, 
heavily wooded country, it is an attractive place, with a few 
houses dating from the 18th century. Among the manufactures 
are toys, furniture, overalls and organs, the Estey and the 
Carpenter organs being made there. First settled about 1753, 
Brattleboro took its name from one of the original patentees, 
William Brattle (1702-1776), a Massachusetts loyalist. It was 
incorporated ten years later. 

See H. Burnham, Brattleboro (Brattleboro, 1880), and H. M. 
Burt, The Attractions of Brattleboro, Glimpses of Past and Present 
(Brattleboro, 1866). 

BRAUNAU (Czech Broumov), a town of Bohemia, Austria, 
139 m. E.N.E. of Prague by rail. Pop. (1900) 7622, chiefly 
German. The town is built on a rocky eminence on the right 
bank of the Steine. It has an imposing Benedictine abbey, once 
a castle, but converted into a religious house in 1322, when 
Ottakar I. gave the district to the Benedictines. Noteworthy 
also is the great church of Saints Wenceslaus and Adalbert, 
built between 1683 and 1733. This stands on the site where, in 
1618, the Protestants attempted to build a church, the forcible 
prevention of which by Abbot Wolfgang Solander was the 
immediate cause of the protest of the Bohemian estates and the 
" defenestration " of the ministers Martinic and Slavata, which 
opened the Thirty Years' War. After the battle of the White 
Hill, near Prague (1620), the town was deprived of all its privi- 
leges, which were, however, in great part restored nine years 
later. It is now a manufacturing centre (cloth, woollen and 
cotton stuffs, &c.) and has a considerable trade. 

BRAUNSBERG, a town of Germany, in the kingdom of Prussia, 
38 m. by rail S.W. of Konigsberg, on the Passarge, 4 m. from its 
mouth in the Frisches Haff. Pop. (1900) 12,497. It possesses 
numerous Roman Catholic institutions, of which the most 
important is the Lyceum Hosianum (enjoying university rank) , 
founded in 1564 by the cardinal bishop Stanislaus Hosius. 
Brewing, tanning, and the manufactures of soap, yeast, carriages 
and bricks are the most important industries of the town, which 
also carries on a certain amount of trade in corn, ship timber and 
yarn. The river is navigable for small vessels. The castle of 
Braunsberg was built by the Teutonic knights in 1241, and the 
town was founded ten years later. Destroyed by the Prussians 
in 1262, it was restored in 1279. The town, which was the seat 
of the bishops of Ermeland from 1255 to 1298, was granted the 
" law of Liibeck " by its bishop in 1284, and admitted to the 
Hanseatic League. After numerous vicissitudes it fell into 
the hands of the Poles in 1520, and in 1626 it was captured 
by Gustavus Adolphus. The Swedes kept possession till 1635. 
It fell to Prussia by the first partition of Poland in 1772. 

BRAVO (Ital. for "brave"), the name for hired assassins 
such as were formerly common in Italy. The word had at first 
ho evil meaning, but was applied to the retainers of the great 
noble houses, or to the cavalier-type of swashbucklers familiar in 
fiction. In later Italian history, especially in that of Venice, 
the bravi were desperate ruffians who for payment were ready 
to commit any crime, however foul. 

BRAWLING (probably connected with Ger. bratten, to roar, 
shout), in law, the offence of quarrelling, or creating a dis- 
turbance in a church or churchyard. During the early stages 
of the Reformation in England religious controversy too often 



became converted into actual disturbance, and the ritual law- 
lessness of the parochial clergy very frequently provoked popular 
violence. To repress these disturbances an act was passed in 
I SS I ; by which it was enacted " that if any person shall, by 
words only, quarrel, chide or brawl in any church or churchyard, 
it shall be lawful for the ordinary of the place where the same 
shall be done and proved by two lawful witnesses, to suspend 
any person so offending, if he be a layman, from the entrance of 
the church, and if he be a clerk, from the ministration of his 
office, for so long as the said ordinary shall think meet, ac- 
cording to the fault." An act of 1553 added the punishment of 
imprisonment until the party should repent. The act of 1551 
was partly repealed in 1828 and wholly repealed as regards 
laymen by the Ecclesiastical Courts Jurisdiction Act i860. 
Under that act, which applies to Ireland as well as to England, 
persons guilty of riotous, violent or indecent behaviour, in 
churches and chapels of the Church of England or Ireland, or in 
any chapel of any religious denomination, or in England in any 
place of religious worship duly certified, or in churchyards or 
burial-grounds, are liable on conviction before two justices to a 
penalty of not more than £5, or imprisonment for any term not 
exceeding two months. This enactment applies to clergy as well 
as to laity, and a clergyman of the Church of England convicted 
under it may also be dealt with under the Clergy Discipline Act 
of 1892 (Girt v. Fillingham, 1901, L.R. Prob. 176). When Mr 
J. Kensit during an ordination service in St Paul's cathedral 
" objected " to one of the candidates for ordination, on grounds 
which did not constitute an impediment or notable crime within 
the meaning of the ordination service, he was held to have 
unlawfully disturbed the bishop of London in the conduct of the 
service, and to be liable to conviction under the act of i860 
(Kensit v. Dean and Chapter of St Paul's, 1905, L.R. 2 K.B. 249). 
The public worship of Protestant Dissenters, Roman Catholics 
and Jews in England had before i860 been protectee! by a series 
of statutes beginning with the Toleration Act of 1689, and ending 
with the Liberty of Religious Worship Act 185 5- These enact- 
ments, though not repealed, are for practical purposes superseded 
by the summary remedy given by the act of i860. In Scotland 
disturbance of public worship is punishable as a breach of the 
peace (Dougall v. Dykes, 1861, 4 Irvine 101). 

In British possessions abroad interference with religious wor- 
ship is usually dealt with by legislation, and not as a common- 
law offence. In India it is an offence voluntarily to cause dis- 
turbance to any assembly lawfully engaged in the performance 
of religious worship or religious ceremonies (Penal Code, s. 296). 
Under the Queensland Criminal Code of 1899 (s. 207) penalties 
are imposed on persons who wilfully and without lawful justifica- 
tion or excuse (the proof of which lies on them) disquiet or 
disturb any meeting of persons lawfully assembled for religious 
worship, or assault any forces lawfully officiating at such meeting, 
or any of the persons there assembled. 

In the United States disturbance of religious worship is treated 
as an offence under the common law, which is in many states 
supplemented by legislation (see Bishop, Amer. Crim. Law, 
8th ed. 1892, vol. i. s. 542, vol. ii. ss. 303-305; California 
Penal Code, s. 302; Revised Laws of Massachusetts, 1902, 
chap. 212, s. 30.). 

BRAY, SIR REGINALD (d. 1503), British statesman and 
architect, was the second son of Sir Richard Bray, one of the 
privy council of Henry VI. Reginald was born in the parish 
of St John Bedwardine, near Worcester, but the date of his 
birth is uncertain. He was receiver-general and steward of the 
household to Sir Henry Stafford, second husband of Margaret, 
countess of Richmond, whose son afterwards became King 
Henry VII. The accession of the king Henry VII. favoured 
the fortunes of Reginald Bray, who was created a knight of the 
Bath at the coronation and afterwards a knight of the Garter. 
In the first year of Henry VII. 's reign he was given a grant 
of the constableship of Oakham Castle in Rutland, and was 
appointed joint chief justice with Lord Fitz Walter of all the forest 
south of Trent and chosen of the privy council. Subsequently 
he was made high treasurer and chancellor of the duchy of 



4-38 



BRAY, T.— BRAZIL 



Lancaster. In October 1494 he became high steward of the 
university of Oxford, and he was a member of the parliament 
summoned in the nth year of Henry VII's reign. In June 
1497 he was at the battle of Blackheath, and his services in 
repressing the Cornish rebels were rewarded with a gift of estates 
and the title of knight banneret. His taste and skill in archi- 
tecture are attested by Henry VII. 's chapel at Westminster 
and St George's chapel at Windsor. He directed the building 
of the former, and the finishing and decoration of the latter, 
to which, moreover, he was a liberal contributor, building at 
his own expense a chapel still called by his name and ornamented 
with his crest, the initial letters of his name, and a device repre- 
senting the hemp-bray, an instrument used by hemp manu- 
facturers. He died in 1503, before the Westminster chapel was 
completed, and was interred in St George's chapel. 

BRAY, THOMAS (1656-1730), English divine, was born at 
Marton, Shropshire, in 1656, and educated at All Souls' College, 
Oxford. After leaving the university he was appointed vicar 
of Over-Whitacre, and rector of Sheldon in Warwickshire, 
where he wrote his famous Catechetical Lectures. Henry Compton, 
bishop of London, appointed him in 1696 as his commissary to 
organize the Anglican church in Maryland, and he was in that 
colony in 1699-1700. He took a great interest in colonial 
missions, especially among the American Indians, and it is to 
his exertions that the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel 
owes its existence. He also projected a successful scheme 
for establishing parish libraries in England and America, out 
of which grew the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge. 
From 1706 till his death in February 1730 he was rector of St 
Botolph- Without, Aldgate, London, being unceasingly engaged 
in philanthropic and literary pursuits. 

BRAY, a village in the Wokingham parliamentary division 
of Berkshire, England, beautifully situated on the west (right) 
bank of the Thames, 1 m. S. of Maidenhead Bridge. Pop. (1901) 
2978. There are numerous riverside residences in the locality. 
The church of St Michael has portions of various dates from 
the Early English period onward, and is much restored. It 
contains a number of brasses of the 14th, 15th, 16th and 17th 
centuries. A well-known ballad, " The Vicar of Bray," tells 
how a vicar held his position by easy conversions of faith accord- 
ing to necessity, from the days of Charles II. until the accession 
of George I. and the foundation of " the illustrious house of 
Hanover " (1714). One Francis Carswell, who is buried in the 
church, was vicar for forty-two years, approximately during 
this period, dying in 1709; but the legend is earlier, and the name 
of the vicar who gave rise to it is not certainly known. That of 
Simon Aleyn, who held the office from c. 1 540 to 1 588, is generally 
accepted, as, in the reigns of Henry VIII., Edward VI., Mary 
and Elizabeth, he is said to have been successively Papist, 
Protestant, Papist and Protestant. The name of Simon Simonds 
is also given on the authority of the vicar of the parish in 1745; 
Simonds died a canon of Windsor in 1531, but had been vicar of 
Bray. Tradition ascribes the song to a soldier in Colonel Fuller's 
troop of dragoons in the reign of George I. 

BRAY, a seaport and watering-place of Co. Wicklow, 
Ireland, 12 m. S.S.E. of Dublin on the Dublin & South-Eastern 
railway, situated on both sides of the river Bray. Pop. of urban 
district (1901) 7424. For parliamentary purposes it is divided 
between the eastern division of county Wicklow and the southern 
of county Dublin. A harbour was constructed by the urban 
district council (the harbour authority) which accommodates 
ships of 400 tons. There is some industry in brewing, milling 
and fishing, but the town, which is known as the " Irish Brighton," 
is almost wholly dependent for its prosperity on visitors from 
Dublin and elsewhere. It therefore possesses all the equipments 
of a modern seaside resort; there is a fine sea-wall with esplanade 
upwards of a mile in length; the bathing is good, and race 
meetings are held. The town is rapidly increasing in size. 
The coast, especially towards the promontory of Bray Head, 
offers beautiful sea-views, and some of the best inland scenery 
in the county is readily accessible, such as the Glens of the Dargle 
and the Downs, the demesne of Powerscourt, the Bray river, 



with its loughs, and the pass of the Scalp. The demesne oi 
Kilruddery, the seat of the earls of Meath, is specially beautiful. 
About 1 1 70 Bray was bestowed by Richard de Clare or Strong- 
bow, earl of Pembroke and Strigul, on Walter de Reddesford, 
who took the title of baron of Bray, and built a castle. 

BRAYLEY, EDWARD WEDLAKE (1773-1854), English 
antiquary and topographer, was born at Lambeth, London, in 
1773. He was apprenticed to the enamelling trade, but early 
developed literary tastes. He formed a close friendship with 
John Britton, which lasted for sixty-five years. They entered 
into a literary partnership, and after some small successes at 
song and play writing they became joint editors of The Beauties 
of England and Wales, themselves writing many of the volumes. 
Long after he had become famous as a topographer, Brayley 
continued his enamel work. In 1823 he was elected a fellow of 
the Society of Antiquaries. He died in London on the 23rd of 
September 1854. His other works include Sir Reginalde or the 
Black Tower (1803); Views in Suffolk, Norfolk and Northampton- 
shire, illustrative of works of Robt. Bloomfield (1806); Lambeth 
Palace (1806); The History of the Abbey Church of Westminster 
(2 vols., 1818); Topographical Sketches of Brighthelm stone (1825); 
Historical and Descriptive Accounts of Theatres of London (1826) ; 
Londiniana (1829); History of Surrey (5 vols., 1841-1848). 

BRAZIER (from the Fr. brasier, which comes from braise, 
hot charcoal), a metal receptacle for holding burning coals or 
charcoal, much used in southern Europe and the East for 
warming rooms. Braziers are often elegant in form, and highly 
artistic in ornamentation, with chased or embossed feet and 
decorated exteriors. 

BRAZIL, or Brasil, a legendary island in the Atlantic Ocean. 
The name connects itself with the red dye-woods so called in the 
middle ages, possibly also applied to other vegetable dyes, and 
so descending from the Insulae Purpurariae of Pliny. It first 
appears as the I. de Brazi in the Venetian map of Andrea Bianco 
(1436), where it is found attached to one of the larger islands 
of the Azores. When this group became better known and was 
colonized, the island in question was renamed Terceira. It is 
probable that the familiar existence of " Brazil " as a geo- 
graphical name led to its bestowal upon the vast region of South 
America, which was found to supply dye-woods kindred to those 
which the name properly denoted. The older memory survived 
also, and the Island of Brazil retained its place in mid-ocean, 
some, hundred miles to the west of Ireland, both in the traditions 
of the forecastle and in charts. In J. Purdy's General Chart of 
the Atlantic, " corrected to 1830," the " Brazil Rock (high) " is 
marked with no indication of doubt, in 51 10' N. and 15° 50' W. 
In a chart of currents by A.G.Findlay, dated 1853, these names 
appear again. But in his 12th edition of Purdy's Memoir 
Descriptive and Explanatory of the N. Atlantic Ocean (1865), the 
existence of Brazil and some other legendary islands is briefly 
discussed and rejected. (See also Atlantis.) 

BRAZIL, a republic of South America, the largest political 
division of that continent and the third largest of the western 
hemisphere. It is larger than the continental United States 
excluding Alaska, and slightly larger than the great bulk of 
Europe lying east of France. Its extreme dimensions are 2629 m. 
from Cape Orange (4 21' N.) almost due south to the river 
Chuy (33 45' S. lat.), and 2691 m. from Olinda (Ponta de Pedra, 
8° o' 57" S., 34 50' W.) due west to the Peruvian frontier (about 
73 50' W.). The most northerly point, the Serra Roraima on 
the Venezuela and British Guiana frontier (5 10' N.), is 56 m. 
farther north than Cape Orange. The area, which was augmented 
by more than 60,000 sq. m. in 1903 and diminished slightly in 
the boundary adjustment with British Guiana (1904), is estimated 
to have been 3,228,452 sq. m. in 190c (A. Supan, Die Bevolkerung 
der Erde, Gotha, 1904). A subsequent planimetric calculation, 
which takes into account these territorial changes, increases the 
area to 3,270,000 sq. m. 

Boundaries. — Brazil is bounded N. by Colombia, Venezuela 
and the Guianas, N.E., E. and S.E. by the Atlantic, S. by 
Uruguay, Paraguay and Bolivia, and W. by Argentina, Para- 
guay, Bolivia, Peru, Ecuador and Colombia. Its territory 



GEOGRAPHY] 



BRAZIL 



439 



touches that of every South American nation, except Chile, 
and with each one there has been a boundary dispute at some 
stage in its political life. The Spanish and Portuguese crowns 
attempted to define the limits between their American colonies 
in 1750 and 1777, and the lines adopted still serve in great part 
to separate Brazil from its neighbours. Lack of information 
regarding the geographical features of the interior, however, led 
to some indefinite descriptions, and these have been fruitful 
sources of dispute ever since. The Portuguese were persistent 
trespassers in early colonial times, and their land-hunger took 
them far beyond the limits fixed by Pope Alexander VI. In the 
boundary disputes which have followed, Brazil seems to have 
pursued this traditional policy, and generally with success. 

Beginning at the mouth of the Arroyo del Chuy, at the southern 
extremity of a long sandbank separating Lake Mirim from the 
Atlantic (33°45' S. lat.), the boundary line between Brazil and 
Uruguay passes up that rivulet and across to the most southerly 
tributary of Lake Mirim, thence down the western shore of that 
lake to the Jaguarao and up that river to its most southerly 
source. The line then crosses to the hill-range called Cuchilla 
de Sant' Anna, which is followed in a north-west direction to the 
source of the Cuareim, or Quarahy, this river becoming the 
boundary down to the Uruguay. This line was fixed by the 
treaty of 185 1, by which the control of Lake Mirim remains with 
Brazil. Beginning at the mouth of the Quarahy, the boundary 
line between Brazil and Argentina ascends the Uruguay, crosses 
to the source of the Santo Antonio, and descends that small 
stream and the Iguassu to the Parana, where it terminates. 
This line was defined by the treaty of 1857, and by the decision 
of President Cleveland in 189s with regard to the small section 
between the Uruguay and Iguassu rivers. The boundary with 
Paraguay was definitely settled in 1872. It ascends the Parana 
to the great falls of Guayra, or Sete Quedas, and thence westward 
along the water-parting of the Sierra de Maracayu to the cerro 
of that name, thence northerly along the Sierra d'Amambay to 
the source of the Estrella, a small tributary of the Apa, and 
thence down those two streams to the Paraguay. From this 
point the line ascends the Paraguay to the mouth of the Rio 
Negro,the outlet of the BahiaNegra, where the Bolivian boundary 
begins. As regards the Peruvian boundary, an agreement was 
reached in 1904 to submit the dispute to the arbitration of the 
president of Argentina in case further efforts to reach an amic- 
able settlement failed. The provisional line, representing the 
Brazilian claim, begins at the termination of the Bolivian 
section (the intersection of the nth parallel with the meridian 
of 72 26' W. approx.) and follows a semicircular direction 
north-west and north to the source of the Javary (or Yavary), 
to include the basins of the Purus and Jurua. within Brazilian 
jurisdiction. The line follows the Javary to its junction with the 
Amazon, and runs thence north by east direct to the mouth of 
the Apaporis, a tributary of the Yapura, in about i c 30' S. lat., 
69 20' W. long., where the Peruvian section ends. The whole of 
this line, however, was subject to future adjustments, Peru 
claiming all that part of the Amazon valley extending eastward 
to the Madeira and lying between the Beni and the east and 
west boundary line agreed upon by Spain and Portugal in 1750 
and 1777, which is near the 7th parallel. With regard to the 
section between the Amazon and the Apaporis river, already 
settled between Brazil and Peru, the territory has been in 
protracted dispute between Peru, Ecuador and Colombia; 
but a treaty of limits between Brazil and Ecuador was signed in 
1901 and promulgated in 1905. The boundary with Colombia, 
fixed by treaty of April 24, 1907, follows the lower rim of 
the Amazon basin, as defined by Brazil. The Colombian claim 
included the left bank of the Amazon eastward to the Auahy 
or Avahy-parana channel between the Amazon and Yapura, 
whence the line ran northward to the Negro near the intersection 
of the 66th meridian. The Brazilian line ran north and north- 
west from the mouth of the Apaporis to the 70th meridian, which 
was followed to the water-parting south of the Uaupes basin, 
thence north-east to the Uaupes river, which was crossed close 
to the 69th meridian, thence easterly along the Serra Tunaji 



and Isana river to Cuyari, thence northerly up the Cuyari and 
one of its small tributaries to the Serra Capparro, and thence 
east and south-east along this range to the Cucuhy rock (Pedra 
de Cucuhy) on the left bank of the Negro, where the Colombian 
section ends. Negotiations for the settlement of this controversy, 
which involved fully one-third of the state of Amazonas, were 
broken off in 1870, but were resumed in 1905. The boundary 
with Venezuela, which was defined by a treaty of 1859, runs 
south-eastward from Cucuhy across a level country intersected 
by rivers and channels tributary to both the Negro and Orinoco, 
to the Serra Cupuy watershed which separates the rivers of 
the Amazon and Orinoco valleys. This watershed includes the 
ranges running eastward and northward under the names of 
Imeri, Tapiira-peco, Curupira, Parima and Pacaraima, the 
Venezuelan section terminating at Mt. R^oraima. On the 9th 
of December 1905 protocols were signed at Caracas accepting 
the line between Cucuhy and the Serra Cupuy located in 1880, 
and referring the remainder, which had been located by a 
Brazilian commission in 1882 and 1884, to a mixed commission 
for verification. 

The disputed boundary between Brazil and British Guiana, 
which involved the possession of a territory having an estimated 
area of 12,741 sq. m., was settled by arbitration in 1904 with 
the king of Italy as arbitrator, the award being a com- 
promise division by which Great Britain received about 7336 
sq. m. and Brazil about 5405. The definite boundary line 
starts from Mt. Roraima and follows the water-parting east and 
south to the source of the Ireng or Mahu river, which with the 
Takutu forms the boundary as far south as i° N. to enclose the 
basin of the Essequibo and its tributaries, thence it turns east 
and north of east along the Serra Acaria to unite with the 
unsettled boundary line of Dutch Guiana near the intersection 
of the 2nd parallel north with the 56th meridian. Negotiations 
were initiated in 1905 for the definite location of the boundary 
with Dutch Guiana. Running north-east and south-east to 
enclose the sources of the Rio Paru, it unites with the French 
Guiana line at 2° 10' N., 55° W., and thence runs easterly along 
the water-parting of the Serra Tumuc-Humac to the source of the 
Oyapok, which river is the divisional line to the Atlantic coast. 
The boundary with French Guiana (see Guiana), which had 
long been a subject of dispute, was settled by arbitration in 
1900, the award being rendered by the government of Switzerland. 
The area of the disputed territory was about 34,750 sq. m. 

Physical Geography. — A relief map of Brazil shows two very 
irregular divisions of surface : the great river basins, or plains, of 
the Amazon-Tocantins and La Plata, which are practically con- 
nected by low elevations in Bolivia, and a huge, shapeless mass of 
highlands filling the eastern projection of the continent and extend- 
ing southward to the plains of Rio Grande do Sul and westward to 
the Bolivian frontier. Besides these there are a narrow coastal 
plain, the low plains of Rio Grande do Sul, and the Guiana highlands 
on the northern slope of the Amazon basin below the Rio Negro. 

The coastal plain consists in great part of sandy beaches, detritus 
formations, and partially submerged areas caused by uplifted 
beaches and obstructed river channels. Mangrove swamps, p»* 
lagoons and marshes, with inland canals following the Keller. 
coast line for long distances, are characteristic features of a large 
extent of the Brazilian coast. Parts of this coastal plain, however, 
have an elevation of 100 to 200 ft., are rolling and fertile in character, 
and terminate on the coast in a line of bluffs. In the larger de- 
pressions, like that of the Reconcavo of Bahia, there are large 
alluvial areas celebrated for their fertility. This plain is of varying 
width, and on some parts of the coast it disappears altogether. 
In Rio Grande do Sul, where two large lakes have been created 
by uplifted sand beaches, the coastal plain widens greatly, and is 
merged in an extensive open, rolling grassy plain, traversed by 
ridges of low hills (cuchillas), similar to the neighbouring republic of 
Uruguay. The western part of this plain is drained by the Uruguay 
and its tributaries, which places it within the river Plate (La Plata) 
basin. 

The two great river basins of the Amazon- r ocantins and La Plata 
comprise within themselves, approximately, three-fifths of the total 
area of Brazil. Large areas of these great river plains are annually 
flooded, the flood-plains of the Amazon extending nearly across 
the whole country and comprising thousands of square miles. The 
Amazon plain is heavily forested and has a slope of less than one 
inch to the mile within Brazilian territory — one competent authority 
placing it at about one-fifth of an inch per mile. The La Plata basin 



44° 



BRAZIL 



[GEOGRAPHY 



is less heavily wooded, its surface more varied, and its Brazilian 
part stands at a much higher elevation. 

Of the two highland regions of Brazil, that of the northern slope 
of the Amazon basin belongs physically to the isolated mountain 
system extending eastward from the Negro and Orinoco to the 
Atlantic, the water-parting of which forms the boundary line between 
the Guianas and Brazil. The culminating point is near the western 
extremity of this chain and its altitude is estimated at 8500 ft. 
The ranges gradually diminish in elevation towards the east, the 
highest point of the Tumuc-Humac range, on the frontier of French 
Guiana, being about 2600 ft. The Brazilian plateau slopes south- 
ward and eastward, traversed by broken ranges of low mountains 
and deeply eroded by river courses. The table-topped hills of 
Almeyrin (or Almeirim) and Erere, which lie near the lower Amazon 
and rise to heights of 800 and 900 ft., are generally considered the 
southernmost margin of this plateau, though Agassiz and others 
describe them as remains of a great sandstone sheet which once 
covered the entire Amazon valley. Its general elevation has been 
estimated to be about 2000 ft. It is a stony, semi-arid region, 
thinly wooded, having good grazing campos in its extreme western 
section. Its semi-arid character is due to the mountain ranges on 
its northern frontier, which extract the moisture from the north-east 
trades and leave the Brazilian plateau behind them with a very 
limited rainfall, except near the Atlantic coast. The more arid 
districts offer no inducement for settlement and are inhabited only 
by a few roving bands of Indians, but there were settlements of 
whites in the grazing districts of the Rio Branco at an early date, 
and a few hundreds of adventurers have occupied the mining districts 
of the east. In general, Brazilian Guiana, as this plateau region is 
sometimes called, is one of the least attractive parts of the republic. 

The great Brazilian plateau, which is the most important physical 
division of Brazil, consists of an elevated tableland 1000 to 3000 ft. 
above the sea-level, traversed by two great mountain systems, and 
deeply eroded and indented by numerous rivers. A thick sandstone 
sheet once covered the greater part if not all of rt, remains of which 
are found on the elevated chapadas of the interior and on isolated 
elevations extending across the republic toward its western frontier. 
These chapadas and elevations, which are usually described as 
mountain ranges, are capped by horizontal strata of sandstone and 
show the original surface, which has been worn away by the rivers, 
leav ing here and there broad flat-topped ridges between river basins 
and narrower ranges of hills between river courses. From the 
valleys their rugged, deeply indented escarpments, stretching away 
to the horizon, have the appearance of a continuous chain of moun- 
tains. The only true mountain systems, however, so far as known, 
are the two parallel ranges which follow the contour of the coast, 
and the central, or Goyana, system. The first consists of an almost 
continuous range crossing the northern end of Rio Grande do Sul 
and following the coast northward to the vicinity of Cape Frio, and 
thence northward in broken ranges to the vicinity of Cape St Roque, 
and a second parallel range running from eastern Sao Paulo north- 
east and north to the eastern margin of the Sao Francisco basin in 
northern Bahia, where that river turns eastward to the Atlantic. 
The first of these is generally known as the Serra do Mar, or Coast 
Range, though it is locally known under many names. Its cul- 
minating point is in the Organ Mountains (Serra dos Orgaos), near 
Rio de Janeiro, which reaches an elevation of 7323 ft. The inland 
range, which is separated from the Coast Range in the vicinity of 
Rio de Janeiro by the valley of the Parahyba do Sul river, is known 
as the Serra da Mantiqueira, and from the point where it turns 
northward to form the eastern rim of the Sao Francisco basin, as the 
Serra do Espinhaco. This range is also known under various local 
names. Its culminating point is toward the western extremity of 
the Mantiqueira range where the Itatiaya, or Itatiaia-assu, peak 
rises to an elevation of 8898 ft. (other measurements give 9823 ft.), 
probably the highest summit in Brazil. This range forms the true 
backbone of the maritime mountainous belt and rises from the 
plateau itself, while the Coast Range rises on its eastern margin and 
forms a rim to the plateau. North of Cape Frio the Coast Range 
is much broken and less elevated, while the Serra do Espinhaco 
takes a more inland course and is separated from the coast by 
great gently-sloping, semi-barren terraces. The second system — the 
Central or Goyana — consists of two distinct chains of mountains 
converging toward the north in the elevated chapadao between the 
Tocantins and Sao Francisco basins. The eastern range of this 
central system, which crosses western Minas Geraes from the so-called 
Serra das Vertentes to the valley of the Paracatii, a western tributary 
of the Sao Francisco, is called the Serra da Canastra and Serra da 
Matta da Corde. Its culminating point is toward its southern ex- 
tremity in the Serra da Canastra, 4206 ft. above sea-level. The 
western range, or what is definitely known of it, runs across southern 
Goyaz, south-west to north-east, and forms the water-parting 
between the Parana and Tocantins-Araguaya basins. Its culmin- 
ating point is in the Montes Pyreneos, near the city of Goyaz, and 
is about 4500 ft. above sea-level. 

The great part of this immense region consists of chapadoes, as 
the larger table-land areas are called, chapadas or smaller sections 
of the same, and broadly excavated river valleys. How extensive 
this work of erosion has been may be seen in the Tocantins-Araguaya 
basin, where a great pear-shaped depression, approximately 100 to 



500 m. wide, 700 m. long, and from 1000 to 1500 ft. deep, has 
been excavated northward from the centre of the plateau. South- 
ward the Parana has excavated another great basin and eastward 
the Sao Francisco another. Add to these the eroded river basins of 
the Xingii, Tapajos and Guapore on the north and west, the Para- 
guay on the south-west, and the scores of smaller rivers along the 
Atlantic coast, and we may have some conception of the agencies 
that have been at work in breaking down and shaping this great 
table-land, perhaps the oldest part of the continent. The most 
southern of these chapadoes, that of the Parana basin, in which may 
be included the northern part of the Uruguay and eastern part of 
the Paraguay basins, includes the greater part of the states of Rio 
Grande do Sul, Santa Catharina, Parana and Sao Paulo, the south- 
western corner of Minas Geraes, a part of southern Goyaz, and the 
south-eastern corner of Matto Grosso. The greatest elevation is on 
its eastern or Atlantic margin where the average is about 3280 ft. 
above sea-level. The plateau breaks down abruptly toward the sea, 
and slopes gradually some hundreds of feet toward the south and 
west. There has been considerable denudation toward the west, 
the eastern tributaries of the Parana rising very near the coast. 
The northern and western parts of this plateau have an average 
elevation a little less than that of the Atlantic margin, and their 
slopes are toward the south and east, those of Goyaz and Matto 
Grosso being abrupt and deeply eroded. This great chapadao is in 
many respects the best part of Brazil, having a temperate climate, 
extensive areas of fertile soil, rich forests and a regular rainfall. 
Its Atlantic slopes are heavily wooded, but the western slopes exhibit 
grass-covered campos between the river courses. The Sac Francisco 
chapadao, which has a general elevation of about 2600 ft., covers 
the greater part of the states of Minas Geraes and Bahia, and a small 
part of western Pernambuco, and might also be considered con- 
tinuous with those of the Parnahyba and Tocantins-Araguaya 
basins. This region is more tropical in character, partially barren, 
and has an uncertain rainfall, a large part of the Sao Francisco basin 
and the upper Atlantic slope of its eastern rim being subject to 
long-continued droughts. This region is well wooded along the 
river courses of Minas Geraes, the lower Atlantic slopes of Bahia, 
which are perhaps outside the plateau proper, and on the weather 
side of some of the elevated ridges where the rainfall is heavy and 
regular. It has extensive campos and large areas of exposed rock 
and stony steppes, but is richly provided with mineral deposits. It 
breaks down less abruptly toward the Atlantic, the slopes in Bahia 
being long and gradual. The Parnahyba chapadao covers the state 
of Piauhy, the southern part of Maranhao, and the western part of 
Ceara. Its general elevation is less than that of the Sao Francisco 
region, owing to the slope of the plateau surface toward the Amazon 
depression and to denudation. It resembles the Sao Francisco region 
in its uncertain rainfall and exposure to droughts, and in having large 
areas of campos suitable for grazing purposes. It is thinly wooded, 
except in the north, where the climatic conditions approach those 
of the Amazon valley. Its climate is more tropical and its develop- 
ment has gone forward less rapidly than inthe more temperate 
regions of the south. The Amazonian chapadao, which includes the 
remainder of the great Brazilian plateau west of the Sao Francisco 
and Parnahyba regions and which appears to be the continuation 
of these tablelands westward, is much the largest of these plateau 
divisions. It covers the greater part of the states of Matto Grosso 
and Goyaz, a large part of southern Para, the southern margin of 
Amazonas, and a considerable part of western Maranhao. It in- 
cludes the river basins of the Tocantins-Araguaya, Xingii, Tapajos, 
and the eastern tributaries of the Guapore-Madeira. A considerable 
part of it has been excavated by these rivers to a level which gives 
their valleys the elevation and character of lowlands, though isolated 
hills and ranges with the characteristic overlying horizontal sand- 
stone strata of the ancient plateau show that it was once a highland 
region. The southern margin of this plateau breaks down abruptly 
toward the south and overlooks the Parana and Paraguay basins 
from elevations of 2600 to 3000 ft. There is great diversity in the 
character and appearance of this extensive region. It lies wholly 
within the tropics, though its more elevated districts enjoy a tem- 
perate climate. Its chapadas are covered with extensive campos, 
its shallow valleys with open woodlands, and its deeper valleys 
with heavy forests. The rainfall is good, but not heavy. The 
general slope is toward the Amazon, and its rivers debouch upon the 
Amazonian plain through a succession of falls and rapids. 

There remains only the elevated valley of the Parahyba do Sul, 
lying between the so-called Serra das Vertentes of southern Minas 
Geraes and the Serra do Mar, and extending from the Serra da 
Bocaina, near the city of Sao Paulo, eastward to Cape Frio and the 
coastal plain north of that point. It includes a small part of eastern 
Sao Paulo, the greater part of the state of Rio de Janeiro, a small 
corner of Espirito Santo, and a narrow strip along the southern 
border of Minas Geraes. It is traversed by two mountain chains, 
the Serra da Mantiqueira and Serra do Mar, and the broad, fertile 
valley of the Parahyba do Sul which lies between them, and which 
slopes gently toward the east from a general elevation exceeding 
2000 ft. in Sao Paulo. This region is the smallest of the chapadao 
divisions of the great plateau, and might be considered either a 
southward extension of the Sao Francisco or an eastward extension 
of the Parana chapadao. It is one of the most favoured regions oi 



GK! 






o 



-Ul* 



Pi 





% 






wMS¥mm 



SlSi 



y%: 



~ & ~~, o—~- 



CO 



./ 







St 



stijj '|1 













%•[<£• 



.aSs^f^? 




* 5 ^ v 



w 




• a < : - • 

a Wo ill 



•Si, 



, « 



ft 



mtM^ 



1 






flfpp 












K. 




©re 



fe§KNnl 




■~fes-^ 




■*» 





*o 



<^ s m i 




v jff*. 



'Z£»p: 




,Sfe; 



m 




\, 



SF* 







It/op- 1 ^' 



/'%** 









i^Li 



(N 






^v\'i 





m 






f^ 





—rn 









15MI 




H 



Q 



V, 



S J3 ^ 

.S "tf u 

13 g "i 

3 fe </) 

c S ,5 



> o ™ 



o r/3 



jM 



O 





a. X 



UD 



<; 



CD ' 



GEOGRAPHY] 



BRAZIL 



441 



Brazil, having an abundant rainfall, extensive forests of valuable 
timber, and large areas of fertile soil. The mountain slopes are still 
masses of dense forest, though their lower elevations and neighbour- 
ing valleys have been cleared for cultivation and by dealers in 
rosewood and other valuable woods. This elevated valley is noted 
for its fertility and was once the principal coffee-producing district 
of Brazil. 

Outside the two great river systems of the Amazon and river 
Plate (Rio de la Plata), which are treated under their respective 
titles, the rivers of Brazil are limited to the numerous 
Rivers. sma \\ streams and three or four large rivers which flow 
eastward from the plateau regions directly into the Atlantic. The 
Amazon system covers the entire north-western part of the republic, 
the state of Amazonas, nearly the whole of Para and the greater 
part of Matto Grosso being drained by this great river and its 
tributaries. If the Tocantins-Araguaya basin is included in the 
hydrographic system, the greater part of Goyaz and a small part of 
Maranhao should be added to this drainage area. The Tocantins is 
sometimes treated as a tributary of the Amazon because its outlet, 
called the Rio Para, is connected with that great river by a number 
of inland channels. It is an entirely separate river, however, and the 
inland communication between them is due to the slight elevation 
of the intervening country above their ordinary levels and to the 
enormous volume of water brought down by the Amazon, especially 
in the flood season. As the outlet of the Tocantins is so near to 
that of the Amazon, and their lower valleys are conterminous, it 
is convenient to treat them as parts of the same hydrographic 
basin. 

In the extreme north-east corner of the republic where the 
Brazilian Guiana plateau slopes toward the Atlantic there is a small 
area lying outside the drainage basin of the Amazon. Its rivers flow 
easterly into the Atlantic and drain a triangular-shaped area of the 
plateau lying between the northern frontier and the southern and 
western watersheds of the Araguary, whose extreme limits are about 
0° 30' N. lat. and 53° 50' W. long. The more important of these 
rivers are the Araguary, Amapa, Calgoene, Cassipore and Oyapok. 
The Araguary rises in the Tumuc-Humac mountains, in about 
2° 30' N. lat., 52 10' W. long., and follows a tortuous course south 
and north-east to the Atlantic. Its largest tributary, the Amapary, 
rises still farther west. Little is known of the country through 
which it flows, and its channel is broken by rapids and waterfalls 
where it descends to the coastal plain. The Amapa is a short river 
rising on the eastern slopes of the same range and flowing across a 
low, wooded plain, filled with lagoons. The Calgoene and Cassipore 
enter the Atlantic farther north and have a north-east course across 
the same plain. All these small rivers are described as auriferous 
and have attracted attention for this reason. The Oyapok, or 
Vicente Pinzon, is the best-known of the group and forms the bound- 
ary line between Brazil and French Guiana under the arbitration 
award of 1900. It rises in about 2° 05' N., 53° 48' W., and flows 
easterly and north-easterly to the Atlantic. Its course is less tortuous 
than that of the Araguary. 

The rivers of the great Brazilian plateau which flow directly to the 
Atlantic coast may be divided into two classes: those of its north- 
ward slope which flow in*a northerly and north-easterly direction 
to the north-east coast of the republic, and those which drain its 
eastern slope and flow to the sea in an easterly direction. The former 
reach the coastal plain over long and gradual descents, and are 
navigable for considerable distances. The latter descend from the 
plateau much nearer the coast, and are in most cases navigable for 
short distances only. In both classes navigation is greatly impeded 
by sandbars at the mouths of these rivers, while in the districts of 
periodical rainfall it is greatly restricted in the dry season. The 
more important rivers of the first division, which are described in 
more detail under the titles of the Brazilian states through which 
they flow, are the following: the Gurupy, Tury-assii, Mearim, 
Itapicuru and Balsas, in the state of Maranhao; the Parnahyba 
and its tributaries in Piauhy; Jaguaribe in Ceara; and the Apody 
and Piranhas in Rio Grande do Norte. Of these the Parnahyba is 
the most important, having a total length of about 900 m., broken 
at intervals by rapids and navigable in sections. It receives only 
one important tributary from Maranhao — the Rio das Balsas, 
447 m. long — and five from Piauhy, the Urussuhy-assu, Gurgueia, 
Caninde, Poty and Longa. Piauhy is wholly within its drainage 
basin, although the river forms the boundary line between that state 
and Maranhao throughout its entire length. All the rivers in this 
division are influenced by the periodical character of the rainfall, 
their navigable channels being greatly shortened in the dry season 
(August- January). In Ceara the smaller rivers become dry channels 
in the dry season, and in protracted droughts the larger ones dis- 
appear also. 

The rivers of the second division are included in a very great 
extension of coast and are influenced by wide differences in climate. 
Their character is also determined by the distance of the Serra do 
Mar from the coast, the more southern rivers having short precipitous 
courses. The more northern rivers are subject to periodical varia- 
tions in volume caused by wet and dry seasons, but the greater dis- 
tance of the coast range and the more gradual breaking down of 
the plateau toward the sea, give them longer courses and a greater 
extent of navigable water. North of the Sao Francisco the watershed 



projecting from the plateau eastward toward Cape St Roque, known 
as the Serra da Borborema in Parahyba and Rio Grande do Norte 
where its direction becomes north-east, leaves a triangular section 
of the easterly slope in which the river courses are short and much 
broken by rapids. The rainfall, also, is limited and uncertain. The 
largest of this group of small rivers is the Parahyba do Norte, belong- 
ing to the state of Parahyba, whose length is said to be less than 
200 m., only 5 or 6 m. of which are navigable for small steamers. 
The Sao Francisco, which belongs to the inland plateau region, is 
the largest river of the eastern coast of Brazil and exists by virtue 
of climatic conditions wholly different from those of the coast where 
it enters the Atlantic. The tributaries of the lower half of this great 
river, which belong to the Atlantic coast region, are small and often 
dry, but the upper river where the rainfall is heavier and more regular 
receives several large affluents. . The river is navigable up to the 
Paulo Affonso falls, 192 m. from the coast, and above the falls there 
is a much longer stretch of navigable water. 

From the Sao Francisco to Cape Frio there are many short rivers 
rising on the slopes of the plateau and crossing the narrow coastal 
plain to the sea. There are also a few of greater length which rise 
far back on the plateau itself and flow down to the plain through 
deeply cut, precipitous courses. The navigable channels of these 
rivers are restricted to the coastal plain, except where a river has 
excavated for itself a valley back into the plateau. The more im- 
portant of these rivers are the Itapicuru, Paraguassii, Contas or 
Jussiape, Pardo or Patype, and Jequitinhonha, of Bahia; the 
Mucury, and Doce, of Espirito Santo; and the Parahyba do Sul of 
the state of Rio de Janeiro. Of the Bahia group, the Jequitinhonha, 
sometimes called the Belmonte on its lower course, is the longest 
and most important, rising near Serro in the state of Minas Geraes 
and flowing in a curving north-east direction for a distance of about 
500 m., 84 of which are navigable inland from the sea. The Mucury 
and Doce also rise in Minas Geraes, and are much broken in their 
descent to the lower plains, the former having a navigable channel 
of 98 m. and the latter of 138 m. The Parahyba, or Parahyba do 
Sul, which enters the sea about 30 m. north of Cape S. Thome, is the 
largest and most important of the Atlantic coast rivers south of the 
Sao Francisco. It rises on an elevated tableland in the state of Sao 
Paulo and flows across the state of Rio de Janeiro from west to east, 
through a broad fertile valley producing coffee in its most elevated 
districts and sugar on its alluvial bottom-lands nearer the sea. It has 
a total length of 658 m., 57 of which are navigable between S. Fidelis 
and its mouth, and about 90 m. of its upper course. 

South of Cape Frio there are no large rivers along the coast because 
of the proximity of the Serra do Mar — the coastal plain being very 
narrow and in places disappearing altogether. There are many short 
streams along this coast, fed by heavy rainfalls, but they have no 
geographic importance and no economic Value under existing con- 
ditions. The largest of these and the only one of commercial value 
is the Ribeira de Iguape, which has its source on the tablelands of 
Parana and after receiving several affluents west of the Serra do 
Mar breaks through a depression in that range and discharges into 
the Atlantic some miles below Santos on the southern boundary of 
the state of Sao Paulo. This river has a navigable channel of 1 18 m. 
below Xiririca, and communicates with an inland canal or waterway 
extending for many miles along this coast and known as the Iguape, 
or Mar Pequeno. In Rio Grande do Sul the Atlantic coastal plain 
extends westward more than half-way across the state, and is well 
watered by numerous streams flowing eastward to the Lag6a dos 
Patos. Of these only two are of large size — the Guayba and Cama- 
quam. The first is formed by the confluence of the Jacuhy, Cahy, 
Sinos and Gravatahy, and is known under this name only from 
Porto Alegre to the Ponta de Itapua, where it enters the Lag6a dos 
Patos. This river system drains a large part of the northern moun- 
tainous region of the state, and has a considerable extension of 
navigable channels between the plateau margin and the lake. In 
the extreme southern part of the state, the Lag6a Mirim empties 
into the Lag6a dos Patos through a navigable channel 61J m. long, 
called the Rio Sao Goncalo. 

The Brazilian rivers of the Rio de la Plata system are numerous 
and important. Those of the Paraguay drain the south-western 
part of Matto Grosso, and the tributaries of the Parana cover the 
western slopes of the Serra do Mar from Rio Grande do Sul north 
to the south-west part of Minas Geraes, and include the south-east 
part of Matto Grosso and the south part of Goyaz within their 
drainage basin. This is one of the most important fluvial systems 
of Brazil, but its economic value is impaired by the great waterfalls 
of Guayra, or Sete Quedas, and Uribu-punga, and by the rapids and 
waterfalls in the majority of its affluents near their junction with the 
main stream. Between the two great waterfalls of the Parana there 
is an open channel of 276 m., passing through a rich and healthy 
country, and receiving large tributaries from one of the most fertile 
regions of Brazil. Among the larger of these are the great falls of 
the Iguassii, near the j unction of that river with the Parana. Though 
the Uruguay plays a less important part, its relations to the 
country arc similar to those of the Parana, and its tributaries from 
the plateau region are similarly broken by falls and rapids. The 
Paraguay is in great part a lowland river, with a sluggish current, 
and is navigable by large river steamers up to Corumba, and by 
smaller steamers to Cuyaba and the mouth of the Jauru. 



442 



BRAZIL 



{GEOGRAPHY 



Compared with the number, length and volume of its rivers, 
Brazil has very few lakes, only two of which are noticeable for their 
Lakes. size. There are a number of lakes in the lowland region 
of the Amazon valley, but these are mainly overflow 
reservoirs whose areas expand and contract with the rise and fall 
of the great river. The coastal plain is also intersected by lagoons, 
lakes and inland channels formed by uplifted beaches. These inland 
channels often afford many miles of sheltered navigation. The lakes 
formed in this manner are generally shallow, and are sometimes 
associated with extensive swamps, as in southern Bahia. The lakes 
of the Alag6as coast, however, are long, narrow and deep, occupying 
valleys which were deeply excavated when the land stood at a higher 
level, and which were transformed into lakes by the elevation of the 
coast. The largest of these are the LagSa do Norte, on whose margin 
stands the city of Maceio, and the Lagfia do Sul, a few miles south of 
that city. Both have outlets to the sea, and the former is salt 
There is a large number of these lakes along the coasts of Espirito 
Santo and Rio de Janeiro, some of them of considerable size. The 
two largest lakes of this class are on the coast of .Rio Grande do Sul 
and are known as the Lagoa dos Patos and Lagoa Mirim. Both of 
these lakes lie nearly parallel with the coast line, are separated from 
the ocean by broad sand beaches filled with small lakes, and com- 
municate with the ocean through the same channel. The Lag6a dos 
Patos is about 124 m. long with a maximum width of 37 m., and 
Lag6a Mirim is 108 m. long with a maximum width of 15 m. Both 
are navigable, though comparatively shallow and filled with sand- 
banks. So far as known, there are no lakes of noteworthy size in the 
interior of the country. There are a few small lakes in Maranhao 
and Piauhy, some in Goyaz in the great valley of the Araguaya, 
and a considerable number in Matto Grosso, especially in the Para- 
guay basin, where the sluggish current of that river is unable to carry 
away the rainfall in the rainy season. 

The coast of Brazil is indented with a number of almost land- 
locked bays, forming spacious and accessible harbours. The larger 
Coast. an d more important of these are Todos os Santos, on 

which is located the city of Sao Salvador or Bahia, and 
Rio de Janeiro or Guanabara, beside which stands the capital of the 
republic. These two are freely accessible to the largest ships afloat, 
f he bays of Espirito Santo, , Paranagua and Sao Francisco have 
similar characteristics, but they are smaller and more difficult of 
access. The first is the harbour for the city of Victoria, and the other 
two for ports of the same name in southern Brazil. The port of 
Pernambuco, or Recife, is formed by a stone reef lying across the 
entrance to a shallow bay at the mouth of two small rivers, Beberibe 
and Capibaribe, and is accessible to steamers of medium draught. 
Santa Catharina and Maranhao have well-sheltered harbours formed 
by an island lying in the mouth of a large bay, but the latter is 
shallow and difficult of access. Para, Parnahyba, Parahyba, Santos 
and Rio Grande do Sul are river ports situated near the sea on rivers 
having the same name ; but, with the exception of Para and Santos, 
they are difficult of access and are of secondary importance. There 
are still other bays along the coast which are well adapted for com- 
mercial purposes but are used only in the coasting trade. Many 
of the Atlantic coast rivers would afford excellent port facilities if 
obstructions were removed from their mouths. 

Geology. — Brazil is a region which has been free from violent 
disturbances since an early geological period. It has, indeed, been 
subject to oscillations, but the movements have been regional in 
character and have not been accompanied by the formation of any 
mountain chain or any belt of intense folding. From the Devonian 
onwards the beds lie flat or dip at low angles. They are faulted but 
not sharply folded. The mountain ranges of the east of Brazil, from 
Cape St Roque to the mouth of the river Plate, are composed chiefly 
of crystalline and mctamorphic rocks. Some of the metamorphic 
rocks may belong to the older Palaeozoic period, but the greater part 
of the series is probably Archaean. Similar rocks cover a large area 
in the province of Goyaz and in the south of the Matto Grosso, and 
they form, also, the hills which border the basin of the Amazon on 
the confines of Venezuela and Guiana. They constitute, in fact, an 
incomplete rim around the basin of sedimentary beds which occupies 
the Amazonian depression. In a large part of this basin the covering 
of sedimentary deposits is comparatively thin. The crystalline floor 
is exposed in the valleys of the Madeira, Xingu, &c. Some of the 
rocks thus exposed are, however, eruptive (e.g. in the Tapajoz), and' 
probably do not belong to the Archaean. The crystalline rocks are 
succeeded by beds which have been referred to the Cambrian and 
Silurian systems. In the valley of the Trombetas, one of the northern 
tributaries of the Amazon, fossils have been found which indicate 
either the top of the Ordovician or the bottom of the Silurian. In 
the Maecuru, another northern affluent, graptolites of Ordovician 
age have been discovered, and Silurian fossils are said to have been 
found in the Maraca. Elsewhere the identification of the Silurian 
and older systems does not rest on palaeontological evidence. 
Devonian beds cover a much more extensive area. They crop out 
in a band some 25 to 50 m. north of the lower Amazon and in another 
band at a still greater distance south of that river. These bands are 
often concealed by more recent deposits, but it is clear that in this 
region the Devonian beds form a basin or synclinal with the Amazon 
for its axis. Devonian beds also lie upon the older rocks in the Matto 
Grosso and other provinces in the interior of Brazil, where they 



generally form plateaux of nearly horizontal strata. Fossils have 
been found in many localities. They belong to either the lower or the 
middle division of the Devonian system. The fauna shows striking 
analogias with that of the Bokkeveld beds of South Africa on the one 
hand and of the Hamilton group of North America on the other. 
The Carboniferous system in Brazil presents itself under two facies, 
the one marine and the other terrestrial. In the basin of the Lower 
Amazon the Carboniferous beds lie within the Devonian synclinal 
and crop out on both sides of the river next to the Devonian bands. 
There is a lower series consisting of sandstone and an upper series 
of limestone. The former appears to be almost unfossiliferous, the 
latter has yielded a rich marine fauna, which belongs to the top 
of the Carboniferous or to the Permo-carboniferous. In southern 
Brazil, on the other hand, in Rio Grande do Sul ; Parana, &c, the 
beds of this period are of terrestrial origin, containing coal seams and 
remains of plants. Some of the plants are European forms, others 
belong to the Glossopteris flora characteristic of India and South 
Africa. The beds are homotaxial with the Karharbari series of India, 
and represent either the top of the Carboniferous or the base of the 
Permian of Europe. The only Mesozoic system which is represented in 
Brazil by marine beds is the Cretaceous, and the marine facies, is 
restricted to the coasts and the basin of the Amazon. In the pro- 
vince of Sergipe, on the east coast, the beds are approximately on 
the horizon of the Cenomanian; in the valley of the Amazon they 
belong to the highest parts of the Cretaceous system, and the fauna 
shows Tertiary affinities. In the interior of Brazil, the Palaeozoic 
beds are directly overlaid by a series of red sandstones, &c, which 
appear to be of continental origin and of which the age is uncertain. 
Tertiary beds cover a considerable area, especially in the Amazonian 
depression. They consist chiefly of sands and clays of aeolian and 
freshwater origin. Of the Pleistocene and recent deposits the most 
interesting are the remains of extinct animals (Glyptodon, Mylodon, 
Megatherium, &c.) in the caves of the Sao Francisco. 

From the above account it will appear that, excepting near the 
coast and in the basin of the Amazon, there is no evidence that any 
part of Brazil has been under the sea since the close of the Devonian 
period. During the Triassic and Jurassic periods even the basin of 
the Amazon appears to have been dry land. Eruptive rocks occur 
in the Devonian and Carboniferous beds, but there is no evidence 
of volcanic activity since the Palaeozoic epoch. The remarkable 
" stone reefs " of the north-east coast are ancient beaches hardened 
by the infiltration of carbonate of lime. They are quite distinct in 
their formation from the coral reefs of the same coast. 

Climate. — Brazil lies almost wholly within the torrid zone, less than 
one-twelfth of its area lying south of the tropic of Capricorn. In 
general terms, it is a tropical country, with sub-tropical and tem- 
perate areas covering its three southern states and a great part of 
the elevated central plateau. The forest-covered, lowland valley 
of the Amazon is a region of high temperatures which vary little 
throughout the year, and of heavy rainfall. There is no appreciable 
change of seasons, except that produced by increased rainfall in the 
rainy season. The average temperature according to Castelnau is 
about 78°F., or 82-40° to 84-20° F. according to Agassiz. There is 
an increase in the rainfall from August to October, and again from 
November to March, the latter being the regular rainy season, but the 
time varies considerably between the valley of the upper Amazon 
and those of the upper Madeira and Negro. There is usually a short 
dry season on the upper Amazon in January and February, which 
causes two annual floods — that of November-December, and the 
great flood of March-June. The subsidence of the latter usually 
lasts until October. The average rainfall throughout the whole 
Amazon valley is estimated by Reclus as " probably in excess of 
2.metres " (78-7 in.), and the maximum rise of the great flood is about 
45 ft. The prevailing winds in the Amazon valley are easterly and 
westerly (or south-westerly), the former warm and charged with 
moisture, the latter dry and cold. The easterly winds, which are 
deflections of the trade winds, blow upstream with great regularity 
and force, more especially in the winter or dry season, and are felt 
as far inland as the mouths of the Madeira and Negro. Above these 
they are less regular and are attracted northward by the heated 
llanos of Venezuela in winter, or southward by the heated campos of 
Matto Grosso in summer. The cold south-westerly winds are felt 
when the sun is north of the equator, and are most severe, for 
a few days, in the month of May, when a tempo da friagem (cold 
period) causes much discomfort throughout the upper Amazon region. 
There are winter winds from the Andes, but in the summer season 
there are cold currents of air from up-river (ventos da cima) which are 
usually followed by downpours of rain. 

The coastal plain as far south as Santos is a region of high tem- 
peratures and great humidity. The year is usually divided into a 
winter (inverno) and summer (verao), corresponding approximately 
to a dry and wet season. The "dry " season, however, is a season of 
moderate rainfall, except on the north-east coast where arid con- 
ditions prevail. Another exception is tha: of the Pernambuco coast, 
where the rainy season comes between March and August, with the 
heaviest rainfall from May to July, which is the time of the southern 
winter. Going southward there is also a gradual decrease in the 
mean annual temperature, the difference between Rio de Janeiro 
and the Amazon being about 5°. The north-east coast, which is 
sandy and barren, shows an average mean annual temperature (at 



FAUNA] 



BRAZIL 



443 



Fortaleza) of nearly 8o°F., which is slightly higher than those of 
Maranhao and Para. At Pernambuco the mean summer temperature 
is 79-5° and that of winter 76-8°, which are about 3° lower than the 
mean temperature of Bahia in summer, and 5 higher than the Bahia 
mean in winter. South of Bahia there is a gradual increase in the 
rainfall, that of Rio de Janeiro exceeding 43 in. per annum. At 
Santos the rainfall is exceptionally heavy and the mean temperature 
high, but below that point the climatic conditions are considerably 
modified, the range in temperature being greater, the mean annual 
temperature lower, and the rainfall more evenly distributed through- 
out the year. The winds are more variable, and the seasons are more 
sharply defined. In Rio Grande do Sul the range in temperature is 
from 26° to 8o°, the climate being similar to that of Uruguay. At 
Pelotas, a sea-level port on Lag6a dos Patos, the mean annual tem- 
perature is about 63 ° and the annual rainfall about 42 in. Extreme 
variations in temperature are often produced by cold south-west 
storms from the Argentine pampas, which sweep across southern 
Brazil as far north as Cape Frio, the fall in temperature sometimes 
being 22 ° to 27 °. These storms usually last from two to three days 
and cause much discomfort. Winter rains are more frequent in 
southern Brazil, and violent storms prevail in August and September. 
At Blumenau, on the Santa Catharina coast, the annual rainfall is 

53 in- 

The climatic conditions of the Brazilian plateau are widely differ- 
ent from those of the coast in many respects. There is less uniformity 
in temperature, and the elevated chapadas are generally hotter during 
the day and cooler at night than are localities of the same latitude 
on the coast. The Brazilian Guiana plateau, lying immediately 
north of the equator, is in great part a hot, stony desert. Geo- 
graphically it belongs to the Amazon basin, as its western and 
southern slopes are drained by tributaries of that great river. 
Climatically, however, it is a region apart. It lies in the north-east 
trade winds belt, but the mountain chain on its northern frontier 
robs these winds of their moisture and leaves the greater part of 
the Brazilian plateau rainless. Its eastern and western extremities, 
however, receive more rain, the former being well forested, while 
the latter is covered with grassy campos. South. of the Amazon 
valley and filling a great part of the eastern projection of the con- 
tinent, is another arid, semi-barren plateau, lying within the south- 
east trade winds belt, and extending from Piauhy southward to 
southern Bahia. It covers the state of Piauhy and the western or 
inland parts of the states of Ceara, Rio Grande do Norte, Parahyba, 
Pernambuco and Bahia. The year is divided into a dry and wet 
season, the first from June to December, when rain rarely falls, the 
streams dry up and the campos are burned bare, and the second 
from January to May when the rains are sometimes heavy and the 
campos are covered with luxuriant verdure. The rains are neither 
regular nor certain, however, and sometimes fail for a succession of 
years, causing destructive seccas (droughts). The interior districts 
of Ceara, Pernambuco and Bahia have suffered severely from these 
skcas. The sun temperature is high on these barren tablelands, 
but the nights are cool and refreshing. The prevailing winds are 
the south-east trades, which have lost some of their moisture in 
rising from the coastal plain. In summer, becoming warmed by the 
heated- surface of the plateau, they sweep across it without a cloud 
or drop of rain. In winter the plateau is less heated, and cold 
currents of air from the west and south-west cause precipitation over 
a part if not all of this region. South and south-west of this arid 
plateau lie the inhabited tablelands of Rio de Janeiro, Sao Paulo 
and Minas Geraes, where the climate is greatly modified by a luxuri- 
ant vegetation and southerly winds, as well as by the elevation. 
Minas Geraes is forested along its water courses and along its southern 
border only; its sun temperature, therefore, is high and the rainfall 
in its northern districts is comparatively light. Sao Paulo is partly 
covered by open campos, and these also serve to augment the maxi- 
mum temperature. In both of these states, however, the nights are 
cool, and the mean annual temperature ranges from 68° to 77 , the 
northern districts of Minas Geraes being much warmer than the 
southern. In Sao Paulo and southern Minas Geraes there are some- 
times frosts. In the Parahyba valley, which extends across the state 
of Rio de Janeiro, the mean temperature is somewhat higher than 
it is in Sao Paulo and Minas Geraes, and the nights are warmer, but 
the higher valleys of the Serra do Mar enjoy a delightfully temperate 
climate. The rainfall throughout this region is abundant, except in 
northern Minas Geraes, where the climatic conditions are influenced 
to some extent by the arid eastern plateau. South of Sao Paulo the 
tablelands of Parana, Santa Catharina and Rio Grande do Sul enjoy 
a temperate climate, with an abundant rainfall. There are occasional 
frosts, but snow is never seen. Of Goyaz and Matto Grosso very 
little can be said. The lower river valleys of the Tocantins- Araguaya, 
Xingu, Tapajos and Paraguay are essentially tropical, their climate 
being hot and humid like that of the Amazon. The higher valleys 
of the Parana and its tributaries, and of the rivers which flow north- 
ward, are sub-tropical in character, having high sun temperatures 
and cool nights. Above these, the chapadas lie open to the sun and 
wind and have a cool, bracing atmosphere even where high sun 
temperatures prevail. _ The mean annual temperature at Goyaz 
(city), according to a limited number of observations, is about 77°. 
There is no absolutely dry season in this part of the great Brazilian 
plateau, though the year is customarily divided into a dry and wet 



season, the latter running from September to April in Goyaz, and 
from November to April in Matto Grosso. The prevailing winds are 
from the north-west in this region, and westerly winds in the rainy 
season are usually accompanied by rain. 

Fauna. — The indigenous fauna of Brazil is noteworthy not only 
for the variety and number of its genera and species, but also for its 
deficiency in the larger mammals. Of this, one of the best authorities 
on the subject (H. W. Bates in The Naturalist on the River Amazons) 
says: " Brazil, moreover, is throughout poor in terrestrial mammals, 
and the species are of small size." It is noteworthy, also, for the 
large number of species having arboreal habits, the density and ex- 
tent of the Amazon forests favouring their development rather than 
the development of those of terrestrial habits. Of Quadrumana 
there are about fifty species in Brazil, all arboreal, thirty-eight of 
which inhabit the Amazon region. They belong mostly to the 
Cebidae family, and are provided with prehensile tails. The Carnivora 
are represented by six species of the Felidae, the best known of 
which is the onca, or jaguar {F. onca, L.), and the cougar, or puma 
(F. concolor) ; three species of the Canidae, the South American wolf 
(C. jubatus), and two small jackals (C. brasiliensis and C. vetulus); 
and a few species of the Mustelina including two of the otter, two 
Galictis and one Mephitis. Of the plantigrades, Brazil has no bears, 
but has the related species of raccoon (Nasua socialis and N. solitaria) , 
popularly called coatis. The opossum (Didelphis) is represented by 
three or four species, two of which are so small that they are gener- 
ally called wood rats. The rodents are numerous and include several 
peculiar species. Only one species of hare is found in Brazil, the 
Lepus brasiliensis, and but one also of the squirrel {Scyurus). Of 
the amphibious rodents, the prea (Ca.via aperea), moco (C. rupestris), 
paca (Coelogenys paca), cutia {Dasyprocta aguti) and capybara 
(Hydrochoerus capybara) are noteworthy for their size and extensive 
range. Their flesh is used as an article of food, that of the paca being 
highly esteemed. Of the Muridae there are several genera and a 
large number of species, some of them evidently importations from 
the Old World. Brazil has three groups of animals similar to the 
common rat — the Capromydae, Loncheridae and Psammoryctidae — 
the best known of which is the " tuco-tuco " (Ctenomys brasiliensis), 
a small burrowing animal of Rio Grande do Sul which excavates 
long subterranean galleries and lives on roots and bulbs. One of the 
characteristic orders of the Brazilian fauna is that of the Edentata, 
which comprises the sloth, armadillo and ant-eater. These animals 
are found only in the tropical regions of South America. The range 
of the sloth is from the Guianas south into Minas Geraes, the arma- 
dillo as far south as the Argentine pampas and the ant-eater from 
the Amazon south to Paiaguay, though it is found in the Amazon 
region principally. The sloth (Bradypus) is an arboreal animal 
which feeds almost exclusively en the foliage of the Cecropias. It 
includes two recognized genera and half a dozen species, the best 
known of which is B. didactylus. The common name in Brazil is 
preguica, which is equivalent to its English name. Of armadillos, 
commonly called tatu in Brazil, the largest species is the Dasypus 
eigas, but the best known is the tatu-ete (D. oclocinctus) , which is 
highly esteemed for its flesh. The ant-eaters {Myrmecophaga) are 
divided into three or four species, one of which (if. jubata) is ex- 
clusively terrestrial, and the others arboreal. The popular name for 
the animal is tamandud. The M. jubata, or tamandud bandeira, is 
sometimes found as far south as Paraguay. Of the ruminants, 
Brazil has only four or five species of Cervidae, which are likewise 
common to other countries of South America. The largest of these 
is the marsh deer (C. paludosus), which in size resembles its European 
congeners. The others are the C. campestris, C. nemorivagus, 
C. rufus and a small species or variety called C. nanus by the Danish 
naturalist Dr P. W. Lund. The pachyderms are represented by 
three species of the peccary (Dicolyles) and two of the anta, or tapir 
(Tapirus). The former are found over a wide range of country, 
extending into Bolivia and Argentina, and are noted for their 
impetuous pugnacity. The tapir also has an extensive range between 
the coast and the foothills of the Andes, and from northern Argentina 
to south-eastern Colombia. It is the largest of the Brazilian 
mammals, and inhabits densely forested tracts near river courses. 
The two species are T. americanus, which is the larger and best 
known, and the anta chure, found in Minas Geraes, which is said to 
be identical with the T. Roulini of Colombia. Perhaps the most 
interesting mammal of Brazil is the manati, or sea-cow (Manatus 
americanus), which inhabits the lower Amazon and sometimes 
reaches a length of 15 to 20 ft. It is taken with the harpoon and its 
oil is one of the commercial products of the Amazon valley. 

The avifauna of Brazil is rich in genera, species and individuals, 
especially in species with brilliantly-coloured plumage. It is esti- 
mated that more than half the birds of Brazil are insectivorous, and 
that more than one-eighth are climbers. The range in size is a wide 
one — from the tiny humming-bird to the ema, rhea, or American 
ostrich. Although the order which includes song-birds is numerous 
in species and individuals, it is noticeably poor in really good 
songsters. On the other hand it is exceptionally rich in species 
having strident voices and peculiar unmusical calls, like the paco 
(Coracina scutlata) and the araponga (Chasmorhynchus nudicollis). 
Two species of vultures, twenty-three of falcons and eight of owls 
represent the birds of prey. The best known vulture is the common 
urubu {Cathartesfoetens, Illig), which is the universal scavenger of the 



444 



BRAZIL 



[FLORA 



tropics. The climbers comprise a large number of species, some of 
which, like those of the parrot {P sittacidae) and woodpecker (Picus), 
are particularly noticeable in every wooded region of the country. 
One of the most striking species of the former is the brilliantly- 
coloured arara (Macrocercus, L.), which is common throughout 
northern Brazil. Another interesting species is the toucan (Ram- 
phastos), whose enormous beak, awkward flight and raucous voice 
make it a conspicuous object in the great forests of northern Brazil. 
In strong contrast to the ungainly toucan is the tiny humming-bird, 
whose beautiful plumage, swiftness of flight and power of wing are 
sources of constant wonder and admiration. Of this smallest of 
birds there are fifty-nine well-known species, divided into two 
groups, the Phaethorninae, which prefer the forest shade and live 
on insects, and the Trochilinae, which frequent open sunny places 
where flowers are to be found. One of the Brazilian birds whose 
habits have attracted much interest is the Joao de Barro (Clay John) 
or oven bird (Furnarius rufus), which builds a house of reddish clay 
for its nest and attaches it to the branch of a tree, usually in a fork. 
The thrush is represented by a number of species, one of which, the 
sabid (Mimus), has become the popular song-bird of Brazil through 
a poem written by Goncalves Dias. The dove and pigeon have also 
a number of native species, one of which, the pomba jurity (Peristera 
frontalis), is a highly-appreciated table luxury. The gallinaceous 
birds are well represented, especially in game birds. The most 
numerous of these are the perdiz (partridge), the best known of which 
is the Tinamus maculosa which frequents the compos of the south, 
the inhambu (Crypturus), capoeira (Odontophorus) , and several 
species of the penelope family popularly known as the jacutinga, 
jacu and jacu-assu. The common domesticated fowl is not in- 
digenous. Among the wading and running birds, of which the ema 
is the largest representative, there are many species of both de- 
scriptions. In the Amazon lowlands are white herons (Ardea can- 
didissima), egrets (A. egretla), bitterns (A. exilis), blue herons {A. 
herodias), scarlet ibises (Ibis rubra), roseate spoonbills (Platalea 
ajaja); on higher ground the beautiful peacock heron (^4. helias) 
which is easily domesticated ; and on the dry elevated compos the 
ceriema (Dicholophus cristatus) which is prized for its flesh, and the 
jacamin (Psophia crepitans) which is frequently domesticated. 
Prominent among the storks is the great black-headed white crane, 
called the jaburu (Mycteria americana), which is found along the 
Amazon and down the coast and grows to a height of 4.5 ft. Of the 
swimmers, the number of species is smaller, but some of them are 
widely distributed and numerous in individuals. There are but few 
species of ducks, and they are apparently more numerous in southern 
Brazil than on the Amazon. 

The reptilian fauna exhibits an exceptionally large number of 
interesting genera and species. A great part of the river systems 
of the country with their flooded areas are highly favourable to the 
development of reptilian life. Most prominent among these is the 
American alligator, of which there are, according to Netterer, two 
genera and eight species in Brazil. They are very numerous in the 
Amazon and its tributaries and in the Paraguay, and are found in 
all the rivers of the Atlantic coast. Three of the Brazilian species 
are voracious and dangerous. The largest of the Amazon species 
are the jacare-assii (Caiman niger), jacare (C. fissipes) and jacare- 
tinga (C. sclerops). The Amazon is also the home of one of the 
largest fresh-water turtles known, the Emys a.mazonica, locally called 
the jurard-assu or tartaruga grande. These turtles are so numerous 
that their flesh and eggs have long been a principal food supply for 
the Indian population of that region. Another Amazon species, the 
E. tracaxa, is still more highly esteemed for its flesh, but it is smaller 
and deposits fewer eggs in the sandy river beaches. -Lagartos 
(Iguanas) and lizards are common everywhere. The ophidians are 
also numerous, especially in the wooded lowlands valleys, and the 
poisonous species, though less numerous than others, include some 
of the most dangerous known — the rattlesnake surucucu (Lachesis 
rhombeatus), and jarardca (Bothrops). The Amazon region is fre- 
quented by the giboia (boa constrictor), and the central plateau by 
the sucuriii (Eunectes murinus), both distinguished for their enormous 
size. The batrachians include a very large number of genera and 
species, especially in the Amazon valley. 

The fauna of the rivers and coast of Brazil is richer in species and 
individuals than that of the land. All the rivers are richly stocked, 
and valuable fishing grounds are to be found along the coast, especi- 
ally that of southern Bahia and Espirito Santo where the garoupa 
(Serranus) is found in large numbers. Some of the small fish along 
the coast are highly esteemed for their flavour. Whales were once 
numerous between. Capes St Roque and Frio, but are now rarely 
seen. Of the edible river fish, the best known is the pirarucu (Sudis 
gigas), a large fish of the Amazon which is salted and dried for 
market during the low-water season. Fish is a staple food of the 
Indian tribes of the Amazon region, and their fishing season is during 
the period of low water. The visit of Professor Louis Agassiz to the 
Amazon in 1865 resulted in a list of 1 143 species, but it is believed 
that no less than 1800 to 2000 species are to be found in that great 
river and its tributaries. 

In strong contrast to the poverty of Brazil in the larger mammals 
is the astonishing profusion of insect life in every part of the country. 
The Coleoptera and Lepidoptera are especially numerous, both in 
species and individuals. A striking illustration of this extraordinary 



profusion was given by the English naturalist H. W. Bates, who 
found 7000 species of insects in the vicinity of only one of his collect- 
ing places on the Amazon (Ega), of which 550 species were of butter- 
flies. Within an hour's walk of Para-are to be found, he says, about 
700 species of butterflies, "whilst the total number found in the 
British Islands does not exceed 66, and the whole of Europe supports 
only 321." (H. W. Bates, The Naturalist on the River Amazons.) 
One of the rare species of the Amazon Morphos (M. hecuba) measures 
8 to 9 in. across its expanded wings. Dipterous insects are also very 
numerous in species, especially in those of sanguinary habits, such 
as the mosquito, pium, maroim, carapana, borochudo, &c. In some 
places these insects constitute a veritable plague, and the infested 
regions are practically uninhabitable. The related species of the 
Oestridae family, which include the widely disseminated chigoe or 
bicho do pe (Pulex penetrans), and the equally troublesome heme 
(Cutiterebra noxialis), which is so injurious to animals, are equally 
numerous. The most numerous of all, however, and perhaps the 
most harmful to civilized man, are the termites and ants, which are 
found everywhere in the uninhabited campo and forest regions, as 
well as in the cultivated districts. Nature has provided several 
species of animals, birds and reptiles, to feed upon these insects, and 
various poisonous and suffocating compounds are used to destroy 
them, but with no great degree of success. It is not uncommon to 
find once cultivated fields abandoned because of their ravages and 
to see large campos completely covered with enormous ant-hills. 
The termites, or " white ants," are exceptionally destructive because 
of their habit of tunnelling through the softer woods of habitations 
and furniture, while some species of ants, like the sauba, are equally 
destructive to plantations because of the rapidity with which they 
strip a tree of its foliage. Spiders are represented by a very large 
number of species, some of which are beautifully coloured. The 
largest of these is the Mygale with a body 2 in. in length and out- 
stretched legs covering 7 in., a monster strong enough to capture 
and kill small birds. A large Mygale found on the island of Siriba, of 
the Abrolhos group, feeds upon lizards, and has been known to 
attack and kill young chickens. One of the most troublesome pests 
of the interior is a minute degenerate spider of the genus Ixodes, 
called carrapato, or bush-tick, which breeds on the ground and then 
creeps up the grass blades and bushes where it waits for some passing 
man or beast, its habit is to bury its head in its victim's skin and 
remain there until gorged with blood, when it drops off. Scorpions 
are common, but are considered less poisonous than some European 
species. 

Flora. — Brazil not only is marvellously rich in botanical species, 
but included at the beginning of the 20th century the largest area 
of virgin forest on the surface of the earth. The flora falls naturally 
into three great divisions : that of the Amazon basin where excep- 
tional conditions of heat and moisture prevail; that of the coast 
where heat, varying rainfall, oceanic influences and changing seasons 
have greatly modified the general character of the vegetation ; and 
that of the elevated interior, or sertao, where dryer conditions, 
rocky surfaces, higher sun temperatures and large open spaces 
produce a vegetation widely different from those of the other two 
regions. Besides these, the flora of the Paraguay basin varies widely 
from that of the inland plateau, and that of the Brazilian Guiana 
region is essentially distinct from the Amazon. The latter region 
is densely forested from the Atlantic to the Andes, but with a vary- 
ing width of about 200 m. on the coast to about 900 m. between 
the Bolivian and Venezuelan llanos, and thus far civilization has 
made only a very slight "impression upon it. Even where settlements 
have been located, constant effort is required to keep the vegeta- 
tion down. Along the coast, much of the virgin forest has been 
cut away, not only for the creation of cultivated plantations, 
but to meet the commercial demand for Brazil-wood and furniture 
woods. 

The chief characteristic of the Amazonian forest, aside from its 
magnitude, is the great diversity of genera and species. In the 
northern temperate zone we find forests of a single species, others of 
three or four species; in this great tropical forest the habit of growth 
is solitary and an acre of ground will contain hundreds of species- 
palms, myrtles, acacias, mimosas, cecropias, euphorbias, malvaceas, 
laurels, cedrellas, bignonias, bombaceas, apocyneas, malpigias, 
lecythises, swartzias, &c. The vegetation of the lower river-margins, 
which are periodically flooded, differs in some particulars from that 
of the higher ground, and the same variation is to be found between 
the forests of the upper and lower Amazon, and between the Amazon 
and its principal tributaries. The density of the forest is greatly 
augmented by the cipos, or lianas, which overgrow the largest trees 
to their tops, and by a profusion of epiphytes which cover the highest 
branches. As a rule the trees of the Amazon forest are not con- 
spicuously high, a few species rarely reaching a height of 200 ft. 
The average is probably less than one-half that height. This is 
especially true of the flood plains where the annual inundations 
prevent the formation of humus and retard forest growth. The 
largest of the Amazon forest trees are the massaranduba (Mimusops 
elata), called the cow-tree because of its milky sap, the samauma 
(Eriodendron samauma) or silk-cotton tree, the pdu d' arco (Tecoma 
speciosa), pdu d' alho (Catraeva iapia), botcori (Symphonea coccinea), 
sapucaia (Lecythis ollaria), and castanheira or brazil-nut tree (Berthol- 
letia excslsa). The Amazon region has a comparatively narrow 



POPULATION] 



BRAZIL 



445 



frontage on the Atlantic. In Maranhao, which belongs to the coast 
region, open spaces or campos appear, though the state is well 
wooded and its forests have the general characteristics of the lower 
Amazon. South-east of the Parnahyba the coast region becomes 
dryer and more sandy and the forests disappear. The coast and 
tide- water rivers are fringed with mangrove, and the sandy plain 
reaching back to the margin of the inland plateau is generally bare 
of vegetation, though the carnahuba palm {Copernicia cerifera) and 
some species of low-growing trees are to be found in many places. 
The higher levels of this plain are covered with shrubs and small 
trees, principally mimosas. The slopes of the plateau, which receive 
a better rainfall, are more heavily forested, some districts being 
covered with deciduous trees, forming catingas in local parlance. 
This dry, thinly-wooded region extends south to the states of Para- 
hyba, where a more regular rainfall favours forest growth nearer the 
coast. Between Parahyba and southern Bahia forests and open 
plains are intermingled ; thence southward the narrow coastal plain 
and bordering mountain slopes are heavily forested. The sea-coast, 
bays and tide-water rivers are still fringed with mangrove, and on 
the sandy shores above Cape Frio grow large numbers of the exotic 
cocoa-nut palm. Many species of indigenous palms abound, and 
in places the forests are indescribably luxuriant. These are made 
up, as Prince Max zu Neuwied found in southern Bahia in 1817, " of 
the genera Cocos, Melastoma, Bignonia, Rhexia, Mimosa, Ingd, 
Bombax, Ilex, Laurus, Myrthus, Eugenia, Jacarandd, Jatropka, 
Visinia, Lecythis, Ficus, and a thousand other, for the most part, 
unknown species of trees." Further inland the higher country 
becomes more open and the forests are less luxuriant. Giant cacti 
and spiny scrub abound. Then come the catinga tracts, and, beyond 
these, the open campos of the elevated plateau, dotted with clumps 
of low growing bushes and broken by tracts of carrasco, a thick, 
matted, bushy growth 10 to 12 ft. in height. Formerly this coast 
region furnished large quantities of Brazil-wood (Caesalpinia 
echinata), and the river valleys have long been the principal source 
of Brazil's best cabinet- wood — rosewood (Dalbergia nigra), jacaranda 
(Machaeriumfirmum,Benth.),viuhatico(Plathymeniafoliosa,Benth.), 
perofca (Aspidosperma peroba), cedro, &c. The exotic mangabeira 
(mango) is found everywhere along the coast, together with the 
bamboo, orange, lemon, banana, cashew, &c. 

Of the great inland region, which includes the arid campos of the 
north, the partiaUy-wooded plateaus of Minas Geraes, Goyaz and 
Matto Grosso, the temperate highlands of the south, and the tropical 
lowlands of the Paraguay basin, no adequate description can be given 
without taking each section in detail, which can be done to better 
advantage in describing the individual states. In general, the 
carrasco growth extends over the whole central plateau, and heavy 
forests are found only in the deep river valleys. Those opening 
northward have the characteristic flora of the Amazon basin. The 
Paraguay basin is covered with extensive marshy tracts and open 
woodlands, the palms being the conspicuous feature. The vege- 
tation is similar to that of Paraguay and the Chaco, and aquatic 
plants are specially numerous and luxuriant. On the temperate 
uplands of the southern states there are imposing forests of South 
American pine (Araucaria brasiliensis), whose bare trunks and 
umbrella-like tops give to them the appearance of open woodland. 
These forests extend from Parana into Rio Grande do Sul and 
smaller tracts are also found in Minas Geraes. Large tracts of Ilex 
Paraguay ensis , from which male, or Paraguay-tea, is gathered, are 
found in this same region. 

The economic plants of Brazil, both indigenous and exotic, are 
noticeably numerous. Coffee naturally occupies first place, and 
is grown wherever frosts are not severe from the Amazon south to 
Parana. The states of Sao Paulo, Rio de Janeiro and Minas Geraes 
are the largest producers, but it is also grown for export in Espirito 
Santo, Bahia and Ceara. The export in 1905 was 10,820,604 bags 
of 132 lb each, with an official valuation of £21,420,330. Sugar 
cane, another exotic, has an equally wide distribution, and cotton is 
grown along the coast from Maranhao to Sao Paulo. Other economic 
plants and fruits having a wide distribution are tobacco, maize, rice, 
beans, sweet potatoes, bananas, cacao (Theobroma cacao), mandioca 
or cassava (Manihot utilitissima) , aipim or sweet mandioca (M. aipi) , 
guavas (Fsidium guayava, Raddi), oranges, lemons, limes, grapes, 
pineapples, mamao (Carica papaya), bread-fruit {Artocarpus incisa), 
jack fruit (^4. irUegrifolia) , and many others less known outside the 
tropics. Among the palms there are several of great economic value, 
not only as food producers but also for various domestic uses. The 
fruit of the pupunha or peach palm {Guilielma speciosa) is an im- 
portant food among the Indians of the Amazon valley, where the 
tree was cultivated by them long before the discovery of America. 
Humboldt found it among the native tribes of the Orinoco valley, 
where it is called pirijao. The ita palm, Mauritia, flexuosa (a fan- 
leaf palm) provides an edible fruit, medullary meal, drink, fibre, 
roofing and timber, but is less used on the Amazon than it is on the 
lower Orinoco. The assai (Euterpe oleracea) is another highly-prized 
palm because of a beverage made from its fruit along the lower 
Amazon. A closely-related species or variety (Euterpe edulis) is the 
well-known palmito or cabbage palm found over the greater part 
of Brazil, whose terminal phylophore is cooked and eaten as a 
vegetable. Another highly useful palm is the carnauba or carnahuba 
(Copernicia cerifera) which supplies fruit, medullary meal, food for 



cattle, boards and timber, fibre, wax and medicine. The fibre of 
the piassava (Leopoldinia piassava, or Attalea funifera) is widely 
used for cordage, brushes and brooms. There are many other palms 
whose fruit, fibre and wood enter largely into the domestic economy 
of the natives, but the list given shows how important a service these 
trees rendered to the aboriginal inhabitants of tropical America, 
and likewise how useful they still are to the people of tropical Brazil. 
Another vegetable product of the Amazon region is made from the 
fruit of the Paullinia sorbilis, Mart., and is known by the name of 
guarand. It is largely consumed in Bolivia and Matto Grosso, 
where it is used in the preparation of a beverage which has excellent 
medicinal properties. The Brazilian flora is also rich in medicinal 
and aromatic plants, dye-woods, and a wide range of gum and 
resin-producing shrubs and trees. The best known of these are 
sarsaparilla, ipecacuanha, cinchona, jaborandi and copaiba ; vanilla, 
tonka beans and cloves; Brazil-wood and anatto (Bixa orellana); 
india-rubber and balata. India-rubber is derived principally from 
the Hevea guayanensis, sometimes called the Siphonia elastica, which 
is found on the Amazon and its tributaries as far inland as the foot- 
hills of the Andes. Other rubber-producing trees are the manigoba 
(Jatropha Glasiovii) of Ceara, and the mangabeira (Hancornia 
speciosa), of the central upland regions. 

Population. — The first explorers of Brazil reported a numerous 
Indian population, but, as the sea-coast afforded a larger and 
more easily acquired food supply than did the interior, the 
Indian population was probably numerous only in a compara- 
tively small part of this immense territory, along the sea-coast. 
Modern explorations have shown that the unsettled inland 
regions of Brazil are populated by Indians only where the con- 
ditions are favourable. They are to be found in wooded districts 
near rivers, and are rarely found on the elevated campos. The 
immediate result of European colonization was the enslavement 
and extermination of the Indians along the coast and in all those 
favoured inland localities where the whites came into contact 
with them. The southern districts and the Amazon and its 
tributaries were often raided by slave-hunting expeditions, 
and their Indian populations were either decimated, or driven 
farther into the inaccessible forests. But there is no record 
that the inland districts of western and north-western Brazil 
were treated in this manner, and their present population may 
be assumed to represent approximately what it was when the 
Europeans first came. According to the census of 1890 the Indian 
population was 1,295,796, but so far as the migratory tribes are 
concerned the figures are only guesswork. A considerable 
number of these Indians have been gathered together in aldeas 
under the charge of government tutors, but the larger part still 
live in their own villages or as nomads. 

Down to the beginning of the 19th century the white colonists 
were almost exclusively Portuguese. The immigration from 
countries other than Portugal during the first half of that century 
was small, but before its close it increased rapidly, particularly 
from Italy. Fully nine-tenths of these immigrants, including 
those from the mother country, were of the Latin race. The 
introduction of African slaves followed closely upon the develop- 
ment of agricultural industries, and continued nominally until 
1850, actually until 1854, and according to some authors until 
i860. About 1826 it was estimated that the negro population 
numbered 2,500,000 or three times the white population of that 
period. The unrestricted intermixture of these three races 
forms the principal basis of the Brazilian population at the be- 
ginning of the 20th century. Brazil has never had a " colour 
line," and there has never been any popular prejudice against 
race mixtures. According to the census of 1872 the total popula- 
tion was 9,930,478, of which 1,510,806 were slaves; the race 
enumeration gave 3,787,289 whites, 1,959,452 Africans, 386,955 
Indians, and 3,801,782 mixed bloods. The Indian population 
certainly exceeded the total given, and the white population 
must have included many of mixed blood, the habit of so describ- 
ing themselves being common among the better classes of South 
American mestizos. The census of 1890 increased the total 
population to 14,333,915, which, according to an unofficial 
analysis {Statesman's Year Book, 1905), was made up of 6,302,198 
whites. 4,638,495 mixed bloods, 2,097,426 Africans, and 1,295,796 
Indians. This analysis, if correct, indicates that the vegetative 
increase of the whites has been greater than that of the Africans 
and mixed races. This is not the conclusion of many observers, 



44^ 



BRAZIL 



[POPULATION 



but it may be due to the excessive infant mortality among the 
lower classes, where an observance of the simplest sanitary laws 
is practically unknown. The census of the 31st of December 
1900 was strikingly defective; it was wholly discarded for the 
city of Rio de Janeiro, and had to be completed by office com- 
putations in the returns from several states. The compilation 
of the returns was not completed and published until May 1908, 
according to which the total population was 17,318,556, of which 
8,825,636 were males and 8,492,920 females. Not including 
the city of Rio de Janeiro, whose population was estimated 
at 691,565 in conformity with a special municipal census of 1906, 
the total population was 16,626,991, of which 15,572,671 were 
Roman Catholics, 177,727 Protestants, 876,593 of other faiths. 
The returns also show a total of 3,038,500 domiciles outside 
the federal capital, which gives an average of 5-472 to the domicile. 
These returns will serve to correct the exaggerated estimate 
of 22, 315,000 for 1900 which was published in Brazil and accepted 
by many foreign publications. 

The racial character of the people is not uniform throughout 
the republic, the whites predominating in the southern states, the 
Indians in Amazonas and, probably, Matto Grosso, and the 
mixed races in the central and northern coast states. The 
excess of whites over the 
coloured races in the southern 



immigration, of which so much has been written for political ends, 
has been greatly over-estimated; trustworthy estimates in 1906 
made the German contingent in the population vary from 
350,000 to 500,000. They are settled chiefly in colonies in the 
southern states, and form a most desirable body of settlers. 

Divisions and Towns. — The republic is divided into twenty 
states and one federal district, which are t he same as the provinces 
and " municipio neutro " of the empire. Their names also remain 
unchanged, except that of the federalized district in which the 
national capital is located, which is called the " districto federal." 
The republic has no territories, although Amazonas, Matto 
Grosso, Para and Goyaz cover an immense region of uninhabited 
and only partially explored territory. The states are subdivided 
into comarcas, or judicial districts, and into municipios, or 
townships, which is the smallest autonomous division. The 
constitution provides for the autonomy of the municipalities in 
order to safeguard the permanence of representative institutions. 
The parochia, or parish, an ecclesiastical division, is often used 
for administrative purposes, but it has no political organization. 
The names, areas, and populations of the states, together 
with the names and populations of their capitals, are as 
follows: — 



States. 



Alagoas 

Amazonas . 

Bahia . 

Ceara . 

Espirito Santo 

Federal District 

Goyaz 

Maranhao 

Matto Grosso 

Minas Geraes 

Para 

Parahyba . 

Parana 

Pernarabuco 

Piauhy 

Rio de Janeiro 

Rio Grande do Norte 

Rio Grande do Sul 

Santa Catharina . 

Sao Paulo . 

Sergipe. 

Brazil 



Area, 1 
Sq. miles. 



22,584 
742,123 
164,650 

40,253 

17.313 

538 

288,549 

177,569 

532,370 

221,961 

443,922 

28,855 

85,455 

49,575 

116,529 

26,635 

22,196 

91,337 

28,633 

112,312 

15,093 



3,228,452 



states is due to their smaller 
slave population and to the 
large number of immigrants 
attracted to them. Slavery 
was not abolished until the 
13th of May 1888, but a num- 
ber of successful colonies had 
already been founded in these 
states. Other colonies were 
founded in Bahia, Espirito 
Santo and Rio de Janeiro 
during the same period, but 
they were unsuccessful, partly 
because of the competition of 
slave labour. Since the aboli- 
tion of slavery immigration 
has poured a large number of 
labourers into the coiTee-pro- 
ducing states, and with bene- 
ficial results. This strengthen- 
ing of the white population 
of the South with fresh 
European blood must eventually divide Brazil into two distinct 
sections : the white states of the south, and the mixed or coloured 
states of the north. The introduction of European immigrants 
dates from 1 8 1 8 when a Swiss colony was located at Nova Friburgo, 
near Rio de Janeiro, and it was continued under the direction 
and with the aid of the imperial government down to the creation 
of the republic. Since then the state governments have assumed 
charge of immigration, and some of them are spending large 
sums in the acquisition of labourers. The old system of locating 
immigrants in colonies, or colonial nuclei, which involved an 
enormous outlay of money with but slight benefit to the country, 
has been superseded by a system of locating the immigrants 
on the large plantations under formal contracts. In some of 
the coffee districts these contracts have resulted very profitably 
to the Italian labourers. The total number of colonists and im- 
migrants entering Brazil between 1804 and 1902, inclusive, 
according to official returns, was 2,208,353. The arrivals 
fluctuate greatly in number from year to year, influenced by 
the prevailing economic conditions in the country. At first 
the Portuguese outnumbered all other nationalities in the immi- 
gration returns, but since the abolition of slavery the Italians 
have passed all competitors and number more than one-half the 
total arrivals. Of the 700,211 immigrants located in the state of 
Sao Paulo from 1827 to the end of 1896, no less than 493,535 
were Italians, and their aggregate throughout the republic 
was estimated in 1906 at more than 1,100,000. The German 



Population '' 



Census 
1890. 



5H,440 

H7,9I5 

1,919,802 

805,687 

135,997 
522,651 
227,572 
430,854 
92,827 

3,184,099 
328,455 
457,232 
249,491 

1,030,224 
267,609 
276,884 
268,273 

897,455 
283,769 

1,384,753 
310,926 



14,333,915 



Census 
1900. 



649,273 
249,756 
2,117,956 
849,127 
209,783 

691,565 
255,284 
499,308 
118,025 

3,594,471 
445,356 
490,784 
327,136 

1,178,150 

334,328 

■ 274,317 

1,149,070 
926,035 
320,289 

2,282,279 
356,264 



17,318,556 



State Capitals. 



Maceio . 

Manaos . 

Sao Salvador 4 

Fortaleza 

Victoria 

Rio de Janeiro 

Goyaz ' . 

S. Luiz do Maranhao 4 

Cuyaba . 

Ouro Preto s 

Belem 4 . 

Parahyba 

Curityba 

Recife 4 . 

Therezina . 

Nictheroy . 

Natal . . 

Porto Alegre 

Desterro 6 . 

Sao Paulo . 

Aracajii . 



Population, 3 

Census 

1890. 



31,498 
38,720 

174,412 
40,902 
16,887 

522,651 
17,181 
29,308 
17,815 
59,249 
50,064 
18,645 

24,553 

i",556 

31,523 

34,269 

13,725 
52,421 
30,687 
64,934 
16,336 



Communications, — Railway construction in Brazil dates from 1852, 
when work was initiated on the Maui railway running from the head 
of the bay of Rio de Janeiro to the foot of the Serra where Petropolis 
is situated. The road is 10 m. long, and its first section was opened 
to traffic on April 30, 1854, and its second December 1 6, 1856. 
The mountain section, 5 J m. long, which uses the Riggenbach system 
from the terminal to Petropolis, was constructed between 1881 and 
1883. The development of railway construction in Brazil has been 
impeded to a great extent by two unfavourable conditions — by the 
chain of mountains or plateau escarpments which follow the coast 
line and obstruct communication with the interior, and by the de- 
tached positions of the settlements along the Atlantic, which compel 

1 The areas are reduced from the planimetrical calculations made 
at Gotha and used by A. Supan in Die Bevolkerung der Erde (1904). 
They are corrected to cover all boundary changes to 1906. 

2 The census of 1890 is the last one of which complete returns 
are published. That of 1900 was notoriously inaccurate in many 
instances. 

3 The census returns are for municipalities, and not for cities 
proper. As a municipality covers a large extent of country, the 
population given is larger than that of the urban parishes, and is 
therefore not strictly correct according to European practice. 

4 The Brazilian official titles are given for the state capitals : 
Belem for Para; Sao Luiz for Maranhao; Sao Salvador for Bahia; 
and Recife for Pernambuco. 

6 The capital of Minas Geraes in 1890 was Ouro Preto; it has 
since been transferred to Bello Horizonte, or Cidade de Minas, which 
has an estimated population of 25,000. 

6 Since the naval revolt of 1893-1894 the name of the capital of 
Santa Catharina has been changed from Desterro to Florianopolis in 
honour of President Floriano Peixoto. 



COMMUNICATIONS] 



BRAZIL 



447 



the building of lines from many widely separated points on the coast 
into a sparsely populated hinterland. A majority of the ports, from 
which these roads are built, are small and difficult of access, and the 
coasting trade is restricted to vessels carrying the Brazilian flag. 
The only ports having a rich and well-populated country behind 
them are Rio de Janeiro and Santos, and these are the terminals 
of long lines of railway which are being slowly extended farther into 
the interior. 

The total mileage under traffic at the beginning of 1905 was 
10,600 m., divided into 94 separate lines. There were also 745 m. 
under construction, 1740 m. under survey, and about 1600 m. 
projected. Of the 94 lines under traffic, 45 were operating by virtue 
of national and 49 by provincial and state concessions. They were 
grouped in the official reports of 1905 as follows: — 

Government lines (21) : — ■ Miles. 

Administered by the state (6) 2228 

Leased to private parties (15) 2174 

4402 

Private lines (24) — ■ 

With national interest guarantees (12) . . . 1290 
Without such guarantees (12) 815 

2105 

Private and state lines operated by virtue of state 

concessions, with and without interest guarantees 

(49) 4°93 

10,600 



The policy of the national government has been gradually to 
lease all its lines except the Estrada de Ferro Central do Brazil, 
which is retained for sentimental reasons. This great railway runs 
from the city of Rio de Janeiro westward to the city of Sao Paulo 
and northward into the interior of Minas Geraes, with a total length 
at the beginning of 1905 of 1002 m., and an extension of about 104 m. 
to Pirapora, on the Sao Francisco river. It was formerly known as 
the " E. de F. Dom Pedro II.," in honour of the sovereign who 
encouraged its construction. The main line has a gauge of 63 in. 
(l-6o m.) and affords an outlet for a number of inland metre-gauge 
lines. The first two sections of this great railway, which carry it 
across the coast range, were opened to traffic in 1858 and 1 864. 
The series of trunk lines terminating at the port of Santos are owned 
by private companies and are formed by the Sao Paulo, Paulista and 
Mogyana lines, the first owned by an English company, and the 
other two by Brazilian companies. The Mogyana carries the system 
entirely across the state of Sao Paulo into the western districts of 
Minas Geraes. The principal trunk lines (the Sao Paulo and 
Paulista) have a broad gauge, while their extensions and feeders 
have a narrow gauge. The comparatively short lines extending 
inland from the ports of Sao Salvador (Bahia), Pernambuco, Maceio, 
Victoria and Paranagua serve only a narrow zone along the coast. 
To encourage the investment of private capital in the construction of 
railways, the general railway law of 1853 authorized the national 
government to grant guarantees of interest on the capital invested. 
l]nder this law companies were organized in England for building 
the Sao Paulo railway, and the lines running fromBahia and Pernam- 
buco toward the Sao Francisco river. Political considerations also 
led to the construction of similar lines in the states of Rio Grande do 
Norte, Parahyba, Alag6as, Sergipe, Espirito Santo, Parana, Santa 
Catharina and Rio Grande do Sul. The result was that the national 
treasury became burdened with a heavy annual interest charge, 
payable abroad in gold, which did not tend to diminish, and had a 
long period to run before the expiration of the contracts. The 
government finally determined to take over these guaranteed lines 
from the foreign companies owning them, and a statement issued 
in October 1902 showed that 1335 m. had been acquired at a cost of 
£14,605,000 in bonds, the interest on which is £584,200 a year against 
an aggregate of £831,750 in interest guarantees which the govern- 
ment had been paying. In addition to this economy it was calcu- 
lated that the lines could be leased for £132,000 a year. The loan 
finally issued in London to cover the purchase of these railways 
aggregated £16,619,320. All but three of these lines had been leased 
in 1905. 

The use of tramways for the transportation of passengers in cities 
dates from 1868, when the first section of the Botanical Garden line 
of Rio de Janeiro was opened to traffic. The line was completed 
with its surplus earnings and continued under the control of the 
American company which built it until 1882, when it was sold to a 
Brazilian company. Subsequently the tramways of the city have 
been mostly concentrated in the hands of a single Canadian com- 
pany. All the large cities of Brazil are liberally provided with 
tramways, those of the city of Sao Paulo, where electric traction is 
used, being noticeably good. The substitution of electricity for 
animal traction was begun in Sao Salvador in 1906. Mules are univer- 
sally employed for animal traction, and narrow gauge lines with 
single-mule trams are generally used where the traffic is light. 

Brazil is lamentably deficient in steamship communication 
considering its importance in a country where the centres of popu- 
lation are separated by such distances of coasts and river. Previous 
to the creation of the republic, the coastwise service was performed 



by two national companies (now united), and partially by .foreign 
lines calling at two or more ports. A considerable number of foreign 
sailing vessels also carried on an important coasting trade. The 
coastwise service centres at Rio de Janeiro, from which port the 
Lloyd Brazileiro sends steamers regularly south to Montevideo, and 
north to Para and Manaos, calling at the more important inter- 
mediate ports. From Montevideo river steamers are sent up the 
Parana and Paraguay rivers to Corumba and Cuyaba, in the state of 
Matto Grosso. The company receives a heavy subsidy from the 
national government. Parts of this coastwise traffic are covered by 
other companies, two of which receive subsidies. There were also 
six lines of river steamers receiving subsidies from the national 
government in 1904, and the aggregate paid to these and the coast- 
wise lines was 2,830,061 milreis. The largest of the river lines is the 
Amazon Steam Navigation Co. (an English corporation), whose ser- 
vice covers the main river and several of its principal tributaries. 
Two subsidized companies maintain services on the Sao Francisco 
river — one below the Paulo Affonso falls, and the other above, the 
latter covering 854 m. of navigable channel between Joazeiro and 
Pirapora. Besides these there are other companies engaged in the 
coasting and river traffic, either with subsidies from the state govern- 
ments, as feeders for railway lines, or as private unsubsidized 
undertakings. 

The telegraph lines, which date from 1852, are owned and operated 
by the national government, with the exception of the lines con- 
structed by private railway companies, and the cable lines of the 
Amazon and the coast. The government lines extend from Para to 
the Argentine and Uruguayan frontiers, where they connect with 
the telegraph systems of those republics, and from Rio de Janeiro 
westward across country, in great part unsettled, to the capitals 
of Goyaz and Matto Grosso. At Para connexion is made with the 
cable laid in the bed of the Amazon to Manaos, which is owned and 
operated by a subsidized English company. At Vizeu, Para, con- 
nexion is made with a French cable to the West Indies and the 
United States, and at Pernambuco with two cable lines to Europe. A 
coastwise cable runs from Para to Montevideo with double cables 
between Pernambuco and Montevideo. There were in 1903 a total of 
15,150 m. of land lines, with 29,310 m. of wire and 1102 telegraph 
offices. The government maintains reciprocal rates with most of 
the private railway lines. 

The Brazilian postal service is under the general supervision of the 
minister of communications and public works, amd is administered 
by a director-general. Owing to the size of the country and the 
sparsely-populated state of a large part of the interior, the trans- 
portation of the mails is attended with much difficulty and expense. 
Although the postal rates are high, the service is not self-sustaining, 
the receipts for 1904 being 7,018,344 milreis, against a total ex- 
penditure of 10,099,545 milreis. There were 2847 post offices 
{agendas), of which 2 166 were of the 4th or lowest grade. Brazil is 
a member of the Postal Union, and like Argentina exacts higher 
nominal rates of postage upon outgoing mail than those agreed upon 
to cover the depreciation in her own currency. The letter rate was 
at first 200 reis (nearly 5Jd.), but it has been increased to 300 reis, 
which is equivalent to 8d. at par and 4^d. at 1 5d. exchange. An 
inland parcel post was in operation long before the overthrow of the 
monarchy, and a similar service with Portugal has been successfully 
maintained for a number of years, notwithstanding the difficulties 
interposed by customs regulations. National and international 
money order systems are also in operation. 

The constitution of Brazil provides that the coastwise trade shall 
be carried on by national vessels, but this provision did not go into 
effect until 1896. And even then, because of the insufficient number 
of Brazilian vessels it was provided in the regulations that foreign 
vessels could be enrolled in that trade by using the Brazilian flag 
and employing a certain proportion of Brazilians on the crew. One 
of the purposes of this restrictive provision was that of creating a 
national merchant marine, but the disinclination of Brazilians for 
maritime pursuits has been a serious obstacle to its realization. In 
1901 the merchant navy included 228 steamers of 91,465 tons net, 
and 343 sailing vessels of 76,992 tons net. These vessels are all 
engaged in the coasting and river trade of the country. Efforts 
have been made, however, to engage in foreign trade, and subsidies 
were offered for a passenger and freight service to the United States. 
On the 23rd of February 1906 the government completed a new 
contract with the Lloyd Brazileiro Company for its coastwise and 
river service, and included clauses providing for a line to the United 
States. This foreign service (monthly) began in August 1906. 

Although the coast of Brazil shows a large number of bays and 
tide-water river channels which are apparently suitable for commer- 
cial ports, a close examination of them reduces the number of good 
ports to less than a dozen. The others are either difficult of access, 
or are rendered practically useless by dangerous reefs, sand bars and 
shoals. Important improvements have been undertaken in some of 
these ports. Those at Santos and Manaos, for example, have produced 
good results. In many cases, as at Rio de Janeiro, Santos and 
Manaos, the cost and maintenance of the new port-works are met 
by an additional tax on merchandise, though the immediate ex- 
penditures are met by advances from the national treasury, and at 
Rio de Janeiro by a foreign loan. 

Commerce. -The imports, exports and domestic trade of Brazil 



44 8 



BRAZIL 



[INDUSTRY 



are by reason of their magnitude and peculiar character the most 
important in South America, though the per capita aggregate is 
less than that of Argentina. Although an agricultural country, 
Brazil does not produce all its own bread and meat, and the imports 
of wheat, wheat flour, rice, fish, jerked beef and preserved meats, 
lard, butter, beans, potatoes, packed fruits and vegetables, Indian 
corn and other food-stuffs, are surprisingly large. Since the creation 
of the republic, extreme protective measures have caused the 
creation of a large number of cotton factories and other manu- 
factures, but these are able to supply only a part of the consumption, 
and the importation of cotton and woollen fabrics, silks, ready- 
made clothing, boots and shoes, &c, is large. Modern industrial 
development in some of the states has greatly increased the im- 
portation of machinery, electric supplies, materials for construction, 
coal, &c. Kerosene oil also figures among the principal imports, 
and beef cattle are imported for consumption by some cities. The 
exports cover a wide range of agricultural, pastoral and natural pro- 
ductions, including coffee, rubber, sugar, cotton, cocoa, Brazil nuts, 
mate (Paraguay tea), hides, skins, fruits, gold, diamonds, manganese 
ore, cabinet woods and medicinal leaves, roots and resins. Coffee 
and rubber, however, represent from 80 to 90% of the official 
valuation of all exports. High import duties are imposed by the 
national government and export duties by the states. The exchange 
of domestic products between the states is greatly restricted through 
lack of cheap transportation facilities, and by the suicidal imposition 
of import and export duties by the states, either for revenue or for 
the protection of home industries. 

According to a summary for the six years 1901 to 1906, derived 
from official sources and published in the annual Retrospecto of the 
Jornal do Commercio, of Rio de Janeiro, the values of the imports 
and exports for those years (exclusive of coin), reduced to pounds 
sterling at the average rate of exchange (or value of one milreis) 
for each year, were as follows : — 





Average 








Value of 


Imports in 


Exports in 


Year. 


the Milreis 
in Pence. 


Pounds Ster. 


Pounds Ster. 






£• 


£• 


1901 


n-33 


21,377,270 


40,621,993 


1902 


"•93 


23,279,418 


36,437.456 


1903 


n-99 


24,207,811 


36,883,175 


1904 


12-22 


25.915,423 


39,430,136 


1905 


15-94 


29,830,050 


44,643,113 


1906 


16-17 


33,204,041 


53.059,480 



Nearly 76J % of the exports of 1906 were of coffee and rubber, 
the official valuations of these being: coffee 245,474,525 milreis 
gold (£27,615,884), and rubber (including manicoba and mangabeira), 
124,941,433 milreis gold (£14,055,911). 

Brazil is essentially an agricultural country. No other country has 
been able to equal Brazil in the production of coffee, and under 
better labour conditions the country might compete with the 
foremost in the production of cane sugar, cotton and tobacco. 
Besides these it might easily excel in producing many of the tropical 
fruits for which there is a commercial demand. During the colonial 
period sifgar cane was cultivated from Parahyba S. to the vicinity 
of Santos, and sugar was the principal export of the colony. Before 
the middle of the 19th century coffee became one of the leading 
exports, and its cultivation in the states of Sao Paulo, Rio de Janeiro 
and Minas Geraes has been so increased since that time that it repre- 
sents over four-fifths in value of the total export of agricultural 
produce. The principal sugar-producing states are Alagoas, Sergipe, 
Pernambuco, Bahia and Rio de Janeiro, and the production is 
between 200,000 and 300,000 tons, the greater part of which is con- 
sumed in the country. Cotton has been widely cultivated since 
early colonial days, principally in the northern Atlantic states. 
Tobacco is also widely cultivated, and the product of some states, 
such as Bahia, Minas Geraes and Goyaz, has a high local reputation 
for its excellence. Cacau (cocoa) is cultivated extensively in the 
Amazon Valley and along the coast as far south as southern Bahia, 
and forms one of the leading exports. In 1906 Sao Paulo offered 
premiums for its cultivation in the state. Rice has been cultivated 
in places, but without much success, although the quality produced 
compared favourably with the imported article. Indian corn grows 
luxuriantly everywhere, but it does not mature well in the humid 
regions of the Amazon region and the coast. The product of the 
elevated inland regions is good, but the costs of transportation and 
the small profits afforded have prevented its extensive cultivation, 
and it is imported from the La Plata republics for consumption along 
the coast. Much has been said in regard to the production of wheat, 
and efforts have been made in various places to promote its cultiva- 
tion. It was once cultivated in Rio Grande do Sul with some success, 
and it has been grown in Minas Geraes and Sao Paulo, but in no case 
have the returns been sufficient to give it a permanent standing 
among the productions of the country. The great majority of the 
people are unused to wheaten bread, using the coarse flour of the 
mandioca root instead, consequently the demand for wheat and 
flour is confined to the large cities, which can obtain them from 



Argentina more cheaply than they can be produced in the country. 
One of the most common and important productions of Brazil is 
mandioca {Manihot), of which there are two well-known species, 
M. utilissima and M. aipi. The first named, which is poisonous in 
its native state, is the cassava of Spanish America. From it is made 
far.inha de mandioca, which is the bread of the common people of 
Brazil, and tapioca. The poison is extracted by soaking the bruised 
or grated roots in water, after which the coarse flour is roasted. 
Mandioca was cultivated by the natives before the discovery of 
America, and the wide area over which it has been distributed 
warrants the conclusion that the discovery of its value as a food 
and the means of separating its poisonous properties must have 
occurred at a very remote period. The peanut, or ground-nut 
(Arachis hypogaea), is another widely-cultivated plant, dating from 
pre-Columbian times. Very little attention has thus far been given 
to the cultivation of fruit for exportation, the exceptions being 
bananas for the Argentine and Uruguayan markets, and oranges and 
pineapples for European markets. The coast region from Ceara to 
Rio de Janeiro is adapted to the cultivation of a great variety of 
fruits of a superior quality. Ceara, Bahia, and Rio de Janeiro are 
celebrated for their oranges,' and Pernambuco for its delicious pine- 
apples. Tangerines, lemons, limes, grapes, guavas, figs, cashews or 
cajiis (Anacardium occidentale) , mangabas (Hancornia speciosa), 
joboticabas (Eugenia cauliflora and E. jaboticaba,Mart.); cocoa-nuts, 
mangos, fruitas de conde (Anona squamosa), plantains, &c, are pro- 
duced in abundance and with little labour. In some parts of southern 
Brazil the fruits and vegetables of the temperate zone do well, but 
within the tropics they thrive well only at a considerable elevation 
above sea-level. Apples, peaches, quinces, raspberries, strawberries, 
&c, are produced under such conditions, but the flavour of their 
kind grown in colder climates is usually wanting. The vegetable 
productions are less numerous, but they include sweet potatoes, 
cabbages, cauliflower, lettuce, beans, peas, onions, garlic, tomatoes, 
okra, radishes, cucumbers, couve, chuchu (Sechium edule), and aipim 
{Manihot aipi). The white potato, known as " batata inglez " 
(English potato), is grown in elevated localities, but it deteriorates 
so greatly after the first planting that fresh imported seed is necessary 
every second or third year. 

The pastoral industries, which date from early colonial times, 
have suffered many vicissitudes, and their development has failed 
to keep pace with the country's growth in population. Horses are 
used to some extent for riding, but very little for carriage and 
draught purposes, consequently there has been no great incentive 
for their breeding. They are largely used and raised in Rio Grande 
do Sul, but in the warmer regions of the north only to a limited extent. 
The hardier mules are generally employed for draught, carriage, 
and saddle purposes in every part of the country, and their breeding 
is a lucrative industry in the southern states. Cattle-raising is the 
principal industry in Rio Grande do Sul, and receives considerable 
attention in Minas Geraes, Matto Grosso, Santa Catharina, Parana, 
Piauhy and Rio Grande do Norte. It was estimated that there 
were 30,000,000 head of cattle in the republic in 1904, but the estimate 
was unquestionably too large. A very large part of the jerked beef 
consumed in Brazil is imported from Argentina and Uruguay, and 
some beef cattle also are imported. These importations at Rio de 
Janeiro in 1906 were 12,464,170 kilograms of jerked beef and 
12,575 head of cattle. In the Rio Branco region of Amazonas and in 
Piauhy, where the national government has long been the owner of 
extensive cattle ranges, the industry is in a state of decadence. 
This is partly due to such pests as the vampire bat and bush ticks 
(carrapatos), and partly to the unprogressiveness of the cattlemen. 
Cattle-raising was once a flourishing industry on the island of 
Marajo, at the mouth of the Amazon, and it is followed to some extent 
at Alemquer and other points along the Amazon, but the cattle 
are small, and commonly in bad condition. In southern Bahia the 
industry has been nearly extinguished through increasing aridity 
and droughts, but in the state of Rio de Janeiro the planters are 
increasing their herds. Minas Geraes produces cheese, butter and 
milk, as well as beef cattle for neighbouring cities. Matto Grosso 
classifies cattle-raising as a principal industry, but under present 
conditions the accessible markets are too small for any large develop- 
ment. In Rio Grande do Sul, where it has attained its greatest 
development, about 400,000 beeves are slaughtered annually for 
the manufacture of jerked beef {xarque), beef extract, &c. Little 
attention has been given to sheep in Brazil except in the southern 
states, and even there the flocks are small. They were to be found 
in Ceara and Piauhy in colonial times, and small flocks are still to be 
seen in the latter state, but no use is made of their wool, and the 
market for mutton is extremely limited because of popular prejudices. 
Woollen manufactures have been established in Rio de Janeiro, Sao 
Paulo and Rio Grande do Sul. The exportation of wool amounted 
to 1,130,160 lb in 1906. Goats have been found highly profitable 
in many of the middle Atlantic states, where the long dry seasons 
render the campos unsuitable for cattle pasturage. The export ot 
goat skins from these states is large. Swine do well in all parts of 
the country, especially in Minas Geraes, Sao Paulo, Rio de Janeiro, 
Parana and Rio Grande do Sul, and domestic pork and lard are 
slowly supplanting the heavily-taxed foreign products. 

Although the coast and river fisheries of Brazil are numerous and 
valuable, cured fish is one of the staple imports, and foreign products 



INDUSTRY] 

are to be found even along the Amazon. In the Amazon valley fish 
is a principal article of food, and large quantities of pirarucu (Sudis 
gigas) are caught during the season of low water and prepared for 
storage or market by drying in the sun. This and the collection of 
turtle eggs for their oil, or butter, are chiefly Indian industries, and 
contribute largely to the support of the native population of that 
region. Along the coast the best known fisheries are among the 
Abrolhos islands and in the shallow waters of Espirito Santo, where 
the garoupa, pargo and vermelho (species of Serranus) abound in 
great numbers. 

The extractive or forest industries of Brazil were among the first 
to engage the attention of Europeans, and have always been con- 
sidered a principal source of colonial and national wealth. The varied 
uses of india-rubber in modern times, however, have given them a 
greatly enhanced importance and value. Of the exports of 1905, 
36% were of this class, while those of the pastoral and mining 
industries combined were not quite 6J %. In 1906 the per- 
centages were 31 and 6-67, showing a considerable loss for the former 
and a slight gain for the latter. The principal products of this class 
are india-rubber, mate, Brazil nuts, vegetable wax, palm fibre, 
cabinet woods, and medicinal leaves, roots, resins, &c. Before the 
discovery of the cheaper aniline colours, dye-woods were among the 
most valuable products of the countty; in fact, Brazil derives her 
name from that of a dye-wood (Brazil-wood — Caesalpinia echinata), 
known as bresill, brasilly, bresiiji, braxilis, or brasile long before the 
discovery of America (see Humboldt's Geographic du nouveau 
continent: torn. ii. p. 214), which for many generations was the most 
highly prized of her natural productions. Of the total exports of 
this group (1905) very nearly 90% was of india-rubber, which 
percentage was reduced to 85 in the following year. The exportation 
for 1906 was 69,761,123 lb of Hevea, 5,871,968 tb of manicoba, and 
1,440,131 lb of mangabeira rubber, the whole valued at 124,941,433 
milreis gold. The dried leaves and smaller twigs of mate (Para- 
guayan tea — Ilex paraguayensis) are exported to the southern Spanish 
American republics, where (as in Rio Grande do Sul) the beverage 
is exceedingly popular. Theexportin 1906 amounted to 127,417,950 
lb, officially valued at 16,502,881 milreis gold. The collection of 
Brazil nuts along the Amazon and its tributaries is essentially a 
poor man's industry, requiring no other plant than a boat. The 
harvest comes in January and February, in the rainy season, and 
the nut-gatherers often come one or two hundred miles in their boats 
to the best forests. The nuts are the fruit of the Bertholletia excelsa, 
one of the largest trees of the Amazon forest region, and are enclosed, 
sixteen to eighteen in number, in a hard, thick pericarp. Another 
nut-producing tree is the sapucaia (Lecythis ollaria), whose nuts are 
enclosed in a larger pericarp, and are considered to be better flavoured 
than those first described. The crop is a variable one, the export 
in 1905 having been 198,226 hectolitres, while that of 1906 was 
96,770 hectolitres. It could undoubtedly be largely increased. 
Vegetable wax, which is an excellent substitute for beeswax, is a 
product of the carnahuba palm (Copernicia cerifera), and is an im- 
portant export from Ceara. Palm, or piassava fibre, derived from 
the piassava palm, is used in the manufacture of brooms, brushes, &c. 
It is found as far south as southern Bahia, and the export could be 
very largely increased. The export of cabinet woods is not large, 
considering the forest area of Brazil and the variety and quality 
of the woods. This is principally due to the cost and difficulties 
of transporting timbers to the coast. The export is confined princi- 
pally to rosewood. Of the medicinal plants, the best-known products 
are ipecacuanha, sarsaparilla, copaiba, jaborandi and cinchona, but 
this is only a part of the list. Besides these, tonka beans, anatto, 
vanilla, and castor-oil seeds form a part of the exports. 

The mineral exports are surprisingly small. Gold was discovered 
by the Portuguese soon after their settlement of the coast in the 
16th century, but the washings were poor and attracted little atten- 
tion. The richer deposits of Minas Geraes were discovered about 
1693, and those of Matto Grosso early in the following century. 
Abandoned placer mines are to be found in every part of the unsettled 
interior, showing how thoroughly it had been explored by gold- 
hunters in those early days. Some good mines, like Morro Velho 
and the abandoned Gongo Soco, have been developed in Minas 
Geraes, but the great majority are small and not very productive. 
Diamonds were discovered in Minas Geraes, near the town now called 
Diamantina, during the first half of the 1 8th century, the dates 
given ranging from 1725 to 1746, but the productiveness of the 
district has greatly decreased. Diamonds have also been found in 
Bahia, Goyaz and Parana. Other precious stones found in Brazil 
are the topaz, ruby, aquamarine, tourmaline, chrysoberyl, garnet 
and amethyst. Among the minerals are silver, platinum, copper, 
iron, lead, manganese, chromium, quicksilver, bismuth, arsenic and 
antimony, of which only iron and manganese have been regularly 
mined. The copper deposits of Minas Geraes are said to be promising. 
Manganese is mined in Minas Geraes for export. Iron ores have been 
found in most of the states, and are especially abundant in Minas 
Geraes. The Ypanema mine and ironworks, near Sorocaba, Sao 
Paulo, which belong to the national government, have been in 
operation since 1810 and small charcoal forges were in operation in 
colonial times and supplied the mines with a considerable part of 
the iron needed by them. Many of the richer deposits have never 
been developed because of a lack of fuel and limestone. Bituminous 

IV. 15 



BRAZIL 



449 



coal of an inferior quality is mined to a limited extent in Rio Grande 
do Sul, and another mine has been opened in Santa Catharina. 
These coal deposits extend from Rio Grande do Sul north into the 
state of Sao Paulo. Salt, which does not figure in the list of exports, 
is produced along the coast between Pernambuco and Cape St Roque. 
The annual production is about 240,000 tons. 

To illustrate the comparative productiveness and relationship of 
these sources of national wealth and industry, the following official 
returns of export for the years 1905 and 1906 are arranged in the 
four general classes previously discussed, the values being in 
Brazilian gold milreis, worth 2s. 3d. or 54-6 cents to the milreis: — 



Coffee 

Cotton 

Cacau 

Tobacco 

Sugar 

Bran 1 

Cotton seed 

Mandioca flour 

Fruits 

Castor-oil seeds 



Agricultural. 
1905. 
Milreis, gold. 
190,404,576 
10,290,790 
9.240,313 
7,335.163 
3,608,476 
1,490,312 
964,074 
692,079 
606,678 
214,016 



224,846,477 



Natural and Forest. 
Rubber: 

Mangabeira . . . 1,286,672 

Manicoba .... 7,418,559 

Hevea (Para) . . . 119,434,947 

Mate (Paraguay tea) . 11,088,108 

Brazil nuts .... 2,064,049 

Palm wax (Carnahuba) . 1,847,273 

Cabinet woods . . . 390,070 

Piassava fibre . . . 336,668 
Medicinal leaves, roots, 

resins, &c. . . . 191,534 



Salted hides 

Dry hides 

Skins . 

Horse hair 

Horns 

Wool 

Beef extract, 



&c. 



143.33m H2 

Pastoral and Animal. 
7,010,498 
5,330,440 
4."7.590 
307,505 
276,172 
142,414 
81,607 



Gold, in bars 
Manganese ore 
Monazite sand 
Precious stones 



Old metals 2 . . 
Sundry products 



Total, all products 



17,266,226 

Mineral Products. 

• • 3.734.469 
. . 2,958,462 
. . 889,231 

• • 633,916 



8,216,078 



Miscellaneous. 
263,506 
2,177,512 



2,441,018 
396,827,679 



1906. 
Milreis, gold. 

245,474.525 

14,726,492 

12,323,922 

8,283,150 

5,388,596 

1,128,761 

1,084,742 

789,913 

7H,332 

333,250 

290,247,683 



1,376,014 

7,335,870 

116,229,549 

16,502,881 

1,190,177 

3,733,478 

318,873 

347,323 

263,137 
147,297,302 



9,691,180 

7,675,715 

4,639,512 

403,541 

277,488 

354,045 
110,925 

23,152,406 



4,379,160 

1,594,486 

881,289 

1,480,260 

8,335,195 



382,073 
2,225,163 

2,607,236 

471,639,822 



Manufactures. — Before the establishment of the republic very 
little attention had been given to manufacturing industries beyond 
what was necessary to prepare certain crude products for market. 
Sugar and rum were essentially plantation products down to the 
last ten years of the empire, when central usines using improved 
machinery and methods were introduced as a means of saving the 
sugar plantations from ruin. The crude methods of preparing jerked 
beef were also modified to some extent by better equipped abattoirs 
and establishments for preparing beef extract, preserved meats, &c. 
There were also mills for crushing the dried mate leaves, cigar and 

1 The " bran " exported is from imported wheat and cannot be 
considered a national product. 

2 The " old metals " consist of old iron, brass, &c, derived from 
railway material, machinery, &c, all imported, and should not be 
considered a Brazilian product. 

The " sundry products ' would probably be included in the four 
general classes were the items given. 

II 



45° 



BRAZIL 



[GOVERNMENT 



cigarette factories, small chocolate factories, hat factories, brick and 
tile yards, potteries, tanneries, saddleries, and many other small 
industries common to all large communities. Considerable protec- 
tion was afforded to many of these industries by the customs tariff 
of that time, but protection did not become an acknowledged 
national policy until after 1889. After that time the duties on 
imports were repeatedly and largely increased, both as a means of 
raising- larger revenues and as an encouragement to manufacturing 
enterprise. Although the protective tariffs thus imposed have 
resulted in a large increase in manufacturing industries, some of 
them have been antagonistic to the productive interests of the 
country, as in the case of weaving mills which use imported yarns. 
Other industries are carried on entirely with imported materials, and 
are national only in name. Among these are flour mills, factories 
for the cutting of wire nails and making hollow ware from sheet iron, 
and factories for the manufacture of umbrellas, boots and shoes, &c. 
The greatest progress has been made in the manufacture of cotton 
fabrics, principally of the plainer and coarser grades used by the 
common people. There were 155 of these factories in 1895, but in 
1905 only 108 were in operation, with 715,000 spindles, and about 
37,000 operatives. Nearly one-half of these were weaving mills, 
using imported yarn. The factories are widely distributed, and 
some are favoured by state legislation in addition to the national 
tariff. The largest and best equipped of them are located in the 
federal states of Rio de Janeiro and Sao Paulo, though the greater 
part of the raw cotton used comes from the northern states and pays 
high freight rates. The manufacture of woollen blankets, cashmeres, 
flannels, &c, had also undergone noteworthy development and is 
carried on in fifteen factories, located principally in Rio Grande do 
Sul, Rio de Janeiro and Sao Paulo. Biscuit-making is represented 
by a large number of factories, for the most part in Rio de Janeiro 
and Sao Paulo, and there are a number of breweries of the most 
modern type in the same two states. The manufacture of boots 
and shoes has also received much attention, but the materials used 
are for the most part imported. Among other manufactures are 
butter and cheese, canned fruits and vegetables, glass and earthen- 
ware, printing and wrapping paper, furniture, matches, hats, 
clothing, pharmaceutical products, soaps and perfumery, ice, 
artificial drinks, cigars and cigarettes, fireworks and candles. 

Government. — The overthrow of the monarchy by a military 
revolt in Rio de Janeiro on 15th November 1889, resulted in the 
creation of a federal republic under the name of United States 
of Brazil (Estados Unidos do Brazil). The constitution under 
which the republic is governed was drafted by a constituent 
assembly convened on the isth of November 1890, and was 
adopted on the 24th of February 1891. The supreme powers of 
the nation are vested in three partially independent branches of 
government — executive, legislative, and judicial — represented 
by the president and his cabinet, a national congress of two 
chambers, and a supreme tribunal. The states forming the 
federation consist of the twenty provinces and municipal district 
of the empire, but the number may be increased or diminished 
by the states concerned with the approval of the national 
congress. The states are self-governed, and have exclusive 
control of the public lands, mines, industries, and all local 
affairs. They have the sole right also to impose duties on 
exports and taxes upon real estate, industries and professions, 
and transfers of property. Among other things they are charged 
with the supervision and support of primary education, with 
the maintenance of order, and with the organization and support 
of a system of state courts. Both the national and state govern- 
ments exercise the right to impose stamp and consumption 
taxes, and the municipalities likewise are permitted to impose 
licence and consumption taxes. The national government 
reserves for itself the exclusive right to direct the foreign affairs 
of the republic, to maintain an army and navy, to impose 
duties on imports, to regulate foreign commerce, to collect port 
dues, to issue money and create banks of issue, and to maintain 
a postal and national telegraph service. It also supervises 
secondary and superior education, issues patents, and provides 
federal courts for the trial of cases amenable to federal laws. 
The national government is forbidden to interfere in the peculiar 
affairs of the states except to repel foreign invasion, to maintain 
a republican form of government, to re-establish order at the 
request of a state, or to enforce federal laws and sentences. 
The states are forbidden, likewise, to tax federal property, to 
tax inter-state commerce, to impose duties of their own on 
foreign imports, or to resist the execution of judicial sentences 
originating in other states. The separation of church and state 



is provided for by the constitution, and both the nation and the 
states are forbidden to establish, subsidize or restrict the 
exercise of any religious worship. Foreigners are eligible to 
Brazilian citizenship, and the right of suffrage is conferred upon 
all male citizens over twenty-one years of age, except beggars, 
illiterates, the rank and file of the armed forces, members of 
monastic orders, &c, bound by private vows, and all unregistered 
citizens. 

The executive power of the nation is vested in a president, 
elected for a term of four years by a direct vote of the electors. 
He must be a native Brazilian over thirty-five years of age, in 
the full enjoyment of his political rights, and is ineligible for the 
next succeeding term. A vice-president is elected at the same 
time and under the same conditions, who is president of the 
senate ex officio, and succeeds to the presidency in case the 
office becomes vacant during the last two years of the presidential 
term. Should the vacancy occur during the first two years of 
the term, a new election must be held. The president receives a 
salary of 120,000 milreis and* the vice-president of 36,000 milreis. 
The president is advised and assisted by a cabinet of six ministers, 
viz. foreign affairs; finance; agriculture, industry and com- 
merce; 1 communications (Viacao) and public works; 1 war; 
and marine. The ministers are appointed and removed by the 
president, take no part in the sessions of congress, and are 
responsible to the president alone for their advisory acts. The 
president sanctions and promulgates, or vetoes, or ignores the 
laws and resolutions voted by congress, and issues decrees and 
regulations for their execution. His veto may be over-ridden 
by a two-thirds vote in each chamber, and permitting ten days 
to pass without signing an act is considered as . acquiescence 
and it is promulgated by congress. The president is charged 
with the duties (among others) of commanding the armed forces 
of the republic, appointing the prefect of the national capital, 
designating members of the supreme tribunal and diplomatic 
representatives for the approval of the senate, to negotiate 
treaties, &c, ad referendum to congress, and maintain relations 
with foreign powers, to declare war in case of invasion and to 
declare martial law in case of grave internal disorder, and to 
advise congress at the opening of the annual session of the pro- 
gress and state of public affairs. He may be impeached before 
the senate for his official acts and suspended from office, or tried 
by the supreme tribunal for criminal offences. 

The legislative power is vested in a national congress of two 
chambers, elected by direct suffrage, and convened on the 3rd 
of May each year. The regular annual sessions are of four months' 
duration, but they may be extended to complete necessary 
legislation. The senate consists of sixty-three members (three 
from each state and the federal district) elected for a period of 
nine years, one-third of each delegation being renewed every 
three years. The senators must be not less than thirty-five 
years of age, and are exempt from all legal processes not previ- 
ously authorized by the senate during their term of office, 
except in cases of arrest in flagrante delicto for a capital crime. 
The chamber of deputies contains 212 members, the membership 
being distributed among the states on a basis of one for each 
70,000 of population, but with a minimum representation of four 
for each state. The deputies are elected by direct suffrage for 
the legislative session of three years, and have the same im- 
munities from legal process as the senators. The chamber has 
the right of initiative in the organization of the annual budget 
laws and those relative to the numerical strength of the army 
and navy. The members of both houses receive a per diem 
subsidy. 

The judicial system of the republic consists of a supreme 
federal tribunal of fifteen judges in the national capital, and a 
district tribunal in the capital of each state, which forms a federal 
judicial district. The judges are appointed for life and can 
be removed only by judicial sentence and impeachment. 
One member of the supreme tribunal holds the position of 

'Previous to 1907 these two departments were united in one under 
the designation of " Industry, Communications and Public Works." 
The division was decreed December 29, 1906. 



DEFENCE, &c] 



BRAZIL 



45i 



solicitor-general of the republic. The judges and solicitor-general 
are appointed by the "president with the approval of the senate, 
but the tribunal chooses its own presiding officers and secretaries 
and, nominally, is independent of executive control. The 
supreme tribunal has original and appellate jurisdiction, but its 
power to pass on the constitutionality of federal laws and 
executive acts seems to fall short of that of the United States 
Supreme Court. It has authority, however, to review the acts 
and laws of state governments and to decide upon their con- 
stitutionality. The district federal court has but one judge 
(juiz de secqao) and a solicitor of the republic, and has original 
jurisdiction in federal causes. Each state has its own local laws 
and courts, independent of federal control, but subject to the 
review of the supreme tribunal, and with rights of appeal to that 
tribunal in specified cases. The federal district, which has a 
municipal council instead of a legislature, has a system of 
municipal and higher courts peculiar to itself. Limited judicial 
powers are exercised by chiefs of police, and by certain depart- 
ment commissions, or boards, of an executive character. The 
members of the army and navy are governed by special laws, 
enjoy immunities from civil process, and are subject to the 
jurisdiction of military courts. The civil code of the republic 
is based upon Roman law. 

Army. — The nominal strength of the army in 1906 was 
29,489, including the officers of the general and subordinate 
staffs and the officers and cadets of the military schools. 
This total represents the nominal strength of the army in 
times of peace. Its actual strength, however, is about 15,000 
men, some of the regimental and battalion organizations 
being skeletons. Its organization consists of 40 battalions 
of infantry with one transport and one depot company, 14 
regiments of cavalry of 4 squadrons each, 6 regiments of 
field artillery with 24 batteries and 6 battalions of heavy 
artillery with 24 batteries, and two battalions of engineers. 
Efforts to organize a national guard have been unsuccessful, 
although officers have been appointed and the organization 
perfected, on paper. The police force, however, is organized on 
a military footing and armed, and is available for service in case 
of necessity. It is credited with 20,000 men. According to law 
military service is obligatory, but the government has been 
unable to enforce it. Impressment is commonly employed to 
fill the ranks, and in cases of emergency the prison population 
is drawn upon for recruits. The president is nominally 
commander-in-chief of the army, but the actual command is 
vested in a general staff in the national capital, and in the general 
commanding each of the seven military districts into which the 
republic is divided. The most important of these districts is 
that of Rio Grande do Sul, where a force of 11,226 men is 
stationed. The principal war arsenal is in Rio de Janeiro. 
The rifle used by the infantry is a modified Mauser of the German 
1888 model. Military instruction is given at the Eschola Militar 
of Rio de Janeiro. The military organization is provided with 
an elaborate code and systems of military courts, which cul- 
minate in a supreme military tribunal composed of 15 judges 
holding office for life, of which 8 are general army officers, 
4 general naval officers and 3 civil judges. 

Navy. — The naval strength of the republic consisted in 1906 
of 9, collection of armoured and wooden vessels of various ages 
and types of construction, of which three armoured vessels 
(including the two designed for coast defence), four protected 
cruisers, five destroyers and torpedo-cruisers, and half a dozen 
torpedo boats represented what may be termed the effective 
fighting force. The loss of the armoured turret ship " Aquidaban " 
by a magazine explosion in the bay of Jacarepagua, near Rio de 
Janeiro, in 1905, had left Brazil with but one fighting vessel (the 
" Reachuelo ") of any importance. Many of the wooden and 
iron vessels listed in the Naval Annual, 1906, though obsolete 
and of no value whatever as fighting machines, are used for 
river and harbour service, and in the suppression of trifling 
insurrections. The Annual describes 21 vessels of various 
types, and mentions 23 small gunboats used for river and 
harbour service. Besides these there are a number of practice 



boats (small school-ships), transports, dispatch boats and 
launches. A considerable part of the armament is old, but the 
more modern vessels are armed with Armstrong rifled guns. 
The naval programme of the republic for 1905 provided for the 
prompt construction of 3 battleships of the largest displacement, 
3 armoured cruisers, 6 destroyers, 12 torpedo boats and 3 sub- 
marine boats; and by 1909 the reorganization of the navy was 
far advanced. The principal naval arsenal is located at Rio de 
Janeiro. The government possesses dry docks at Rio de Janeiro. 
The naval school, which has always enjoyed a high reputation 
among Brazilians, is situated on the island of Enxadas in the 
bay of Rio de Janeiro. There are smaller arsenals at Para, 
Pernambuco, Sao Salvador and Ladario (Matto Grosso) and a 
shipbuilding yard of considerable importance at the Rio de 
Janeiro arsenal. 

Education. — Education is in a backward condition, and it is 
estimated that 80% of the population can neither read nor 
write. The lowest rate of illiteracy is to be found in the southern 
half of the republic. Public instruction . is, by constitutional 
provision, under secular control, but religious denominations 
are permitted to have their own schools. Primary instruction 
is free but not compulsory, and the schools are supported and 
supervised by the states. An incomplete return in 1891 gave 
8793 schools and 376,399 pupils. Secondary and higher educa- 
tion are under both federal and state control, the former being 
represented by lyceums in the state capitals, and by such 
institutions as the Gymnasio Nacional (formerly Collegio Dom 
Pedro II.) in Rio de Janeiro. Many of the states also maintain 
normal schools of an inferior type, that of Sao Paulo being the 
best and most modern of the number. Higher, or superior, in- 
struction is confined almost exclusively to professional schools — 
the medical schools of Rio de Janeiro and Bahia, the law schools 
of Sao Paulo and Pernambuco, the polytechnic of Rio de Janeiro, 
and the school of mines of Ouro Preto. There are many private 
schools in all the large cities, from the primary schools maintained 
by the church and various corporations and religious associations 
to schools of secondary and collegiate grades, such as the Protes- 
tant mission schools of Petropolis, Piracicaba, Juiz de Fora, Sao 
Paulo and Parana, the Lyceu de Artes e Officios (night school) of 
Rio de Janeiro, and the Mackenzie College of Sao Paulo. Perhaps 
the best educational work in Brazil is done in these private 
schools. In addition to these there are a number of seminaries 
for the education of priests, where special attention is given to 
the classics and belles-lettres. 

Religion. — The revolution of 1889 and the constitution adopted 
in 1891 not only effected a radical change in the form of govern- 
ment, but also brought about the separation of church and state. 
Before that time the Roman Catholic Church had been recognized 
and supported by the state. Not only are the national and state 
governments forbidden by the constitution to establish or 
subsidize religious worship, but its freedom is guaranteed by a 
prohibition against placing obstructions upon its exercise. 
The relations of the state with the disestablished church since 

1889 have been somewhat anomalous, the government having 
decided to continue during their lives the stipends of the church 
functio.naries at the time of disestablishment. The census of 

1890 divided the population into 14,179,615 Roman Catholics, 
J 43(743 Protestants, 3300 of all other faiths, 7257 of no religious 
profession, and 600,000 unchristianized Indians. The increase 
of population through immigration is overwhelmingly Catholic, 
and the nation must, therefore, continue Roman Catholic whether 
the church is subsidized by the state or not. The moral character 
of churchmen in Brazil has been severely criticized by many 
observers, and the ease with which disestablishment was effected 
is probably largely due to their failings. The church had 
exercised a preponderating influence in all matters relating to 
education and the social life of the people, and it was felt that 
no sweeping reforms could be secured until its domination had 
been broken. The immediate results of disestablishment were 
civil marriage, the civil registry of births and deaths, and the 
secularization of cemeteries; but the church retains its influence 
over all loyal churchmen through the confessional, the last rites 



452 



BRAZIL 



[LITERATURE 



of the church, and their sentiment against the profanation of 
holy ground. Formerly Brazil constituted an ecclesiastical 
province under the metropolitan jurisdiction of an archbishop 
residing at Bahia, with n suffragan bishops, 12 vicars-general 
and about 2000 curates. In 1892 the diocese of Rio de Janeiro 
was made an archbishopric, and four new dioceses were created. 
Three more have been added since, making twenty dioceses in 
all. In 1905 the archbishop of Rio de Janeiro was made a 
cardinal. The church has eleven seminaries for the education 
of priests, and maintains a large number of private schools, 
especially for girls, which are patronized by the better classes. 
The church likewise exercises a far-reaching influence over the 
people through the beneficent work of ics lay orders, and through 
the hospitals and asylums under its control in every part of the 
country. A Misericordia hospital is to be found in almost every 
town of importance, and recolhimentos for orphan girls in all the 
large cities. In no country have these charities received more 
generous support than in Brazil. The Protestant contingent 
consists of a number of small congregations scattered throughout 
the country, a few Portuguese Protestants from the Azores, a 
part of the German colonists settled in the central and southern 
states, and a large percentage of the North Europeans and 
Americans temporarily resident in Brazil. The Positivists are 
few in number, but their congregations are made up of educated 
and influential people. 

Art, Science and Literature. — The Brazilian people have the 
natural taste for art, music and literature so common among 
the Latin nations of the Old World. The emperor Dom Pedro II. 
did much to encourage these pursuits, and many promising 
young men received their education in Europe at his personal 
expense. Still earlier in the century (181 5) the regent Dom 
John VI. brought out a number of French artists to educate 
his subjects in the fine arts, and the Escola Real de Sciencias, 
Aries e Officios was founded in the following year. From this 
beginning resulted the Academia de Bellas Artcs of a later date, 
to which was added a conservatory of music in 1841. The 
institution is now called the Escola Nacional de Bellas Artes. 
Free instruction in the fine arts has been given in this school. 
The higher results of artistic training, however, are less marked 
than a widespread dilettantism. The Brazilian composer Carlos 
Gomes (1839-1896) is the best known of those who have adopted 
music as a profession, his opera // Guarani having been produced 
at most of the European capitals. The most prominent among 
Brazilian painters is Pedro Amcrico, and in sculpture Rodolpho 
Bernardelli has done good work. In science Brazil has accom- 
plished very little, although many eminent foreign naturalists 
have spent years of study within her borders. Joao Barbosa 
Rodrigues has done some good work in botany, especially in 
the study of the palms of the Amazon, and Joao Baptista de 
Lacerda has made important biological investigations at the 
national museum of Rio de Janeiro. There are several scientific 
societies and institutions in the country, but they rarely under- 
take original work. The most active are the geographical 
societies, but very little has been done in the direction of scientific 
exploration. Some interesting results have been obtained from 
the boundary surveys, from Dr E. Cruls's exploration of a section 
of the Goyaz plateau in 1892 in search of a site for the future 
capital of the republic, and from some of the river and railway 
surveys. In 1875 a geological commission was organized under 
the direction of Professor Charles Frederick Hartt, but it was 
disbanded two years later. In 1906 Congress resolved to under- 
take a national geological survey under the direction of Mr 
Orville A. Derby, one of Professor Hartt's assistants. The coal 
resources of the southern states were investigated in 1904, under 
the auspices of the national government, by Dr J. C. White, of 
the U.S. Geological Survey, who found strata of fairly good coal 
at depths of 100 to 200 ft. extending from Rio Grande do Sul 
north to Sao Paulo. The more important contributions to our 
present knowledge of Brazil, however, have been obtained through 
the labours of foreign naturalists. Beginning with the German 
mineralogist W. L. von Eschwege, who spent nineteen years 
in Brazil (1809-1828), the list includes A. de Saint-Hilaire (1816- 



1820 and 1830), J. B. von Spix and C. F. von Martins (1817-1820), 
Prince Max zu Neuwied (1815-1817), P. W. Lund (1827-1830, 
and 1830 to 1880, the year of his death), George Gardner (1836-- 
1841), A. R. Wallace (1848-1852), H. W. Bates (1848-1859), 
Hermann Burmeister (1850-1852), Louis Agassiz (1865-1866), 
Charles Frederick Hartt (1865-1866, 1872 and 1875-1878) 
and Karl von den Steinen (1884-1885 and 1887-1888). These 
explorations cover every branch of natural science and resulted 
in publications of inestimable scientific value. There should also 
be mentioned the monumental work of C. F. P. von Martius 
on the Flora Braziliensis, and the explorations of Agassiz and 
Lund. Among other scientists of a later date who have published 
important works on Brazil are the American geologists O. A. 
Derby and J. C. Branner, the Swiss naturalist E. A. Goeldi, 
the German botanist J. Huber, the German ethnologist H. von 
Ihring, and the German geographer Fried. Katzer. The In- 
stitute Historico e Geographico Brazileiro, though devoted chiefly 
to historical research, has rendered noteworthy service in its 
encouragement of geographical exploration and by its publication 
of various scientific memoirs. The Museu Nacional at Rio de 
Janeiro, which has occupied the imperial palace of Sao Christovao 
since the overthrow of the monarchy, contains large collections 
of much scientific value, but defective organization and apathetic 
direction have rendered them of comparatively slight service. 
The Observatorio Nacional at Rio de Janeiro is another prominent 
public institution. The botanical gardens of Brazil are develop- 
ing into permanent exhibitions of the flora of the regions in which 
they are located. That of Rio de Janeiro is widely celebrated 
for its avenues of royal palms, but it has also rendered an im- 
portant service to the country in the dissemination of exotic 
plants. 

Brazilian literature has been seriously prejudiced by partisan 
politics and dilettantism. The colonial period was one of 
strict repression, the intellectual life of the people being jealously 
supervised by the church to protect itself against heresy, and 
their progress being restricted by the Portuguese crown to 
protect its monopoly of the natural resources of the country. 
The arrival of Dom John VI. in 1808 broke down some of these 
restrictions, and the first year of his residence in Rio de Janeiro 
saw the establishment of the first printing press in Brazil and 
the publication of an official gazette. There was no freedom of 
the press, however, until 1821, when the abolition of the censor- 
ship and the constitutional struggle in Portugal gave rise to 
a political discussion that marked the opening of a new era in 
the development of the nation, and aroused an intellectual 
activity that has been highly productive in journalistic and 
polemical writings. In no country, perhaps, has the press 
exercised a more direct and powerful influence upon government 
than in Brazil, and in no other country can there be found so 
high a percentage of journalists in official life. Some of the 
political writers have played an important part in moulding 
public opinion on certain questions, as in the case of A. C. 
Tavares Bastos, whose Cartas do Solitario were highly instru- 
mental in causing the Amazon to be thrown open to the world's 
commerce and also in preparing the way for the abolition of 
slavery; and in that of Joaquim Saldanha Marinho, whose 
discussions in 1874-1876 of the relations between church and 
state prepared the way for their separation. The personal 
element is conspicuous in the Brazilian journalism, and for a 
considerable period of its history libellous attacks on persons, 
signed by professional sponsors, popularly called lestas de ferro 
(iron heads), were admitted at so much a line in the best 
newspapers. 

The singular adaptability of the Portuguese language to 
poetical expression, coupled with the imaginative temperament 
of the people, has led to an unusual production and appreciation 
of poetry. The percentage of educated men who have written 
little volumes of lyrics is surprisingly large, and this ma}' be 
accounted for by the old Portuguese custom of reciting poetry 
with musical accompaniment. The most popular of the Brazilian 
poets are Thomaz Antonio Gonzaga, Antonio Goncalves Dias 
and Bernardo Guimaraes. Among the dramatists and novelists 



FINANCE] 



BRAZIL 



453 



may be mentioned Joaquim Manoel de Macedo, Jos6 Martiniano 
de Alencar, Bernardo Guimaraes, A. de Escrangnolle Taunay 
and J. M. Machado de Assis. Jose M. de Alencar is usually 
described as the greatest of Brazilian novelists. The most 
popular of his romances are Iracema and O Guarany. In 
historical literature Brazil has produced one writer of high stand- 
ing — Francisco Adolpho Varnhagen ( Visconde de Porto Seguro) , 
whose Historia Geral do Brazil is a standard authority on that 
subject. The two English authorities, Robert Southey's History 
of Brazil, covering the colonial period, and John Armitage's 
History of Brazil, covering the period between the arrival of the 
Braganza family (1808) and the abdication of Dom Pedro I. 
(183 1) , have been translated into Portuguese. Another Brazilian 
historian of recognized merit is Joao Manoel Pereira da Silva, 
whose historical writings cover the first years of the empire, from 
its foundation to 1840. Among the later writers Joao Capistrano 
de Abren has produced some short historical studies of great 
merit. In the field of philosophic speculation, Auguste Comte 
has had many disciples in Brazil. 

Finance. — The national revenue is derived largely from the duties 
on imports, the duties on exports having been surrendered to the 
states when the republic was organized. Other sources of revenue 
are stamp taxes on business transactions, domestic consumption 
taxes (usually payable in stamps) on manufactured tobaccos, 
beverages, boots and shoes, textiles, matches, salt, preserved foods, 
hats, pharmaceutical preparations, perfumeries, candles, vinegar, 
walking sticks and playing cards, and taxes on lotteries, passenger 
tickets, salaries and dividends of joint-stock companies. Formerly 
import duties were payable in currency, but in 1899 it was decided 
to collect 10% of them in gold to provide the government with 
specie for its foreign remittances. The revenues and expenditures 
have since then been calculated in gold and currency together, 
to the complete mystification of the average citizen, and the gold 
percentage of the duties on imports has been increased to 35 and 
50% (in 1907), the higher rate to apply to specified articles and rule 
when exchange on London is above 14 pence per milreis, and the 
lower when it is below. The service of the national debt absorbs 
a very large part of the expenditure, about 45 % of the estimates 
for 1907 being assigned to the department of finance. The depart- 
ment of industry, communications and public works takes the next 
highest proportion, but about half its expenditures are met by 
special taxes, as in the case of port works and railway inspection, 
and by the revenues of the state railways, telegraph lines and post 
office. The depreciation and unstable character of the paper 
currency render it difficult to give a clear statement of receipts and 
expenditures for a term of years, the sterling equivalents often show- 
ing a decrease, through a fall in the value of the milreis, where there 
has been an actual increase in currency returns. This was most 
noticeable between 1889 and 1898, when exchange, which represents 
the value of the milreis, fell from a maximum of 27! pence (27d. 
being the par value of the milreis) to a minimum of 5§ pence. 
Since 1898 there has been an upward movement of exchange, the 
average rate for 1905 having been very nearly 16 pence. In this 
period the increase in the sterling equivalents would be proportion- 
ately greater than that of the currency values. The gold and 
currency receipts and expenditures for the six years 1900 to 1905, 
inclusive, according to official returns, were as follows : — , . 



the interest obligations on its debt and railway guarantees, and an 
arrangement was made with its creditors in London for the issue of a 
5 % funding loan to an amount not to exceed £10,000,000, and the 
suspension of all amortization for thirteen years. On the other 
hand the government agreed to withdraw currency, which had 
reached a total of 788,364,614 j-milreis, pari passu with the issue of 
the loan, the milreis being computed at 18 pence. The purpose of 
this condition was in order to improve the value of the paper milreis 
in order to increase the specie value of the revenues. The scheme 
came into operation in June 1898, and not only was a complete 
suspension of payments avoided but the financial situation was 
greatly improved. The government even withdrew more of its 
currency issues than required by the agreement, and the value of the 
milreis steadily improved. At the same time the government carried 
out the forced conversion of the national loans into lower interest- 
bearing issues, which greatly reduced the annual interest charges. 
These measures would have put the financial affairs of the nation on 
a solid footing in a very few years had the government been able 
to keep its expenditure within its income. The naval revolt of 
1893-1894, however, had aroused the spirit of militarism in the 
ruling classes, and the effort to perfect the organization and equip- 
ment of the army, strengthen the fortifications of Rio de Janeiro, 
and increase the navy, have kept expenditures in excess of 
the revenues. The purchase of guaranteed railways owned by 
foreign companies likewise added largely to the bonded in- 
debtedness, though the onus was in existence in another form. 
The result of these measures was a large addition to the public 
debt, which on 31st December 1906 was approximately as follows 
{apolices being the name given to bonds inscribed to the holder) : — 



External debt : 

Loans of 1883, 1888 and 1889 
Oestede Minas R. R. loan 
Loan of 1898 .... 
Funding loan of 1898 
Railway rescission loan of 1901 
Port works loan of 1903 . 


£ s. d 
26,478,500 

3,388,100 

7.33l.6oo 

8,613,717 9 9 
15,467,015 16 1 

8,500,000 




£69,778,933 5 10 


Internal debt, funded: 

5 % apolices, Law of 1827 

4i % „ „ 1879 

6 % „ „ 1897 

'5 % » ,. !903 


Milreis"* 51 

• 483,546,600 

20,548,000 

37,082,000 

17,300,000 


Total, funded .... 558,476,600 
(at I5d. £34,904,787) ===== 



Internal debt, not funded: Milreis 

Paper money 664,792,960 

Savings bank and other deposits: 

In paper 246,812,407 

In gold, 19,053,861 r (say) . . . 34,296,950 
Floating indebtedness ("fcs current, bills, &c.) ? 



Total, not funded, approx. 
(at I5d. £59,118,895 stg.) 



Approximate total indebtedness 



945,902,317 



£163,802,675 



Year. 


Average Rate 
of Exchange. 


Revenue. 


Expenditure. 


Gold 

Milreis. 


Currency 
Milreis. 


Gold 
Milreis. 


Currency 
Milreis. 


Pence. 


1900 
1901 
1902 
1903 
1904 
1905 


9-50 
11-38 
n-97 
12 

12-28 
15-89 


49,955,522 
44,041,302 
42,904,844 
45,121,815 
50,566,572 
64,207,004 


263,687,253 
239,284,702 
266,584,912 
327,370,063 
342,782,191 
243,335,396 


41,892,150 
40,493,241 
34,574,643 
48,324,642 
48,476,413 
51,606,272 


372,753.986 
261,629,212 
236,458,862 
291,198,960 
352,292,147 
265,699,281 



Reducing gold to a currency basis at I5d. per milreis (the official 
valuation adopted in 1906), the budget for 1907 provided for a 
revenue of 353,590,593 milreis and an expenditure of 409,482,284 
milreis, showing a deficit of 55,891,691 milreis. These deficits were 
common enough under the monarchy, but they have become still 
more prominent under the republic. According to the " Retrospecto 
Commercial " for 1906 of the Jornal do Commercio (Rio de Janeiro, 
March 5, 1907), the aggregate deficits for the eleven years 1891 to 
1904 were 692,000,000 milreis, or, say, £43,250,000. 

The natural result of such a regime is increasing indebtedness. 
In 1888, a year before the republic was proclaimed, the internal 
and external national debts amounted to £74,000,000 sterling, with 
the currency at par. Ten years later, when the currency had fallen 
to 5f pence per milreis, the government found itself unable to meet 



In addition to these, the government was still responsible for interest 
guarantees on fourteen railways, or sections 
of existing lines, with an aggregate capital 
of about £4,900,000 held in Europe and 
12,055,440 milreis held in Brazil, on which 
the national treasury paid in interest £191,324 
and 1,398,493 milreis. 

The paper currency of Brazil consists of 
both treasury issues and bank-notes, the 
latter issued under government supervision. 
Its fluctuations in value have been not only 
a serious inconvenience in commercial trans- 
actions, but also the cause of heavy loss to 
the people. Under the provisions of the 
funding loan of 1898 a scheme for the 
withdrawal of the paper money was carried into effect, and by 
the end of December 1906 the amount in circulation had been 
reduced from 788,364,614 |-milreis (the outstanding circulation 31st 
August 1898) to 664,792,960 J-milreis. Two funds were created 
for the redemption and guarantee of paper issues, the latter receiving 
5 % of the import duties payable in gold. Up to 1906 the Caixa 
da Amortisacao (redemption bureau), which has charge of the service 
of the internal funded debt, superintended the redemption of the 
currency, but in that year (December 6, 1906) a Caixa de Conversao 
(conversion bureau) was created for this special service. It is 
modelled after the Argentine Conversion office, and is authorized 
to issue notes to bearer against deposits of gold at the rate of 15 
pence per milreis although exchange was above I7d. when the 
scheme was proposed. The notes are to be redeemable in gold at 



454 



BRAZIL 



[HISTORY 



sight, the Caixa de Conversao to keep the gold paid in for that 
express purpose. The coffee producers of Sao Paulo and other 
states found that the appreciation in value of themilreis was reducing 
their profits, and they advocated this measure (at first with a valua- 
tion of 1 2d.) to check the upward movement in exchange. Metallic 
money is limited to nickel and bronze coins, but in 1906 the govern- 
ment was authorized to purchase bar silver for the coinage of 
pieces of the denomination of two milreis, one milreis and 500 reis 
( J-milreis). Gold is the nominal standard of value, the monetary unit 
being the gold milreis worth 2s. 2§d. at par. The 10-milreis gold 
piece weighs 8-9648 grammes, 916 fine, and contains 8-2178 grammes 
of pure gold. There is no gold in circtilation, however, and gold 
duties are paid with gold cheques purchased at certain banks with 
paper money. The banking facilities of the republic have undergone 
many changes under the new regime. A fruitful cause of disaster 
has been the practice of issuing agricultural and industrial loans 
under government authorization. Commercial business at the 
principal ports is largely transacted through foreign banks, of 
which there are a large number. 

In addition to the indebtedness of the national government, the 
individual states have also incurred funded debts of their own. 
The aggregate of these debts in 1904 was £20,199,440, and the 
several loans made during the next two years, including those oi 
the municipalities of Rio de Janeiro, Santos, Bahia and Manaos, 
add fully two and a half millions more to the total. (A. J. L.) 

History 

Brazil was discovered in February 1499 (o.s.) by Vicente 
Yanez Pinzon, a companion of Columbus. He descried the land 
near Cape St Augustine, and sailed along the coast as 
The Porta- f ar as ^g r i ver Amazon, whence he proceeded to the 
ftraztf! mouth of the Orinoco. He made no settlement, but 
took possession of the country in the name of the 
Spanish government, and carried home, as specimens of its 
natural productions, some drugs, gems and Brazil-wood. Next 
year the Portuguese commander, Pedro Alvares Cabral, ap- 
pointed by his monarch to follow the course of Vasco da Gama 
in the East, was driven by adverse winds so far from his track, 
that he reached the Brazilian coast, April 24, and anchored in 
Porto Seguro (16° S. lat.) on Good Friday. On Easter day an 
altar was erected, mass celebrated in presence of the natives, 
the country declared an apanage of Portugal, and a stone cross 
erected in commemoration of the event. Cabral despatched a 
small vessel to Lisbon to announce his discovery, and, without 
forming any settlement, proceeded to India on the 3rd of May. 
On the arrival of the news in Portugal, Emanuel invited Amerigo 
Vespucci to enter his service, and despatched him with three 
vessels to explore the country. The navigator's first voyage 
was unsuccessful ; but, according to his own account, in a second 
he discovered a safe port, to which he gave the name of All- 
Saints and where he erected a small fort. Vespucci's narrative 
is, however, suspected of being apocryphal (see Vespucci, 
Amerigo). 

The poor and barbarous tribes of Brazil, and their country, 
the mineral riches of which were not immediately discovered, 
offered but few attractions to a government into the coffers of 
which the wealth of India and Africa was flowing. For nearly 
thirty years the kings of Portugal paid no further attention 
to their newly-acquired territory than what consisted, in com- 
bating the attempts of the Spaniards to occupy it, and dispersing 
the private adventurers from France who sought its shores for 
the purposes of commerce. The colonization of Brazil was 
prosecuted, however, by subjects of the Portuguese monarchy, 
who traded thither chiefly for Brazil-wood. The government 
also sought to make criminals of some use to the state, by placing 
them in a situation where they could do little harm to society, 
and might help to uphold the dominion of their nation. 

The first attempt on the part of a Portuguese monarch to 
introduce an organized government into his dominions was made 
First by John III. He adopted a plan which had been 

organ iza- found to succeed well in Madeira and the Azores, — 
tioa la dividing the country into hereditary captaincies, and 
granting them to such persons as were willing to 
undertake their settlement, with unlimited powers of jurisdiction, 
both civil and criminal. Each captaincy extended along fifty 
leagues of coast. The boundaries in the interior were undefined.' 
The first settlement made under this new system was that of 



Sao Vicente Piratininga, in the present province of Sao Paulo. 
Martim Alfonso de Sousa, having obtained a grant, fitted out a 
considerable armament and proceeded to explore the country 
in person. He began to survey the coast about Rio de Janeiro, 
to which he gave that name, because he discovered it on the 
1st of January 1531. He proceeded south as far as La Plata, 
naming the places he surveyed on the way from the days on 
which the respective discoveries were made. He fixed upon an 
island in 245 S. lat., called by the natives Guaibe, for his settle- 
ment. The Goagnazes, or prevailing tribe of Indians in that 
neighbourhood, as soon as they discovered the intentions of the 
new-comers to fix themselves permanently there, collected for 
the purpose of expelling them. Fortunately, however, a ship- 
wrecked Portuguese, who had lived many years under the pro- 
tection of the principal chief, was successful in concluding a 
treaty of perpetual alliance between his countrymen and the 
natives. Finding the spot chosen for the new town inconvenient, 
the colonists removed to the adjoining island of Sao Vicente, 
from which the captaincy derived its name. Cattle and the 
sugar-cane were at an early period introduced from Madeira, 
and here the other captaincies supplied themselves with both. 
' Pero Lopes de Sousa received the grant of a captaincy, and 
set sail from Portugal at the same time as his brother, the founder 
of Sao Vicente. He chose to have his fifty leagues in two 
allotments. That to which he gave the name of Santo Amaro 
adjoined Sao Vicente, the two towns being only three leagues 
asunder. The other division lay much nearer to the line between 
Parahyba and Pernambuco. He experienced considerable diffi- 
culty in founding this second colony, from the strenuous oppo- 
sition of a neighbouring tribe, the Petiguares; at length he 
succeeded in clearing his lands of them, but not long afterwards 
he perished by shipwreck. 

Rio de Janeiro was not settled till a later period; and for a 
considerable time the nearest captaincy to Santo Amaro, sailing 
along the coast northwards, was that of Espirito Santo. It was 
founded by Vasco Fernandes Coutinho, who having acquired a 
large fortune in, India, sank it in this scheme of colonization. 
He carried with him no less than sixty fidalgos. They named 
their town by anticipation, Our Lady of the Victory (Victoria) ; 
but it cost them some hard fighting with the Goagnazes to 
justify the title. 

Pedro de Campo Tourinho, a nobleman and excellent navigator, 
received a grant of the adjoining captaincy of Porto Seguro. 
This, it will be remembered, is the spot where Cabral first took 
possession of Brazil. The Tupinoquins at first offered some 
opposition; but having made peace, they observed it faithfully, 
notwithstanding that the oppression of the Portuguese obliged 
them to forsake the country. Sugar-works were established, and 
considerable quantities of the produce exported to the mother 
country. 

Jorge de Figueiredo, Escrivam da Fazenda, was the first dona- 
tory of the captaincy Ilheos, 140 m. south of Bahia. His office 
preventing him from taking possession in person, he deputed the 
task to Francisco Romeiro, a Castilian. The Tupinoquins, the 
most tractable of the Brazilian tribes, made peace with the 
settlers, and the colony was founded without a struggle. 

The coast 'from the Rio Sao Francisco to Bahia was granted 
to Francisco Pereira Coutinho; the bay itself, with all its creeks, 
was afterwards added to the grant. When Coutinho formed 
his establishment, where Villa Velha now stands, he found a 
noble Portuguese living in the neighbourhood who, having been 
shipwrecked, had, by means of his fire-arms, raised himself to 
the rank of chief among the natives. He was surrounded by a 
patriarchal establishment of wives and children; and to him 
most of the distinguished families of Bahia still trace their lineage. 
The regard entertained by the natives for Caramuru (signifying 
man of fire) induced them to extend a hospitable welcome to his 
countrymen, and for a time everything went on well. Coutinho 
had, however, learned in India to be an oppressor, and the 
Tupinambas were the fiercest and most powerful of the native 
tribes. The Portuguese were obliged to abandon their settle- 
ment; but several of them returned at a later period, with 



HISTORY] 



BRAZIL 



4-55 



Caramuru, and thus a European community was established 
in the district. 

Some time before the period at which these captaincies were 
established, a factory had been planted at Pernambuco. A ship 
from Marseilles took it, and left seventy men in it as a garrison; 
but she was captured on her return, and carried into Lisbon, and 
immediate measures were taken for reoccupying the place. The 
captaincy of Pernambuco was granted to Don Duarte Coelho 
Pereira as the reward of his services in India. It extended 
along the coast from the Rio Sao Francisco, northward to the 
Rio de Juraza. Duarte sailed with his wife and children, and 
many of 'his kinsmen, to take possession, of his new colony, and 
landed in the port of Pernambuco. To the town which was 
there founded he gave the name of Olinda. The Cabetes, who 
possessed the soil, were fierce and pertinacious; and, assisted 
by the French, who traded to that coast, Coelho had to gain 
by inches what was granted him by leagues. The Portuguese 
managed, however, to beat off their enemies; and, having 
entered into an alliance with the Tobayanes, followed up their 
success. 

Attempts were made about this time to establish two other 
captaincies, but without success. Pedro de Goes obtained a 
grant of the captaincy of Parahyba between those of Sao Vicente 
and Espirito Santo; but his means were too feeble to enable 
him to make head against the aborigines, and the colony was 
broken up after a painful struggle of seven years. Joao de 
Barros, the historian, obtained the captaincy of Maranhao. 
For the sake of increasing his capital, he divided his grant with 
Fernao Alvares de Andrade and Aires da Cunha. They projected 
a scheme of conquest and colonization upon a large scale. Nine 
hundred men, of whom one hundred and thirteen were horsemen, 
embarked in ten ships under the command of Aires da Cunha. 
But the vessels were wrecked upon some shoals about one 
hundred leagues to the south of Maranhao; the few survivors, 
after suffering immense hardships, escaped to the nearest settle- 
ments, and the undertaking was abandoned. 

By these adventures the whole line of Brazilian coast, from 
the mouth of La Plata to the mouth of the Amazon, had become 
studded at intervals with Portuguese settlements, in all of which 
law and justice were administered, however inadequately. 
It is worthy of observation, that Brazil was the first colony 
founded in America upon an agricultural principle, for until then 
the precious metals were the exclusive attraction. Sufficient 
capital was attracted between the year 1531 (in which De Sousa 
founded the first captaincy) and the year 1548 to render these 
colonies an object of importance to the mother country. Their 
organization, however, in regard to their means of defence 
against both external aggression and internal violence, was 
extremely defective. Their territories were surrounded and 
partly occupied by large tribes of savages. Behind them the 
Spaniards, who had an establishment at Asuncion, had penetrated 
almost to the sources of the waters of Paraguay, and had suc- 
ceeded in establishing communication with Peru. Orellana, on 
the other hand, setting out from Peru, had crossed the mountains 
and sailed down the Amazon. Nor had the French abandoned 
their hopes of effecting an establishment on the coast. 

The obvious remedy for these evils was to concentrate the 
executive power, to render the petty chiefs amenable to one 
tribunal, and to confide the management of the defensive force 
to one hand. In order to this the powers of the several captains 
were revoked, whilst their property in their grants was reserved 
to them. A governor-general was appointed, with full powers, 
civil and criminal. The judicial and financial functions in each 
province were vested in the Ouvidor, whose authority in the 
college of finance was second only to that of the governor. Every 
colonist was enrolled either in the Milicias or Ordenanzas. The 
former were obliged to serve beyond the boundaries of the 
province, the latter only at home. The chief cities received 
municipal constitutions, as in Portugal. Thome de Sousa was 
the first person nominated to the important post of governor- 
general. He was instructed to build a strong city in Bahia and 
to establish there the seat of his government. In pursuance 



of his commission he arrived at Bahia in April 1549, with a fleet 
of six vessels, on board of which were three hundred and twenty 
persons in the king's pay, four hundred convicts and about three 
hundred free colonists. Care had been taken for the spiritual 
wants of the provinces by associating six Jesuits with the 
expedition. 

Old Caramuru, who still survived, rendered the governor 
essential service by gaining for his countrymen the goodwill of 
the natives. The new city, to which the name of Sao Salvador 
was given, was established on the heights above the Bay of 
All Saints (Todos os Santos), from which its later name of Bahia 
is taken. Within four months one hundred houses were built, 
and surrounded by a mud wall. Sugar plantations were laid 
out in the vicinity. During the four years of Sousa's government 
there were sent out at different times supplies of all kinds. 
Female orphans of noble families were given in marriage to 
the officers, and portioned from the royal estates, and orphan' 
boys were sent to be educated by the Jesuits. The capital rose 
rapidly in importance, and the captaincies learned to regard it 
as a common head and centre of wealth. Meanwhile the Jesuits 
undertook the moral and religious culture of the natives, and 
of the scarcely less savage colonists. Strong opposition 
was at first experienced from the gross ignorance of F . ,rst H 
the Indians, and the depravity of the Portuguese, missions. 
fostered by the licentious encouragement of some 
abandoned priests who had found- their way to Brazil. Over 
these persons the Jesuits had no authority; and it was not until 
the arrival of the first bishop of Brazil in 1552, that anything like 
an efficient check was imposed upon them. Next year Sousa 
was succeeded by Duarte da Costa, who brought with him a 
reinforcement of Jesuits, at the head of whom was Luis de Gran, 
appointed, with Nobrega the chief of the first mission, joint 
provincial of Brazil. 

Nobrega's first act was one which has exercised the most 
beneficial influence over the social system of Brazil, namely, 
the establishment of a college on the then unreclaimed plains 
of Piratininga. It was named Sao Paulo, and has been at once 
the source whence knowledge and civilization have been diffused 
through Brazil, and the nucleus of a colony of its manliest and 
hardiest citizens, which sent out successive swarms of hardy 
adventurers to people the interior. The good intentions of the 
Jesuits were in part frustrated by the opposition of Costa the 
governor; and it was not until 1558, when Mem de Sa was sent 
out to supersede him, that their projects were allowed free scope. 

Rio de Janeiro was first occupied by French settlers. Nicholas 
Durand de Villegagnon, a bold and skilful seaman, having visited 
Brazil, saw at once the advantages which might accrue s tl . m 
to his country from a settlement there. In order to meat of 
secure the interest of Coligny, he gave out that his Mode 
projected colony was intended to serve as a place of Janeiro. 
refuge for the persecuted Huguenots. Under the patronage of 
that admiral, he arrived at Rio de Janeiro in 1558 with a train 
of numerous and respectable colonists. As soon, however, as 
he thought his power secure, he threw off the mask, and began 
to harass and oppress the Huguenots by every means he could 
devise. Many of them were forced by his tyranny to return to 
France; and ten thousand Protestants, ready to embark for 
the new colony, were deterred by their representations. Ville- 
gagnon, finding his force much diminished in consequence of 
his treachery, sailed for France in quest of recruits; and during 
his absence the Portuguese governor, by order of his court, 
attacked and dispersed the settlement. For some years the 
French kept up a kind of bush warfare; but in 1567 the Portu- 
guese succeeded in establishing a settlement at Rio. 

Mem de Sa continued to hold the reins of government in Brazil 
upon terms of the best understanding with the clergy, and to the 
great advantage of the colonies, for fourteen years. On the 
expiration of his power, which was nearly contemporary with 
that of his life, an attempt was made to divide Brazil into two 
governments; but this having failed, the territory was reunited 
in 1578, the year in which Diego Laurenco da Veiga was 
appointed governor. At this time the colonies, although not yet 



45 6 



BRAZIL 



[HISTORY 



independent of supplies from the mother country, were in a 
flourishing condition; but the usurpation of the crown of 
Portugal by Philip II. changed the aspect of affairs. Brazil, 
believed to be inferior to the Spanish possessions in mines, was 
consequently abandoned in comparative neglect for the period 
intervening between 1578 and 1640, during which it continued an 
apanage of Spain. 

No sooner had Brazil passed under the Spanish crown, than 
English adventurers directed their hostile enterprises against 
Enziish ' ts snores - In 1586 Witherington plundered Bahia; 
and in 1 591 Cavendish made an abortive attack on Santos; 

French in 1595 Lancaster attacked Olinda. These exploits, 
aggres- however, were transient in their effects. In 161 2 the 

French attempted to found a permanent colony in the 
island of Marajd, where they succeeded in maintaining themselves 
till 1618. This attempt led to the erection of Maranhao and 
Para into a separate Estado. But it was on the part of the Dutch 
that the most skilful and pertinacious efforts were made for 
securing a footing in Brazil; and they alone of all the rivals of 
the Portuguese have left traces of their presence in the national 
spirit and institutions of Brazil. 

The success of the Dutch East India Company led to the 
establishment of a similar one for the West Indies, to which a 

monopoly of the trade to America and Africa was 
witiffhe g rante d. This body despatched in 1624 a fleet against 
Dutch. Bahia. The town yielded almost without a struggle. 

The fleet soon after sailed, a squadron being detached 
against Angola, with the intention of taking possession of that 
colony, in order to secure a supply of slaves. The fall of Bahia 
for once roused the Spaniards and Portuguese to joint action, 
and a grea t expedition speedily sailed from Cadiz and Lisbon for 
Bahia. Once more, though strongly garrisoned, the town was 
retaken without any serious fighting in May 1625. The honours 
bestowed upon the Indian chiefs for their assistance in this war 
broke down in a great measure the barrier between the two races ; 
and there is at this day a greater admixture of their blood among 
the better classes in Bahia than is to be found elsewhere in Brazil. 
In 1630 the Dutch attempted again to effect a settlement; 
and Olinda, with its port, the Recife-Olinda, was destroyed, 

but the Recife was fortified and held, reinforcements 
settlement an< ^ su PP ues being sent by sea from Holland. The 
in Brazil. Dutch were unable, however, to extend their power 

beyond the limits of the town, until the arrival of 
Count John Maurice of Nassau-Siegen in 1636. His first step 
was to introduce a regular government among his countrymen; 
his second, to send to the African coast one of his officers, who 
took possession of a Portuguese settlement, and thus secured a 
supply of slaves. In the course of eight years, the limited period 
of his government, he succeeded in asserting the Dutch supremacy 
along the coast of Brazil from the mouth of Sao Francisco to 
Maranhao. The Recife was rebuilt and adorned with splendid 
residences and gardens and received from its founder the name 
of Mauritstad. He promoted the amalgamation of the different 
races, and sought to conciliate the Portuguese by the confidence 
he reposed in them. His object was to found a great empire; 
but this was a project at variance with the wishes of his employers 
— an association of merchants, who were dissatisfied because 
the wealth which they expected to see flowing into their coffers 
was expended in promoting the permanent interests of a distant 
country. Count Maurice resigned his post in 1644. His suc- 
cessors possessed neither his political nor his military talents, 
and had to contend with more difficult circumstances. 

In 1640 the revolution which placed the house of Braganza 
on the throne of Portugal restored Brazil to masters more inclined 
to promoteitsinterestsandassertits possession than the Spaniards. 
It was indeed high time that some exertion should be made. 
The northern provinces had fallen into the power of Holland; 
the southern, peopled in a great measure by the hardy descend- 
ants of the successive colonists who had issued on all sides from 
the central establishment of Sao Paulo, had learned from their 
habits of unaided and successful enterprise to court independence. 
They had ascended the waters of the Paraguay to their sources. 



They had extended their limits southwards till they reached 
the Spanish settlements of La Plata. They had reduced to 
slavery numerous tribes of the natives. They were rich in cattle, 
and had commenced the discovery of the mines. When, there- 
fore, the inhabitants of Sao Paulo saw themselves about to be 
transferred, as a dependency of Portugal, from one master to 
another, they conceived the idea of erecting their country into 
an independent state. Their attempt, however, was frustrated 
by Amador Bueno, the person whom they had selected for their 
king. When the people shouted " Long live King Amador," he 
cried out " Long live John IV.," and took refuge in a convent. 
The multitude, left without a leader, acquiesced, - and this 
important province was secured to the house of Braganza. 

Rio and Santos, although both evinced a desire of independ- 
ence, followed the example of the Paulistas. Bahia, as capital 
of the Brazilian states, felt that its ascendancy depended upon 
the union with Portugal. The government, thus left in quiet 
possession of the rest of Brazil, had time to concentrate its atten- 
tion upon the Dutch conquests. The crown of Portugal was, 
however, much too weak to adopt energetic measures. But 
the Brazilian colonists, now that the mother country had thrown 
off the Spanish yoke, determined even without assist- 
ance from the homeland to rise in revolt against foreign aza°nst 
domination. . The departure of Count Maurice, more- the Dutch. 
over, had seriously weakened the position of the Dutch, 
for his successors had neither his conciliatory manners nor his 
capacity. Joao Fernandes Vieyra, a native of Madeira, organized 
the insurrection which broke out in 1645. This insurrection 
gave birth to one of those wars in which a whole nation, destitute 
of pecuniary resources, military organization and skilful leaders, 
but familiar with the country, is opposed to a handful of soldiers 
advantageously posted and well officered. But home difficulties 
and financial necessities prevented the West India Company 
from sending adequate reinforcements from Holland. In 1649 
a rival company was started in Portugal known as the Brazil 
Company, which sent out a fleet to help the colonists in Pernam- 
buco. Slowly the Dutch lost ground and the outbreak of war 
with England sounded the knell of their dominion in Brazil. 
In 1654 their capital and last stronghold fell into the hands of 
Vieyra. It was not, however, till 1662 that Holland signed a 
treaty with Portugal, by which all territorial claims in Brazil 
were abandoned in exchange for a cash indemnity and certain 
commercial privileges. After this, except some inroads on the 
frontiers, the only foreign invasion which Brazil had p reac h 
to suffer was from France. In 17 10 a squadron, expedition 
commanded by Duclerc, disembarked 1000 men, and io Brazil, 
attacked Rio de Janeiro. After having lost half of 
his men in a battle, Duclerc and all his surviving com- 
panions were made prisoners. The governor treated them 
cruelly. A new squadron with 6000 troops was entrusted to the 
famous admiral Duguay Trouin to revenge this injury. They 
arrived at Rio on the 12th of September 1711. After four days of 
hard fighting the town was taken. The governor retreated to 
a position out of it, and was only awaiting reinforcements from 
Minas to retake it; but, Duguay Trouin threatening to burn it, 
he was obliged on the 10th of October to sign a capitulation, and 
pay to the French admiral 610,000 crusados, 500 cases of sugar, 
and provisions for the return of the fleet to Europe. Duguay 
Trouin departed to Bahia to obtain fresh spoils; but having 
lost in a storm two of his best ships, with an important part of 
the money received, he renounced this plan and returned directly 
to France. 

After this the Portuguese governed their colony undisturbed. 
The approach of foreign traders was prohibited, while the 
regalities reserved by the crown drained the country of a great 
proportion of its wealth. 

The important part which the inhabitants of Sao Paulo have 
played in the history of Brazil has been already adverted to. 
The establishment of the Jesuit college had attracted settlers 
to its neighbourhood, and frequent marriages had taken place 
between the Indians of the district and the colonists. A hardy 
and enterprising race of men had sprung from this mixture, 



HISTORY] 



BRAZIL 



457 



who, first searching whether their new country were rich in metals, 
soon began adventurous raids into the interior, making excursions 
also against the remote Indian tribes with a view to obtaining 
slaves, and from the year 1629 onwards repeatedly attacked 
the Indian reductions of the Jesuits in Paraguay, although both 
provinces were then nominally subject to the crown of Spain. 
Other bands penetrated into Minas and still farther north and 
westward, discovering mines there and in Goyaz and Cuyaba. 
New colonies were thus formed round those districts in which 
gold had been found, and in the beginning of the 18th century 
five principal settlements in Minas Geraes had been elevated 
by royal charter to the privileges of towns. In 1720 this district 
was separated from Sao Paulo, to which it had previously been 
dependent. As early as 16 18 a code of laws for the regulation 
of the mining industry had been drawn up by Philip III., the 
executive and judicial functions in the mining districts being 
vested in a provedor, and the fiscal in a treasurer, who received 
the royal fifths and superintended the weighing of all the gold, 
rendering a yearly account of all discoveries and produce. For 
many years, however, these laws were little more than a dead 
letter. The same infatuated passion for mining speculation 
which had characterized the Spanish settlers in South America 
now began to actuate the Portuguese; labourers and capital 
were drained off to the mining districts, and Brazil, which had 
hitherto in great measure supplied Europe with sugar, sank 
before the competition of the English and French. A new 
source of wealth was now opened up; some adventurers from 
Villa do Principe in Minas, going north to the Seria Frio, made 
the discovery of diamonds about the year 17 10, but it was not till 
1730 that the discovery was for the first time announced to the 
government, which immediately declared them regalia. While 
the population of Brazil continued to increase, the moral and 
intellectual culture of its inhabitants was left in great measure 
to chance; they grew up with those robust and healthy senti- 
ments which are engendered by the absence of false teachers, 
but with a repugnance to legal ordinances, and encouraged in 
their ascendancy over the Indians to habits of violence and 
oppression. The Jesuits from the first moment of their landing 
in Brazil had constituted themselves the protectors of the 
natives, and though strenuously opposed by the colonists and 
ordinary clergy, had gathered the Indians together in many 
aldeas, over which officials of their order exercised spiritual 
and temporal authority. A more efficacious stop, however, 
was put to the persecution of the Indians by the importation 
of large numbers of negroes from the Portuguese possessions in 
Africa, these being found more active and serviceable than the 
native tribes. 

The Portuguese government, under the administration of 
Carvalho, afterwards marquis of Pombal, attempted to extend 

to Brazil the bold spirit of innovation which directed 
Pombal ° f a ^ hi s e ff° rts - The P rou d minister had been resisted 

in his plans of reform at home by the Jesuits, and, 
determining to attack the power of the order, first deprived 
them of all temporal power in the state of Maranhao and 
Para. These ordinances soon spread to the whole of Brazil, 
and a pretext being found in the suspicion of Jesuit influence 
in some partial revolts of the Indian troops on the Rio Negro, 
the order was expelled from Brazil under circumstances of great 
severity in 1760. The Brazilian Company founded by Vieyra, 
which so materially contributed to preserve its South American 
possessions to Portugal, had been abolished in 1721 by John V.; 
but such an instrument being well suited to the bold spirit of 
Pombal, he established a chartered company again in 1755, to 
trade exclusively with Maranhao and Para; and in 1759, in 
spite of the remonstrance of the British Factory at Lisbon, 
formed another company for Parahyba and Pernambuco. Pom- 
bal's arrangements extended also to the interior of the country, 
where he extinguished at once the now indefinite and oppressive 
claims of the original donatories of the captaincies, and 
strengthened and enforced the regulations of the mining districts. 
The policy of many of Pombal's measures is more than question- 
able; but his admission of all races to equal rights in the eye 



of the law, his abolition of feudal privileges, and the firmer 
organization of the powers of the land which he introduced, 
powerfully co-operated towards the development of the capa- 
bilities of Brazil. Yet on the death of his king and patron 
in 1777, when court intrigue forced him from his high station, 
he who had done so much for his country's institutions was 
reviled on all hands. 

The most important feature in the history of Brazil during 
the first thirty years following the retirement of Pombal was the 
conspiracy of Minas in 1789. The successful issue of the recent 
revolution of the English colonies in North America had filled 
the minds of some of the more educated youth of that province; 
and in imitation, a project to throw off the Portuguese yoke 
was formed, — a cavalry officer, Silva Xavier, nicknamed Tira- 
dentes (tooth-drawer), being the chief conspirator. But the plot 
being discovered during their inactivity, the conspirators were 
banished to Africa, and Tira-dentes, the leader, was hanged. 
Thenceforward affairs went on prosperously; the mining 
districts continued to be enlarged; the trading companies of 
the littoral provinces were abolished, but the impulse they had 
given to agriculture remained. 

Removed from all communication with the rest of the world 
except through the mother country, Brazil remained unaffected 
by the first years of the great revolutionary war in 
Europe. Indirectly, however, the fate of this isolated guese ~ 
country was decided by the consequences of the French royal 
Revolution. Brazil is the only instance of a colony family la 
becoming the seat of the government of its own ™f ' 
mother country, and this was the work of Napoleon. 
When he resolved upon the invasion and conquest of Portugal, 
the prince regent, afterwards Dom John VI., having no means 
of resistance, decided to take refuge in Brazil. He created 
a regency in Lisbon, and departed for Brazil on the 29th of 
November 1807, accompanied by the queen Donna Maria I., 
the royal family, all the great officers of state, a large part of the 
nobility and numerous retainers. They arrived at Bahia on 
the 21st of January 1808, and were received with enthusiasm. 
The regent was requested to establish there the seat of his 
government, but a more secure asylum presented itself in Rio 
de Janeiro, where the royal fugitives arrived on the 7th of March. 
Before leaving Bahia, Dom John took the first step to emancipate 
Brazil, opening its ports to foreign commerce, and permitting 
the export of all Brazilian produce under any flag, the royal 
monopolies of diamonds and Brazil-wood excepted. Once 
established in Rio de Janeiro, the government of the regent 
was directed to the creation of an .administrative machinery 
for the dominions that remained to him as it existed in Portugal. 



Besides the ministry which had come with the regent, 



Reorgaa- 



the council of state, and the departments of the four u a tion on 
ministries of home, finances, war and marine then Porta- 
existing, there were created in the course of one year suese 
a supreme court of justice, a board of patronage and 
administration of the property of the church and military orders, 
an inferior court of appeal, the court of exchequer and royal 
treasury, the royal mint, bank of Brazil, royal printing-office, 
powder-mills on a large scale, and a supreme military court. 
The maintenance of the court, and the salaries of so large a 
number of high officials, entailed the imposition of new taxes 
to meet these expenses. Notwithstanding this the expenses 
continued to augment, and the government had recourse to 
the reprehensible measure of altering the money standard, and 
the whole monetary system was soon thrown into the greatest 
confusion. The bank, in addition to its private functions, 
farmed many of the regalia, and was in the practice of advancing 
large sums to the state, transactions which gave rise to extensive 
corruption, and terminated some years later in the breaking of the 
bank. 

Thus the government of the prince regent began its career 
in the new world with dangerous errors in the financial system; 
yet the increased activity which a multitude of new customers 
and the increase of circulating medium gave to the trade of 
Rio, added a new stimulus to the industry of the whole nation. 



458 



BRAZIL 



[HISTORY 



Numbers of English artisans and shipbuilders, Swedish iron- 
founders, German engineers and French manufacturers sought 
fortunes in the new country, and diffused industry by their 
example. 

In the beginning of 1809, in retaliation for the occupation of 
Portugal, an expedition was sent from Para to the French 
colony of Guiana, and after some fighting this part of Guiana 
was incorporated with Brazil. This conquest was, however, of 
short duration; for, by the treaty of Vienna in 18 15, the colony 
was restored to France. Its occupation contributed to the 
improvement of agriculture in Brazil; it had been the policy 
of Portugal up to this time to separate the productions of its 
colonies, to reserve sugar for Brazil, and spices to the East Indies, 
and to prohibit the cultivation of these in the African possessions. 
Now, however, many plants were imported not only from 
Guiana but from India and Africa, cultivated in the Royal 
Botanic Garden, and thence distributed. The same principle 
which dictated the conquest of French Guiana originated 
attempts to seize the Spanish colonies of Montevideo and Buenos 
Aires, Portugal being also at war with Spain. The chiefs of these 
colonies were invited to place them under the protection of the 
Portuguese crown, but these at first affecting loyalty to Spain 
declined the offer, then threw off the mask and declared them- 
selves independent, and the Spanish governor, Elio, was after- 
wards defeated by Artigas, the leader of the independents. 

The inroads made on the frontiers of Rio Grande and Sao 
Paulo decided the court of Rio to take possession of Montevideo; 

a force of 5000 troops was sent thither from Portugal, 
dared an together with a Brazilian corps; and the irregulars 
integral of Artigas, unable to withstand disciplined troops, 
portion w ere forced, after a total defeat, to take refuge beyond 
monarchy. tne " ver Uruguay. The Portuguese took possession 

of the city of Montevideo in January 181 7, and the 
territory of Misiones was afterwards occupied. The importance 
which Brazil was acquiring decided the regent to give it the title 
of kingdom, and by decree of the 16th January 181 5, the Portu- 
guese sovereignty thenceforward took the title of the United 
Kingdom of Portugal, Brazil and Algarves. Thus the old 
colonial government disappeared even in name. In March 1816 
the queen Donna Maria I. died, and the prince regent became 
king under the title of Dom John VI. 

Although Brazil had now become in fact the head of its own 
mother country, the government was not in the hands of 
Brazilians, but of the Portuguese, who had followed the court. 
The discontent arising among Brazilians from this cause was 
heightened by a decree assigning a heavy tax on the chief 
Brazilian custom houses, to be in operation for forty years, for 
the benefit of the Portuguese noblemen who had suffered during 
the war with France. The amiable character of the king pre- 
served his own popularity, but the government was ignorant and 
profligate, justice was ill administered, negligence and disorder 
reigned in all its departments. Nor was the discontent less 
in Portugal on account of its anomalous position. These causes 
and the fermentation of liberal principles produced by the French 
Revolution originated a conspiracy in Lisbon in 1817, which was, 
however, discovered in time to prevent its success. A similar 
plot and rebellion took place in the province of Pernambuco, 
where the inhabitants of the important commercial city of 
Recife (Pernambuco) were jealous of Rio and the sacrifices they 
were compelled to make for the support of the luxurious court 
there. Another conspiracy to establish a republican government 
was promptly smothered in Bahia, and the outbreak in Pernam- 
buco was put down after a republic had been formed there for 
ninety days. Still the progress of the republican spirit in Brazil 
caused Dom Joao to send to Portugal for bodies of picked troops, 
which were stationed throughout the provincial capitals. In 
Portugal the popular discontent produced the revolution of 1820, 
when representative government was proclaimed — the Spanish 
constitution of 181 2 being provisionally adopted. In Rio, the 
Portuguese troops with which the king had surrounded himself 
as the defence against the liberal spirit of the Brazilians, took 
up arms on the 26th of February 1821, to force him to accept 



the system proclaimed in Portugal. The prince Dom Pedro, 
heir to the. crown, who now for the first time took part in public 
affairs, actively exerted himself as a negotiator between the king 
and the troops, who were joined by bodies of the people. After 
attempting a compromise the king finally submitted, took the 
oath and named a new ministry. The idea of free government 
filled the people with enthusiasm, and the principles of a repre- 
sentative legislature were freely adopted, the first care being 
for the election of deputies to the Cortes of Lisbon to take part 
in framing the new constitution. As the king could not abandon 
Portugal to itself he determined at first to send the prince thither 
as regent, but Dom Pedro had acquired such popularity by his 
conduct in the revolution, and had exhibited such a thirst for 
glory, that the king feared to trust his adventurous spirit in 
Europe, and decided to go himself. The Brazilian deputies on 
arriving in Lisbon expressed dissatisfaction with the Cortes 
for having begun the framing of the constitution before their 
arrival, for Brazil could not be treated as a secondary part of the 
monarchy. Sharp discussions and angry words passed between 
the Brazilian and Portuguese deputies, the news of which excited 
great discontent in Brazil. An insulting decree was passed 
in the Cortes, ordering the prince Dom Pedro to come to Europe, 
which filled the Brazilians with alarm; they foresaw that without 
a central authority the country would fall back to its former 
colonial state subject to Portugal. The provisional government 
of Sao Paulo, influenced by the brothers Andrada, began a move- 
ment for independence by asking the prince to disobey the Cortes 
and remain in Brazil, and the council of Rio de Janeiro followed 
with a similar representation, to which the prince assented. 
The Portuguese troops of the capital at first assumed a coercive 
attitude, but were forced to give way before the ardour and 
military preparations of the Brazilians, and submitted to embark 
for Portugal. These scenes were repeated in Pernambuco, where 
the Portuguese, after various conflicts, were obliged 
to leave the country; in Bahia, however, as well as in c / a ,- ms the 
Maranhao and Para, the Portuguese prevailed. In independ- 
Rio the agitation for independence continued. The ence °' 
two brothers Andrada were called to the ministry; jg*" ' 
and the municipal council conferred upon the prince 
regent the title of Perpetual Defender of Brazil. With great 
activity he set off to the central provinces of Minas and Sao Paulo 
to suppress disaffected movements and direct the revolution. 
In Sao Paulo, on the 7th of September 1822, he proclaimed the 
independence of Brazil. On his return to Rio de Janeiro on the 
1 2th of October he was proclaimed constitutional emperor with 
great enthusiasm. 

The Cortes at Lisbon chose Bahia as a centre for resisting the 
independence, and large forces were sent thither. But the city 
was vigorously besieged by the Brazilians by land, and finally 
the Portuguese were obliged to re-embark on the 2nd of July 
1823. A Brazilian squadron, under command of Lord Cochrane, 
attacked the Portuguese vessels, embarrassed with troops, and 
took several of them. Taylor, another Englishman in Brazilian 
service, followed the vessels across the Atlantic, and even 
captured some of the ships in sight of the land of Portugal. The 
troops in Montevideo also embarked for Portugal, and the 
Banda Oriental remained a part of Brazil with the title of the 
Provincia Cisplatina. Before the end of 1823 the authority of 
the new emperor and the independence of Brazil were undisputed 
throughout the whole country. 

Republican movements now began to spread, to suppress 
which the authorities made use of the Portuguese remaining in 
the country; and the disposition of the emperor to consider 
these as his firmest supporters much influenced the course of his 
government and his future destiny. The two Andradas, who 
imagined they could govern the young emperor as a sovereign 
of their own creation, encountered great opposition in the 
constitutional assembly, which had been opened in Rio in May 
1823, to discuss the project of a new constitution. In July the 
emperor resolved to dismiss them and form a new ministry, but 
against this the brothers raised a violent opposition. In 
November the emperor put an end to the angry debates which 



HISTORY] 



BRAZIL 



459 



ensued in the assembly by dissolving it, exiling the Andradas to 
France, and convoking a new assembly to deliberate on a 
proposed constitution more liberal than the former project. 
The proclamation of a republic in the provinces of Pernambuco 
and Ceara, with the rebellion of the Cisplatina province, favoured 
by Buenos Aires and its ultimate loss to Brazil, were the result 
of the coup d'etat of November 1823. The Brazilians were 
universally discontented — on one side fearing absolutism if 
they supported the emperor, on the other anarchy if he fell. 
Knowing the danger of an undefined position, the emperor 
caused the councils to dispense with their deliberations, and 
adopt, as the constitution of the empire, the project framed by 
the council ofi state. Accordingly, on the 25th of March 1824, 
the emperor swore to the constitution with great 
Coastitu- solemnity and public rejoicings. By this stroke of 
1824° policy he saved himself and Brazil. Negotiations 
were opened in London between the Brazilian and 
Portuguese plenipotentiaries, treating for the recognition of the 
independence of Brazil; and on the 25th of August 1825 a 
treaty was signed by which the Portuguese king, Dom John VI., 
assumed the title of emperor of Brazil, and immediately abdicated 
in favour of his son, acknowledging Brazil as an independent 
empire, but the treaty obliged Brazil to take upon herself 
the Portuguese debt, amounting to nearly two millions 
sterling. 

The rebellion of the Banda Oriental was followed by a declara- 
tion of war with Buenos Aires which had supported it, and 
operations by sea and land were conducted against that republic 
in a feeble way. Meanwhile the well-deserved popularity of the 
emperor began to decline. He had given himself up to the 
influence of the Portuguese; the most popular men who had 
worked for the independence were banished; and a continual 
change of ministry showed a disposition on the part of the 
sovereign to prosecute obstinately measures of which his advisers 
disapproved. His popularity was regained, however, to some 
extent, when, on the death of his father, he was unanimously 
acknowledged king of Portugal, and especially when he abdicated 
that crown in favour of his daughter, Donna Maria; but his 
line of policy was not altered, and commercial treaties entered 
into with European states conceding them favours, which were 
popularly considered to be injurious to Brazilian trade, met 
with bitter censure. 

During the year 1827 the public debt was consolidated, and 
a department was created for the application of a sinking 
fund. 

The year 182S was a calamitous one for Brazil. It began with 
the defeat of the Brazilian army by the Argentine forces, and 
this entirely through the incapacity of the commander-in-chief; 
and misunderstandings, afterwards compensated by humbling 
money-payments on the part of Brazil, arose with the United 
States, France and England on account of merchant vessels 
captured by the Brazilian squadron blockading Buenos Aires. 
Financial embarrassments increased to an alarming extent; 
the emperor was compelled by the British government to make 
peace with Buenos Aires and to renounce the Banda Oriental; 
and to fill the sum of disasters Dom Miguel had treacherously 
usurped the crown of Portugal. It was under these unlucky 
auspices that the elections of new deputies took place in 1829. 
As was expected the result was the election everywhere of ultra- 
liberals opposed to the emperor, and in the succeeding year 
people everywhere exhibited their disaffection. During the 
session of 1830 the chambers adopted a criminal code in 
which punishment by death for political offences was abolished. 
It was openly suggested in the journals to reform the con- 
stitution by turning Brazil into independent federal provinces, 
governed by authorities popularly elected, as in tne United States. 
Alarmed at length at the ground gained by this idea in the 
provinces, the emperor set off to Minas to stir up the former 
enthusiasm in his favour from recollections of the independence, 
but was coldly received. On his return to Rio in March 1831 
scenes of disorder occurred, and great agitation among the 
Liberal party. Imagining himself sure of a brilliant destiny 



in Europe if he lost his Brazilian crown, the emperor attempted 
to risk a decisive attack against the Liberals, and to form a new 
ministry composed of men favourable to absolutism. 
This step caused excited public meetings in the capital, A Mj c * tloa 
which were joined in by the troops, and deputations /.,/&?/. 
went to ask the emperor to dismiss the unpopular 
ministry. He replied by dissolving the ministry without naming 
another, and by abdicating the crown in favour of the heir 
apparent, then only five years of age. Dom Pedro immediately 
embarked in an English ship, leaving the new emperor Dom 
Pedro II. and the princesses Januaria, Francisca and Paula. 
The subsequent career of this unfortunate prince belongs to the 
history of Portugal. 

A provisional and afterwards a permanent regency", composed 
of three members, was now formed in Brazil, but scenes of 
disorder succeeded, and discussions and struggles between the 
republican party and the government, and a reactionary third 
party in favour of the restoration of Dom Pedro, occupied the 
succeeding years. In 1834 a reform which was well received 
consisted in the alteration of the regency, from that of three 
members elected by the legislative chambers, to one regent 
chosen by the whole of the electors in the same manner as the 
deputies; and the councils of the provinces were replaced by 
legislative provincial assemblies. Virtually, this was a republican 
government like that of the United States, for no difference 
existed in the mode of election of the regent from that of a 
president. The ex-minister Feijoo was chosen for this office. 
With the exception of Para, and Rio Grande the provinces were 
at peace, but these were in open rebellion; the former was 
reduced to obedience, but in the latter, though the imperial 
troops occupied the town, the country was ravaged by its 
warlike inhabitants. The regent was now accused of conniving 
at this rebellion, and the opposition of the chamber of deputies 
became so violent as to necessitate his resignation. Araujo 
Lima, minister of the home department, who strove to give his 
government the character of a monarchical reaction against the 
principles of democracy, was chosen by a large majority in his 
stead. The experiment of republican government had proved 
so discreditable, and had so wearied the country of cabals, 
that men hitherto known for their sympathy with democratic 
principles became more monarchical than the regent himself; 
and under this influence a movement to give the regency into 
the hands of the princess Donna Januaria, now in her 18th year, 
was set on foot. It was soon perceived, however, that if the 
empire could be governed by a princess of eighteen it could be 
managed better by the emperor himself, who was then fourteen. 

A bill was accordingly presented to the legislature dispensing 
with the age of the emperor and declaring his majority, which 
after a noisy discussion was carried. The majority 
of the emperor Dom Pedro II. was proclaimed on the ofPedro 
23rd of July 1840. Several ministries, in which n.,i840. 
various parties predominated for a time, now governed 
the country till 1848, during which period the rebellious province 
of Rio Grande was pacified, more by negotiation than force of 
arms. In 1848 hostilities were roused with the British govern- 
ment through the neglect shown by the Brazilians in putting 
in force a treaty for the abolition of the slave trade, which had 
been concluded as far back as 1826; on the other hand the 
governor of Buenos Aires, General Rosas, was endeavouring to 
stir up revolution again in Rio Grande. The appearance of 
yellow fever in 1849, until then unknown in Brazil, was attributed 
to the importation of slaves. Public opinion declared against 
the traffic; severe laws were passed against it, and were so 
firmly enforced that in 1853 not a single disembarkation took 
place. The ministry of the Visconde de Olinda in 1849 entered 
into alliances with the governors of Montevideo, Paraguay 
and the states of Entre Rios and Corrientes, for the purpose of 
maintaining the integrity of the republics of Uruguay and 
Paraguay, which Rosas intended to reunite to Buenos Aires, 
and the troops of Rosa's which besieged Montevideo were forced 
to capitulate. Rosas then declared war formally against Brazil. 
An army of Correntine, Uruguayan and Brazilian troops, under 



460 



BRAZIL 



[HISTORY 



General Urquiza, assisted by a Brazilian naval squadron, ad- 
vanced on Buenos Aires, completely routed the forces of Rosas, 
and crushed for ever the power of that dictator. From 1844 
Brazil was free from intestine commotions, and had resumed 
its activity. Public works and education were advanced, and 
the finances rose to a degree of prosperity previously unknown. 
In 1855 the emperor of Brazil sent a squadron of eleven 
men-of-war and as many transports up the Parana to adjust 

several questions pending between the empire and 
Paraguay. tne republic of Paraguay, the most important of which 

was that of the right of way by the Paraguay river 
to the interior Brazilian province of Matto Grosso. This right 
had been in dispute for several years. The expedition was 
not permitted to ascend the river Paraguay, and returned com- 
pletely foiled in its main purpose. Though the discord resulting 
between the states on account of this failure was subsequently 
allayed for a time by a treaty granting to Brazil the right to 
navigate the river, every obstacle was thrown in the way by 
the Paraguayan government, and indignities of all kinds were 
offered not only to Brazil but to the representatives of the 
Argentine and the United States. In 1 864 the ambitious dictator 
of Paraguay, Francisco Solano Lopez, without previous declara- 
tion of war, captured a Brazilian vessel in the Paraguay, and 
rapidly followed up this outrage by an armed invasion of the 
provinces of Matto Grosso and Rio Grande in Brazil, and that of 
Corrientes in the Argentine Republic. A triple alliance of the 
invaded states with Uruguay ensued, and the tide of war was 
soon turned from being an offensive one on the part of Paraguay 
to a defensive struggle within that republic against the superior 
number of the allies. So strong was the natural position of 
Paraguay, however, and so complete the subjection of its inhabit- 
ants to the will of the dictator, that it was not until the year 

1870, after the republic had been completely drained of its man- 
hood and resources, that the long war was terminated by the 
capture and death of Lopez with his last handful of men by the 
pursuing Brazilians. From its duration and frequent battles 
and sieges this war involved an immense sacrifice of life to Brazil, 
the army in the field having been constantly maintained at be- 
tween 20,000 and 30,000 men, and the expenditure in maintaining 
it was very great, having been calculated at upwards of fifty 
millions sterling. Large deficits in the financial budgets of the 
state resulted, involving increased taxation and the contracting 
of loans from foreign countries. 

■ Notwithstanding this the sources of public wealth in Brazil 
were unaffected, and commerce continued steadily to increase. 
A grand social reform was effected in the law passed in September 

1 87 1, which enacted that from that date every child born of 
slave parents should be free, and also declared all the slaves 
belonging to the state or to the imperial household free from 
that time. The same law provided an emancipation fund, to 
be annually applied to the ransom of a certain number of slaves 
owned by private individuals. 

Under the long reign of Dom Pedro II. progress and material 
prosperity made steady advancement in Brazil. Occasional 
political outbreaks occurred, but none of very serious 
C /p'rf C<er nature except in Rio Grande do Sul, where a long 
li.'s reign, guerrilla warfare was carried on against the imperial 
authority. The emperor occupied himself to a far 
greater extent with the economic development of his people 
and country than with active political life. Unostentatious 
in his habits, Dom Pedro always had at heart the true interests 
of the Brazilians. Himself a highly-educated man, he sincerely 
desired to further the cause of education, and devoted a large 
portion of his time to the study of this question. His extreme 
liberalism prevented his opposing the spread of Socialist doctrines 
preached far and wide by Benjamin Constant. Begun about 1880, 
this propaganda took deep root in the educated classes, creating 
a desire for change and culminating in the military conspiracy 
of November 1889, by which monarchy was replaced by a 
republican form of government. 

At first the revolutionary propaganda produced no personal 
animosity against the emperor, who continued to be treated by 



his people with every mark of respect and affection, but this 
state of things gradually changed. In 1864 the princess Isabella, 
the eldest daughter of the emperor and empress, had married 
the Comte d'Eu, a member of the Orleans family. The marriage 
was never popular in the country, owing partly to the fact that 
the Comte d'Eu was a reserved man who made few intimate 
friends and never attempted to become a favourite. Princess 
Isabella was charitable in many ways, always ready to take her 
full share of the duties falling upon her as the future empress, 
and thoroughly realizing the responsibilities of her position; 
but she was greatly influenced by the clerical party and the 
priesthood, and she thereby incurred the hostility of the Pro- 
gressives. When Dom Pedro left Brazil for the purpose of 
making a tour through Europe and the United States he ap- 
pointed Princess Isabella to act as regent, and she showed her- 
self so swayed in political questions by Church influence that 
Liberal feeling became more and. more anti-dynastic. Another 
incident which gave strength to the opposition was the sudden 
abolition of slavery without any compensation to slave-owners. 
The planters, the principal possessors of wealth, regarded the 
measure as unnecessary in view of the act which had been 
passed in 1885 providing for the gradual freeing of all slaves. 
The arguments used were, however, of no avail with the regent, 
and the decree was promulgated on the 13th of May 1888. No 
active opposition was offered to this measure, but the feelings of 
unrest and discontent spread rapidly. 

Towards the close of 1888 the emperor returned and was 
received by the populace with every demonstration of affection 
and esteem. Even among the advocates of republi- _ . . 
canism there was no intention of dethroning Dom meat of 
Pedro, excepting a few extreme members of the party, the Re- 
who now gained the upper hand. They argued that P abV,c < 
it would be much more difficult to carry out a success- 
ful coup d'etat when the good-natured, confiding emperor had 
been succeeded by his more suspicious and energetic daughter. 
Discontented officers in the army and navy rallied to this idea, 
and a conspiracy was organized to depose the emperor and 
declare a republic. On the 14th of November 1889 the palace 
was quietly surrounded, and on the following morning the 
emperor and his family were placed on board ship and sent 
off to Portugal. A provisional government was then formed 
and a proclamation issued to the effect that the country would 
henceforth be known as the United States of Brazil, and that in 
due time a republican constitution would be framed. The only 
voice raised in protest was that of the minister of war, and he 
was shot at and severely wounded as a consequence. Dom Pedro, 
completely broken down by the ingratitude of the people whom 
he had loved so much and laboured for so strenuously, made no 
attempt at resistance. The republican government offered to 
compensate him for the property he had held in Brazil as emperor, 
but this proposal was declined. His private possessions 
were respected, and were afterwards still held by Princess 
Isabella. 

The citizen named as president of the provisional government, 
was General Deodoro da Fonseca, who owed his advancement 
to the personal friendship and assistance of Dom Pedro. Second 
in authority was placed General Floriano Peixoto, an officer also 
under heavy obligations to the deposed monarch, as indeed were 
nearly all of those who took active part in the conspiracy. 

Though the overthrow of the imperial dynasty was totally 

unexpected throughout, the new regime was accepted without 

any disturbances. Under the leadership of General 

Deodoro da Fonseca a praetorian system of government, B ™ z '' 

, . , , ... , . „ r 1 under the 

in which the military element was all-powerful, came Republic. 

into existence, and continued till February 1891, when 
a national congress assembled and formulated the constitution 
for the United States of Brazil. The former provinces were 
converted into states, the only right of the federal government 
to interfere in their administration being for the purposes of 
national defence, the maintenance of public order or the enforce- 
ment of the federal laws. The constitution of the United States 
of America was taken as a model for drawing up that of Brazil, 



HISTORY] 



BRAZIL 



461 



and the general terms were as far as possible adhered to (see 
above, section Government). 

General da Fonseca and General Floriano Peixoto were 
elected to fill the offices of president and vice-president until 
the 15th of November 1894. This implied the continuance of 
praetorian methods of administration. The older class of more 
conservative Brazilians, who had formerly taken part in the 
administration under the emperor, withdrew altogether from 
public life. Many left Brazil and went into voluntary exile, 
while others retired to their estates. In the absence of these 
more respectable elements, the government fell into the hands 
of a gang of military adventurers and unscrupulous politicians, 
whose only object was to exploit the national resources for their 
own benefit. As a consequence, deep-rooted discontent rapidly 
arose. A conspiracy, of which Admiral Wandenkolk was the 
prime instigator, was discovered, and those who had taken part 
in it were banished to the distant state of Amazonas. Disturb- 
ances then broke out in Rio Grande do Sul, in consequence of 
disputes between the official party and the people living in the 
country districts. Under the leadership of Gumercindo Saraiva 
the country people broke into open revolt in September 1891. 
This outbreak was partially suppressed, but afterwards it 
again burst into flame with great vigour. In view of the discon- 
tent, conspiracies and revolutionary movements, President da 
Fonseca declared himself dictator. This act, however, met with 
such strong opposition that he resigned office on the 23rd of 
November 1891, and Vice-President Floriano Peixoto assumed 
the presidency. 

Floriano Peixoto had been accustomed all his life to use harsh 
measures. For the first year of his term of office he kept seditious 
attempts in check, but discontent grew apace. Nor was this 
surprising to those who knew the corruption in the administration. 
Concessions and subsidies were given broadcast for worthless 
undertakings in order to benefit the friends of the president. 
Brazilian credit gave way under the strain, and evidences were 
not wanting at the beginning of 1893 that an outburst of public 
opinion was not far distant. Nevertheless President Peixoto 
made no effort to reform the methods of administration. Mean- 
while, the revolution in Rio Grande do Sul had revived; and in 
July 1893 the federal government was forced to send most of the 
available regular troops to that state to hold the insurgents 
in check. 

On the 6th of September prevailing discontent took definite 
shape in the form of a naval revolt in the Bay of Rio de Janeiro. 
Naval re- Admiral Custodio de Mello took command of the naval 
volt and forces, and demanded the resignation of the president. 
civil war, General Peixoto replied by organizing a defence 
,893 ' . against any attack from the squadron. Admiral 
Mello, finding that his demands were not complied with, 
began a bombardment of the city, but did not effect his 
purpose of compelling Peixoto to resign. The foreign ministers 
then arranged a compromise between the contending parties, 
according to which President Peixoto was to place no artillery 
in the city, while Admiral Mello was to refrain from bom- 
barding the town, which was thus saved from destruction. 
Shortly afterwards the cruiser " Republica " and a transport 
ran the gauntlet of the government forts at the entrance of the 
bay, and proceeded south to the province of Santa Catharina, 
taking possession of Desterro, its capital. A provisional govern- 
ment was proclaimed by the insurgents, with headquarters at 
Desterro, and communication was opened with Gumercindo 
Saraiva, the leader of the insurrection in Rio Grande do Sul. 
It was proposed that the army of some 10,000 men under 
his command should advance northwards towards Rio de 
Janeiro, while the insurgent squadron threatened the city of Rio. 
In November Admiral Mello left Rio de Janeiro in the armoured 
cruiser " Aquidaban " and went to Desterro, the naval forces in 
Rio Bay being left in charge of Admiral Saldanha da Gama, an 
ardent monarchist, who had thrown in his lot with the insurgent 
cause. All was, apparently, going well with the revolt, Saraiva 
having invaded the states of Santa Catharina and Parana, and 
defeated the government troops in several encounters. Mean- 



while, President Peixoto had fortified the approaches to the city 
of Rio de Janeiro, bought vessels of war in Europe and the 
United States and organized the National Guard. 

Early in 1894 dissensions occurred between Saraiva and Mello, 
which prevented any advance of the insurgent forces, and 
allowed Peixoto to perfect his plans. Admiral da Gama, unable 
to leave the Bay of Rio de Janeiro on account of lack of transport 
for the sick and wounded and the civilians claiming his protection, 
could do no more than wait for Admiral Mello to return from 
Desterro. In the meantime the ships bought by President 
Peixoto arrived off Rio de Janeiro and prevented da Gama from 
escaping. On the 15th of March 1894 the rebel forces evacuated 
their positions on the islands of Villegaignon, Cobras and 
Enxadas, abandoned their vessels, and were received on board 
two Portuguese warships then in the harbour, whence they were 
conveyed to Montevideo. The action of the Portuguese com- 
mander was prompted by a desire to save life, for had the rebels 
fallen into the hands of Peixoto, they would assuredly have been 
executed. 

When the news of the surrender of Saldanha da Gama reached 
Gumercindo Saraiva, then at Curitiba in Parana, he proceeded 
to retire to Rio Grande do Sul. Government troops were 
despatched to intercept his retreat, and in one of the skir- 
mishes which followed Saraiva was killed. The rebel army then 
dispersed. Admiral Mello made an unsuccessful attack on the 
town of Rio Grande, and then sailed to Buenos Aires, there 
surrendering the rebel squadron to the Argentine authorities, 
by whom it was immediately delivered to the Brazilian govern- 
ment. After six months of civil war peace was once more 
established, but there still remained some small rebel groups in 
Rio Grande do Sul. These were joined by Admiral da Gama 
and a number of the naval officers, who had escaped from Rio 
de Janeiro; but in June 1895 the admiral was killed in a fight 
with the government troops. After the cessation of hostilities, 
the greatest barbarities were practised upon those who, although 
they had taken no part in the insurrection, were known to have 
desired the overthrow of President Peixoto. The baron Cerro 
Azul was shot down without trial; Marshal de Gama Eza, an 
old imperial soldier of eighty years of age, was murdered in cold 
blood, and numerous executions of men of lesser note took place, 
among these being two Frenchmen for whose death the Brazilian 
government was subsequently called upon to pay heavy com- 
pensation. 

General Peixoto was succeeded as president on the 15th of 
November 1894 by Dr Prudente de Moraes Barros. It was a 
moot question whether Peixoto, after the revolt was crushed, 
would not declare himself dictator; certainly many of his 
friends were anxious that he should follow this course, but he 
was broken down by the strain which had been imposed upon 
him and was glad to surrender his duties. He did not recover 
his health and died shortly afterwards. 

From the first day that he assumed office, President Moraes 
showed that he intended to suppress praetorian systems and 
reduce militarism to a minimum. This policy received the 
approval and sympathy of the majority of Brazilians, but 
naturally met with bitter opposition from the military element. 
The president gradually drew to him some members of the 
better conservative class to assist in his administration, and felt 
confident that he had the support of public opinion. Early in 
1895 murmurings and disorderly conduct against the authorities 
began to take place in the military school at Rio de Janeiro, 
which had always been a hotbed of intrigue. Some of the 
officers and students were promptly expelled, and the president 
closed the school for several months. This salutary lesson had 
due effect, and no more discontent was fomented from that 
quarter. Two great difficulties stood in the way of steering the 
country to prosperity. The first was the chaotic confusion of 
the finances resulting from the maladministration of the national 
resources since the deposition of Dom Pedro II., and the corrup- 
tion that had crept into every branch of the public service. 
Much was done by President Moraes to correct abuses, but the 
task was of too herculean a nature to allow of accomplishment 



462 



BRAZIL 



[HISTORY 



within the four years during which he was at the head of affairs. 
The second difficulty was the war waged by religious fanatics 
under the leadership of Antonio Maciel, known as " Conselheiro," 
against the constituted authorities of Brazil. 

The story of Conselheiro is a remarkable one. A native of 
Pernambuco, when a young man he married against the wishes 
of his mother, who took a violent dislike to the bride. Shortly 
after the marriage the mother assured her son that his wife held 
clandestine meetings with a lover, and stated that if he would 
go to a certain spot not far from the house that evening he would 
himself see that her assertion was true. The mother invented 
some plea to send the wife to the trysting-place, and then, 
dressing herself in male clothing, prepared to come suddenly on 
the scene as the lover, trusting to be able to make her escape 
before she was recognized. The three met almost simultaneously. 
Conselheiro, deeming his worst suspicions confirmed, shot and 
killed his wife and his mother before explanations could be 
offered. He was tried and allowed to go at liberty after some 
detention in prison. From that time Conselheiro was a victim 
of remorse, and to expiate his sin became a missionary in the 
sertao or interior of Brazil among the wild Jagunco people. He 
built places of worship in many different districts, and at length 
became the recognized chief of the people among whom he had 
thus strangely cast his lot. Eventually he formed a settlement 
near Canudos, situated about 400 m. inland from Bahia. Diffi- 
culty arose between the governor of Bahia and this fanatical 
missionary, with the result that Conselheiro was ordered to leave 
the settlement and take away his people. This order was met 
with a sturdy refusal to move. Early in 1897 a police force was 
sent to eject the settlers, but encountered strong resistance, and 
suffered heavy loss without being able to effect the purpose 
intended. In March 1897 a body of 1500 troops, with four guns, 
was despatched to bring the Jaguncoes to reason, but was totally 
defeated. An army comprising some 5000 officers and men was 
then sent to crush Conselheiro and his people at all costs. Little 
progress was made, the country being difficult of access and the 
Jaguncoes laying ambuscades at every available place. Finally 
strong reinforcements were sent forward, the minister of war 
himself proceeding to take command of the army, now numbering 
nearly 13,000 men. Canudos was besieged and captured in 
September 1897, Conselheiro being killed in the final assault. 
The expense of these expeditions was very heavy, and prevented 
President Moraes from carrying out many of the retrenchments 
he had planned. 

Soon after the Canudos affair a conspiracy was hatched to 
assassinate the president. He was watching the disembarkation 
of some troops when a shot was fired which narrowly missed him, 
and killed General Bitencourt, the minister of war. The actual 
perpetrator of the deed, a soldier, was tried and executed, but 
he was apparently ignorant of the persons who procured his 
services. Three other men implicated in the conspiracy were 
subsequently sentenced to imprisonment for a term of thirty 
years. The remainder of the presidency of Dr Moraes was 
uneventful; and on the 15th of November 1898 he was succeeded 
by Dr Campos Salles, who had previously been governor of the 
state of Sao Paulo. President Salles publicly promised political 
reform, economy in the administration, and absolute respect 
for civil rights, and speedily made efforts to fulfil these pledges. 

The difficulties in the reorganization of the finances of the 
state, which Dr Campos Salles had to face on his accession to 
R forms P ower > were very great. The heavy cost involved in 
under the suppression of internal disorders, ■ maladministra- 

presideat tion,and the hindrances placed in the way of economical 
Campos development by the semi-independence of trie federal 
states had seriously depreciated the national credit. 
The president-elect accordingly undertook with the full approval 
of Dr Moraes, who was still in office, the task of visiting Europe 
with the object of endeavouring to make an arrangement with 
the creditors of the state for a temporary suspension of payments. 
He was successful in his object, and an agreement was made by 
which bonds should be issued instead of interest payments 
from the 1st of July 1898, the promise being given -that every 



effort should be made-for the' resumption of cash payments in 
1901. President Campos Salles entered upon his tenure of 
office on the 15th of November 1898, and at once proceeded to 
initiate fiscal legislation for the purpose of reducing expenditure 
and increasing the revenue. He had to face opposition from 
sectional interests and from the jealousy of interference with 
their rights on the part of provincial administrations, but he 
was able to achieve a considerable measure of success and to lay 
the foundation of a sounder system under which the financial 
position of the republic has made steady progress. The chief 
feature of the administration of Dr Campos Salles was the 
statesmanlike ability with which various disputes with foreign 
powers on boundary questions were seriously taken in hand and 
brought to a satisfactory and pacific settlement. There had for a 
long period been difficulties with France with regard to the 
territory which lay between the mouth of the Amazon and 
Cayenne or French Guiana. The language of various treatises 
was doubtful and ambiguous, largely owing to the ignorance 
of the diplomatists who drew up the articles of the exact geo- 
graphy of the territory in question. Napoleon had forced the 
Portuguese government to cede to him the northernmost arm 
of the mouth of the Amazon as the southern boundary of French 
Guiana with a large slice of the unexplored interior westwards. 
A few years later the Portuguese had in their turn conquered 
French Guiana, but had been compelled to restore it at the 
peace of Paris. The old ambiguity attaching to the interpretation 
of earlier treaties, however, remained, and in April 1899 the 
question by an agreement between the two states was referred 
to the arbitration of the president of the Swiss "confederation. 
The decision was given in December 1900 and was entirely in 
favour of the Brazilian contention. A still more interesting 
boundary dispute was that between Great Britain and Brazil, 
as to the southern frontier line of British Guiana. The dispute 
was of very old standing, and the settlement by arbitration in 
1899 of the acute misunderstanding between Great Britain and 
Venezuela regarding the western boundary of British Guiana, 
and the reference to arbitration in that same year of the Franco- 
Brazilian dispute, led to an agreement being made in 1901 
between Brazil and Great Britain for the submission of their 
differences to the arbitration of the king of Italy. The district 
in dispute was the site of the fabled Lake of Parima and the 
Golden City of Manoa, the search for which in the early days 
of European settlement attracted so many adventurous expedi- 
tions, and which fascinated the imagination of Raleigh and drew 
him to his doom. The question was a complicated one involving 
the historical survey of Dutch and Portuguese exploration and 
control in the far interior of Guiana during two centuries; and 
it was not until 1904 that the king of Italy gave his award, 
which was largely in favour of the British claim, and grants to 
British Guiana access to the northern affluents of the Amazon. 
Before this decision was given Senhor Rodrigues Alves had been 
elected president in 1902. Dr Campos Salles had signalized his 
administration, not only by the settlement of disputes with 
European powers, but by efforts to arrive at a good understanding 
with the neighbouring South American republics. In July 
1899 President Roca had visited Rio de Janeiro accompanied 
by an Argentine squadron, this being the first official visit that 
any South American president had ever paid to one of the 
adjoining states. In October 1900 Dr Campos Salles isturned 
the visit and met v/ith an excellent reception at Buenos Aires. 
The result was of importance, as it was known that Brazil was on 
friendly terms with Chile, and this interchange of courtesies 
had some effect in bringing about a settlement of the controversy 
between Chile and Argentina over the Andean frontier question 
without recourse to hostilities. This was indeed a time when 
questions concerning boundaries were springing up on every 
side, for it was only through the moderation with which the 
high-handed action of Bolivia in regard to the Acre rubber- 
producing territory was met by the Brazilian government that 
war was avoided. Negotiations were set on foot, and finally 
by treating the matter in a give-and-take spirit a settlement 
was reached and a treaty for an amicable exchange of territories 



BRAZIL— BRAZING AND SOLDERING 



463 



in the district in question, accompanied by a pecuniary indemnity, 
was signed by President Alves at Petropolis on the 17 th of 
November 1903. During the remainder of the term of this 
president internal and financial progress were undisturbed save 
by an outbreak in 1904 in the Cunani district, the very portion 
of disputed territory which had been assigned to Brazil by the 
arbitration with France. This province, being difficult of access, 
was able for a time to assert a practical independence. In 1906 
Dr Affonso Penna, three times minister under Pedro II., and at 
that time governor of the state of Minas-Geraes, of which he had 
founded the new capital, Bello Horizonte, was elected president, 
a choice due to a coalition of the other states against Sao Paulo, 
to which all the recent presidents had belonged. Penna's 
presidency was distinguished by his successful efforts to place 
the finances on a sound basis. He died in office on the 14th of 
June 1909. (K. J.; C. E. A.; G. E.) 

Bibliography. — History: Capistrano de Abreu, Descobrimento do 
Brazil e seu desenvolvimento no seculo xix. (Rio de Janeiro, 1883) ; 
John Armitage, History of Brazil from 1808 to 1831 (2 vols., London, 
1836) ; Moreira de Azevedo, Historia do Brazil de 1831 a 1840 (Rio de 
Janeiro, 1841) ; V. L. Basil, L'Empire du Bresil (Paris, 1862) ; Caspar 
Barlaeus, Rerum per octennium in Brasilia . . . sub praefecturd 
Mauritii Nassovii . . . historia (Amsterdam, 1647) ; F. S. Con- 
stancio, Historia do Brazil (Pernambuco, 1843) ; Anfonso Fialho, 
Historia d ' estabelecimento da republica " Estados Unidos do Brazil " 
(Rio de Janeiro 1890) ; P. Gaffarel, Histoire du Bresil francais 
(Paris, 1878) ; E. Grosse, Dom Pedro I. (Leipzig, 1836) ; E. Levasseur, 
V Abolition de I'esclavage en Bresil (Paris, 1888) ; J. M. de Macedo, 
Anno biographico brazileiro (3 vols., Rio de Janeiro, 1876) ; A. J. 
Mello Moraes, Brazil historico (4 vols., Rio de Janeiro, 1839) ; Choro- 
graphia historica, chronographica genealogica, nobiliaria e politica do 
Brazil (5 vols., Rio de Janeiro, 1858-1863); A Independencia e o 
imperio do Brazil (Rio de Janeiro, 1877) ; B. Mosse, Dom Pedro II., 
empereur du Bresil (Paris, 1889); P. Netscher, Les Hollandais au 
Bresil (Hague, 1853); J. M. Pereira da Silva, Varaes illustres do 
Brazil (2 vols., Paris, 1888) ; Historia dafundacao do imperio brazileiro 
(Rio de Janeiro, 1877); Segundo Periodo do reinado de D. Pedro I. 
(Paris, 1875); Historia do Brazil de 1831 d. 1840 (Rio de Janeiro, 
1888) ; J. P. Oliveira Martins, O Brazil e as colonias Portuguezo-s 
(Lisbon, 1888); S. da Rocha Pitta, Historia da America Portugueza 
(Lisbon, 1730); C. da Silva. L'Oyapock et I'Amazone (2 vols., Paris, 
1861); R. Southey, History of Brazil (3 vols., London, 1810-1819); 
J. B. Spix and C. F. von Martius, Reise in Brasilien, 1817-1820 (3 
parts, Munich, 1823-1831); F. A. de Varnhagen, Historia geral 
do Brazil (2 vols., Rio de Janeiro, 1877) ; Historia das luctas com os 
Hollandeses (Vienna, 1871); C. E. Alters, Hist, of South America, 
18^4-1904 (1904) ; the Revista trimensal do Instituto Historico e 
Geographico do Brazil (1839-1908), one or two volumes annually, is 
a storehouse of papers, studies and original documents bearing on 
the history of Brazil. 

Geography, &c. : Elisee Reclus, Universal Geography (1875-1894), 
vol. xix. pp. 77-291; J. E. Wappaus, Geographica physica do Brazil 
(Rio de Janeiro, 1884); A. Moreira Pinto, Chorographia do Brazil 
(5th ed., Rio de Janeiro, 1895); Therese Prinzessin von Bayern, 
Meine Reise indenbrasilianischen Tropen (Berlin, 1897) ; M. Lamberg, 
Brasilien, Land und Leute (Leipzig, 1899); L. Hutchinson, Report 
on Trade in Brazil (Washington, 1906) ; F. Katzer, Grundziige der 
Geologie des unteren Amazonegebietes (Leipzig, 1903) ; J. C. Branner, 
A Bibliography of the Geology, Mineralogy and Paleontology of Brazil 
(Rio de Janeiro, 1903) ; J. W. Evans, " The Rocks of the Cataracts 
of the River Madeira and the adjoining Portions of the Beni and 
Mamore," Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc, London, vol. lxii., 1906, pp. 88- 
124, pi. v. 

BRAZIL, a city and the county-seat of Clay county, Indiana, 
U.S.A., situated in the west central part of the state, about 
16 m. E. of Terre Haute and about 57 m. W.S.W. of Indianapolis. 
lop. (1890) 5905; (1900) 7786(723 foreign-born); (1910) 9340. 
It is served by the Central Indiana, the Chicago & Eastern 
Illinois, the Evansville & Indianapolis and the Vandalia railways, 
and is connected with Indianapolis, Terre Haute and other 
cities by an interurban electric line. The principal business 
thoroughfare is part of the old National Road. Brazil's chief 
industrial importance is due to its situation in the heart of the 
" Brazil block " coal (so named because it naturally breaks into 
almost perfect rectangular blocks) and clay and shale region; 
among its manufactures are mining machinery and tools, 
boilers, paving and enamelled building bricks, hollow bricks, 
tiles, conduits, sewer-pipe and pottery. The municipality owns 
and operates its water-works. The first settlement here was 
in 1844; and Brazil was incorporated as a town in 1866, and 
was chartered as a city in 1873. 



BRAZIL NUTS, the seeds of Bertholletia excelsa, a gigantic 
tree belonging to the natural order Lecythidaceae, which grows 
in the valleys of the Amazons and generally throughout tropical 
America. The tree attains an average height of 130 ft., having a 
smooth cylindrical trunk, with a diameter of 14 ft. 50 ft. from 
the ground, and branching at a height of about 100 ft. The 
lower portion of the trunk presents a buttressed aspect, owing 
to the upward extension of the roots in the form of thin prop-like 
walls surrounding the stem. The fruit of the tree is globular, 
with a diameter of 5 or 6 in., and consists of a thick hard woody 
shell, within which are closely packed the seeds which constitute 
the so-called nuts of commerce. The seeds are triangular in 
form, having a hard woody testa enclosing the " kernel "; and 
of these each fruit contains from eighteen to twenty-five. The 
fruits as they ripen fall from their lofty position, and they are 
at the proper season annually collected and broken open by the 
Indians. Brazil nuts are largely eaten; they also yield in the 
proportion of about 9 oz. to each lb of kernels a fine bland fluid 
oil, highly valued for use in cookery, and used by watchmakers 
and artists. 

BRAZIL WOOD, a dye wood of commercial importance, 
obtained from the West Indies and South America, belonging 
to the genera Caesalpinia and Peltophorum of the natural order 
Leguminosae. There are several woods of the kind, commercially 
distinguished as Brazil wood, Nicaragua or Peach wood, Pernam- 
buco wood and Lima wood, each of which has a different com- 
mercial value, although the tinctorial principle theyyield is similar. 
Commercial Brazil wood is imported for the use of dyers in billets 
of large size, and is a dense compact wood of a reddish brown 
colour, rather bright when freshly cut, but becoming dull on 
exposure. The colouring-matter of Brazil wood, brazilin, 
C16H14O5, crystallizes with i§ H 2 0, and is freely soluble in water; 
it is extracted for use by simple infusion or decoction of the 
coarsely-powdered wood. When freshly prepared the extract 
is of a yellowish tint; but by contact with the air, or the addition 
of an alkaline solution, it develops a brick-red colour. This is 
due to the formation of brazilein, Ci6Hi20 5 -H 2 Q, which is the 
colouring matter used by the dyer. Brazilin crystallizes in 
hexagonal amber yellow crystals, which are soluble in water and 
alcohol. The solution when free of oxygen is colourless, but on 
the access of air it assumes first a yellow and thereafter a reddish 
yellow colour. With soda-ley it takes a brilliant deep carmine 
tint, which colour may be discharged by heating in a closed 
vessel with zinc dust, in which condition the solution is excessively 
sensitive to oxygen, the slightest exposure to air immediately 
giving a deep carmine. With tin mordants Brazil wood gives 
brilliant but fugitive steam reds in calico-printing; but on 
account of the loose nature of its dyes it is seldom used except 
as an adjunct to other colours. It is used to form lakes which 
are employed in tinting papers, staining paper-hangings, and 
for various other decorative purposes. 

BRAZING AND SOLDERING, in metal work, termed respec- 
tively hard and soft soldering, are processes which correspond 
with soldering done at high and at low temperatures. The first 
embraces jointing effected with soldering mixtures into which 
copper, brass, or silver largely enter, the second those in which 
lead and tin are the only, or the principal, constituents. Some 
metals, as aluminium and cast iron, are less easily soldered than 
others. Aluminium, owing to its high conductivity, removes 
the heat from the solder rapidly. Aluminium enters into the 
composition of most of the solders for these metals, and the 
" soldering bit " is of pure nickel. 

The hard solders are the spelter and the silver solders. Soft 
spelter solder is composed of equal parts of copper and zinc, 
melted and granulated and passed through a sieve. As some of 
the zinc volatilizes the ultimate proportions are not quite equal. 
The proportion of zinc is increased if the solder is required to be 
softer or more fusible. A valuable property of the zinc is that 
its volatilization indicates the fusing of the solder. Silver 
solder is used for jewelry and other fine metal work, and has the 
advantage of high fusing points. The hardest contains frorA 
4 parts of silver to 1 of copper; the softest 2 of silver to 1 of 



4 6 4 



BRAZZA 



brass wire. Borax is the flux used, with silver solder as with 
spelter. 

The soft solders are composed mainly of tin and lead. They 
occur in a large range. Common tinner's solder is composed of 
equal parts of tin and lead, and melts at 370° Fah. Plumber's 
solder has 2 of lead to 1 of tin. Excess of lead in plumber's 
solder renders the solder difficult to work, excess of tin allows 
it to melt too easily. Pewterers add bismuth to render the 
solder more fusible, e.g. lead 4, tin 3, bismuth 2; or lead 1, 
tin 2, bismuth 1. Unless these are cooled quickly the bismuth 
separates out. 

The essentials of a soldered joint are the contact of absolutely 
clean surfaces, free from oxide and dirt. The surfaces are there- 
fore scraped, filed and otherwise treated, and then, in order to 
cleanse and preserve them from any trace of oxide which might 
form during subsequent manipulation, a fluxing material is used. 
The soldering material is compelled to follow the areas prepared 
for it by the flux, and it will not adhere anywhere else. There 
is much similarity between soldering and welding in this respect. 
A weld joint must as a rule be fluxed, or metal will not adhere 
to metal. There is not, however, the absolute need for fluxing 
that there is in soldered joints, and many welds in good fibrous 
iron are made without a flux. But the explanation here is that 
the metal is brought to a temperature of semifusion, and the 
shapes of joints are generally such that particles of scale are 
squeezed out from between the joint in the act of closing the 
weld. But in brazing and soldering the parts to be united are 
generally nearly cold, and only the soldering material is fused, 
so that the conditions are less favourable to the removal of 
oxide than in welding processes. 

Fluxes are either liquid or solid, but the latter are not efficient 
until they fuse and cover the surfaces to be united. Hydro- 
chloric acid (spirits of salts) is the one used chiefly for soft 
soldering. It is " killed " by the addition of a little zinc, the 
resulting chloride of zinc rendering its action quiet. Common 
fluxes are powdered resin, and tallow (used chiefly by plumbers 
for wiped joints). These, with others, are employed for soft 
solder joints, the temperature of which rarely exceeds about 
6oo° Fah. The best flux for zinc is chloride of zinc. For brazed 
joints, spelter or powdered brass is employed, and the flux is 
usually borax. The borax will not cover the joint until it has 
been deprived of its water of crystallization, and this is effected 
by raising it to a full red heat, when it swells in bulk, " boils," 
and afterwards sinks quietly and spreads over, or into the joint. 
There are differences in details of working. The borax is generally 
powdered and mixed with the spelter, and both with water. 
But sometimes they are applied separately, the borax first and 
over this the particles of spelter. Another flux used for copper 
is sal ammoniac, either alone or mixed with powdered resin. 

As brazed joints often have to be very strong, other precautions 
are frequently taken beyond that of the mere overlapping of 
the joint edges. In pipes subjected to high steam pressures, 
and articles subjected to severe stresses, the joints are "cramped " 
before the solder is applied. That is, the edges are notched in a 
manner having somewhat the appearance of the dovetails of the 
carpenter; the notched portions overlap the opposite edges, 
and on alternate sides. Such joints when brazed are stronger 
than plain overlapping joints would be. Steam dome coverings 
are jointed thus longitudinally as cylinders, and the crown is 
jointed thereto, also by cramping. Another common method 
of union is that of flanges to copper pipes. In these the pipe 
passes freely within a hole bored right through the flange, and 
the solder is run between. The pipe is suspended vertically, 
flange downwards, and the spelter run in from the back of the 
flange. The fused borax works its way in by capillary action, 
and the spelter follows. 

The " copper bit " is used in soft soldering. Its end is a 
prismatic pyramid of copper, riveted to an iron shank in a 
wooden handle. It is made hot, and the contained heat is 
sufficient to melt the solder. It has to be " tinned," by being 
heated to a dull red, filed, rubbed with sal ammoniac, and then 
rubbed upon the solder. It is wiped with tow before use. For 



small brazed work the blow-pipe is commonly employed; large 
works are done on the brazier's hearth, or in any clear coke fire. 
If coal is used it must be kept away from the joint. 

In " sweating on," a variation in soldering, the surfaces to be 
united are cleaned, and solder melted and spread over them. 
They are then brought together, and the temperature raised 
sufficiently to melt the solder. 

A detail of first importance is the essential difference between 
the melting points of the objects to be brazed or soldered, and 
that of the solder used. The latter must always be lower than 
the former. This explains why soldering materials are used in 
a large range of temperatures. A few will melt at the temperature 
of boiling water. At the other extreme 2000 Fah. is required 
to melt a solder for brazing. If this point is neglected, it will 
often happen that the object to be soldered will fuse before the 
solder melts. This accident may occur in the soft Britannia and 
white metals at the one extreme, and in the softer brasses at 
the other. It would not do, for example, to use flanges of common 
brass, or even ordinary gun-metal, to be brazed to copper pipe, 
for they would begin to fuse before the joint was made. Such 
flanges must be made of nearly pure copper, to withstand the 
temperature, usually 98 of copper to 2 of tin (brazing metal). 
A most valuable feature in solder is that by varying the pro- 
portions of the metals used a great range in hardness and 
fusibility is obtainable. The useful solders therefore number 
many scores. This is also a source of danger, unless regard be 
had to the relative fusing points of solders, and of the parts 
they unite. (J. G. H.) 

BRAZZA, PIERRE PAUL FRANCOIS CAMILLE SAVORGNAN 
DE, Count (1852-1905), French explorer and administrator, 
founder of French Congo, was born on board ship in the harbour 
of Rio de Janeiro on the 26th of January 1852. He was of 
Italian parentage, the family name being de Brazza Savorgnani. 
Through the instrumentality of the astronomer Secchi he was 
sent to the Jesuit college in Paris, and in 1868 obtained author- 
ization to enter as a foreigner the marine college at Brest. In 
the Franco-Prussian War of 1870-71 he took part in the opera- 
tions of the French fleet. In 1874 when the warship on which 
he was serving was in the Gabun, Alfred Marche and the marquis 
de Compiegne arrived at Libreville from an expedition in the 
lower Ogowe district. Interested in the reports of these travellers, 
de Brazza conceived the idea of exploring the Ogowe, which he 
thought might prove to be the lower course of the Lualaba, a 
river then recently discovered by David Livingstone. Having 
meantime been naturalized as a Frenchman, de Brazza in 1875 
obtained permission to undertake his African scheme, and with 
the naval doctor, Noel Ballay, he explored the Ogowe river. 
Penetrating beyond the basin of that river, he discovered the 
Alima and Likona, but did not descend either stream. Thence 
turning northwards the travellers eventually regained the 
coast at the end of November 1878, having left Paris in August 
1875. On arrival in Paris, de Brazza learned of the navigation 
of the Congo by H. M. Stanley, and recognized that the rivers 
he had discovered were affluents of that stream. 

De Brazza was anxious to obtain for France some part of the 
Congo. The French ministry, however, determined to utilize 
his energies in another quarter of Africa. Their attention had 
been drawn to the Niger through the formation of the United 
African Company by Sir George Goldie (then Mr Goldie Taub- 
man) in July 1879, Goldie's object being to secure Nigeria for 
Great Britain. A new expedition was fitted out, and de Brazza 
left Paris at the end of 1879 with orders to go to the Niger, make 
treaties, and plant French flags. When on the point of sailing; 
from Lisbon he received a telegram cancelling these instructions, 
and altering his destination to the Congo. This was a decision 
of great moment. Had the Nigerian policy of France been 
maintained the International African Association (afterwards 
the Congo Free State) would have had a clear field on the Congo, 
while the young British Company would have been crushed out 
by French opposition; so that the two great basins of the Niger 
and the Congo would have had a vastly different history. 

Acting on his new instructions, de Brazza, who was again 



BRAZZA— BREAD 



465 



accompanied by Ballay, reached the Gabun early in 1880. 
Rapidly ascending the Ogowe he founded the station of France- 
ville on the upper waters of that river and pushed on to the 
Congo at Stanley Pool, where Brazzaville was subsequently 
founded. With Makoko, chief of the Bateke tribe, de Brazza 
concluded treaties in September and October 1880, placing the 
country under French protection. With these treaties in his 
possession Brazza proceeded down the Congo, and at Isangila 
on the 7th of November met Stanley, who was working his way 
up stream concluding treaties with the chiefs on behalf of the 
International African Association. De Brazza spent the next 
eighteen months exploring the hinterland of the Gabun, and 
returned to France in June 1882. The ratification by the French 
chambers in the following November of the treaties with Makoko 
(described by Stanley as worthless pieces of paper) committed 
France to the action of her agent. 

Furnished with funds by the French government, de Brazza 
returned in 1883 to the Congo to open up the new colony, of 
which he was named commissioner-general in 1886. This post 
he held until January 1898, when he was recalled. During his 
period of office the work of exploration was systematically carried 
out by numerous expeditions which he organized. The incessant 
demands on the resources of the infant colony for these and other 
expeditions to the far interior greatly retarded its progress. 
De Brazza's administration was severely criticized; but that 
its comparative failure was largely due to inadequate support 
from the home authorities was recognized in the grant to him 
in 1902 of a pension by the chambers. Both as explorer and 
administrator his dealings with the natives were marked by 
consideration, kindness and patience, and he earned the title 
of " Father of the Slaves." His efforts to connect the upper 
Congo with the Atlantic by a railway through French territory 
showed that he understood the chief economic needs of the colony. 
After seven years of retirement in France de Brazza accepted, 
in February 1905, a mission to investigate charges of cruelty 
to natives brought against officials of the Congo colony. Having 
concluded his inquiry he sailed for France, but died at Dakar, 
Senegal, on the 4th of September 1905. His body was taken to 
Paris for burial, but in 1908 was reinterred at Algiers. 

See D. Neuville et Ch. Breard, Les Voyages de Savorgnan de Brazza, 
Ogooue et Congo, 1875-1882 (Paris, 1884), and Conferences et lettres 
de P. Savorgnan de Brazza sur ses trots explorations dans I'ouest 
africain de 1875 a 1886 (Paris, 1887); A. J. Wauters, " Savorgnan 
de Brazza et la conquete du Congo francais," in Le Mouvement 
geographique, vol. xxii., No. 39 (Brussels, 1905). Giacomo or Jacques 
de Brazza (1 859-1 883), a younger brother of Savorgnan, and one 
of the men he employed in the work of exploration, published in 
collaboration with his companion A. Pecile, Tre Anni e mezzo 
nella regione del Congo e dell' Ogowe (Rome, 1887). (G. T. G.) 

BRAZZA (Serbo-Croatian, Brae; Lat. Brattia), an island 
in the Adriatic Sea, forming part of Dalmatia, Austria. Pop. 
(1900) 24,408. With an area of 170 sq. m. Brazza is the largest 
of the Dalmatian Islands; it is also the most thickly populated, 
and one of the most fertile. Its closely cultivated surface though 
ragged and mountainous yields an abundance of olives, figs, 
almonds and saffron, while its wines are of good quality. The 
corn-crop, however, barely suffices for three months' food. Other 
local industries are fishing and silkworm-rearing. The most 
important among twenty small villages on the island is Milna 
(pop. 2579), a steamship station, provided with shipwrights' 
wharves. The early history of Brazza is obscure. In the first 
years of the 13 th century it was ruled by the piratical counts of 
Almissa; but after a successful revolt and a brief period of 
liberty it came under the dominion of Hungary. From 1413 to 
1416 it was subject to Ragusa; and in 1420 it passed, with the 
greater part of Dalmatia, under Venetian sovereignty. 

BREACH (Mid. Eng. breche, derived from the common 
Teutonic root brec, which appears in " break," Ger. brechen, &c), 
in general, a breaking, or an opening made by breaking; in 
law, the infringement of a right or the violation of an obligation 
or duty. The word is used in various phrases: breach of close, 
the unlawful entry upon another person's land (see Trespass) ; 
breach of covenant or contract, the non-fulfilment of an agreement 
either to do or not to do some act (see Damages); breach of the 



peace, a disturbance of the public order (see Peace, Breach of) ; 
breach of pound, the taking by force out of a pound things lawfully 
impounded (see Pound) ; breach of promise of marriage, the 
non-fulfilment of a contract mutually entered into by a man 
and a woman that they will marry each other (see Marriage) ; 
breach of trust, any deviation by a trustee from the duty imposed 
upon him by the instrument creating the trust (q.v.). 

BREAD, the name given to the staple food-product prepared 
by the baking of flour. The word itself, O. Eng. bread, is common 
in various forms to many Teutonic languages; cf. Ger. Brot, 
Dutch, brood, and Swed. and Dan. brot; it has been derived 
from the root of " brew," but more probably is connected with 
the root of " break," for its early uses are confined to " broken 
pieces, or bits " of bread, the Lat. frustum, and it was not till 
the 1 2th century that it took the place, as the generic name of 
bread, of hlaf, " loaf," which appears to be the oldest Teutonic 
name, cf. Old High Ger. hleib, and modern Ger. Laib. 

History. — Bread-baking, or at any rate the preparation of 
cakes from flour or parched grain by means of heat, is one of 
the most ancient of human arts. At Wangen and Robenhausen 
have been found the calcined remains of cakes made from 
coarsely-ground grain in Swiss lake-dwellings that date back to 
the Stone Age. The cakes were made of different kinds of grain, 
barley and one-grained wheat (Trilicum monococcum) being 
among the ingredients. This bread was made, not from fine 
meal, but from grain crushed between some hard surfaces, and 
in these lake-dwellings many round-shaped stones have been 
found, which were evidently used for pounding or crushing 
grain against the surface, more or less concave, of another stone 
(see Flour and Flour Manufacture). Perhaps the earliest 
form of bread, if that word may be used, was prepared from 
acorns and beech nuts. To this day a sort of cake prepared 
from crushed acorns is eaten by the Indians of the Pacific 
slopes. The flour extracted from acorns is bitter and unfit to 
eat till it has been thoroughly soaked in boiling water. The 
saturated flour is squeezed into a kind of cake and dried in the 
sun. Pliny speaks of a similar crude process in connexion with 
wheat; the grain was evidently pounded, and the crushed 
remnant, soaked into a sort of pulp, then made into a cake and 
dried in the sun. Virgil (Georgics, i. 267) refers to the husband- 
man first torrefying and then crushing his grain between stones: — 
" Nunc torrele ignifruges, nunc f ran giie saxo." 

The question naturally arises, how did the lake-dwellers bake 
their cakes of bruised grain ? Probably the dough was laid on 
a flat or convex-shaped stone, which was heated, while the cake 
was covered with hot ashes. Stones have been found among 
prehistoric remains which were apparently used for this purpose. 
In ancient Egyptian tombs cakes of durra have been found, of 
concave shape, suggesting the use of such baking-slabs; here the 
cake was evidently prepared from coarsely-cracked grain. In 
primitive times milling and baking were twin arts. The house- 
wife, and the daughters or handmaids, crushed or ground the 
grain and prepared the bread or cakes. When Abraham enter- 
tained the angels unawares (Genesis xviii.) he bade his wife 
Sarah " make ready quickly three measures of fine meal, knead 
it, and make cakes upon the hearth." Professor Maspero says 
that an oven for baking bread was to be found in the courtyard 
of every house in Chaldaea; close by were kept the grinding 
stones. That bread prepared by means of leaven was known 
in the days of the patriarchs may be fairly inferred from the 
passage in Genesis iii., where it is said of Lot that he " made a 
feast, and did bake unleavened bread." Whether the shew- 
bread of the Jewish tabernacle was leavened is an open question, 
but it is significant that the Passover cakes eaten by Jews to-day, 
known as Matzos, are innocent of leaven. Made from flour and 
water only, they are about 1 2 in. in diameter, and have somewhat 
the look of water biscuits. 

The ancient Egyptians carried the art of baking to high 
perfection. Herodotus remarks of them, " dough they knead 
with their feet, but clay with their hands." The practice of 
using the feet for dough kneading, however repulsive, long 
persisted in Scotland, if indeed it is yet defunct. The Egyptians 



4 66 



BREAD 



used for their bread, wheat, spelt, barley and durra (sorghum). 
In the opinion of Dr Wallis Budge, barley was in Egypt the 
grain of most primitive culture. However that may be, it is 
certain that even in ancient Egypt white bread made from 
wheat was used by the rich. The form of the bread is revealed 
by ancient monuments. A common shape was a small, round 
loaf, something like the muffin of to-day. Other loaves were 
elongated rolls, and curiously enough were sprinkled on the top 
with seeds like modern Vienna bread. 

The history of baking in classical Greece and Italy can be 
clearly traced. Athenaeus in his Deipnosophists minutely 
describes many different kinds of bread, which may be assumed 
to have been currently used in Greece. According to Pliny 
(Nat. Hist, xviii. n. § 28) Rome had no public bakers till after 
the war with Perseus (171-168 B.C.). That long after public 
bakehouses came into use the Romans and other urban dwellers 
in Italy continued to make a great deal of bread at home is 
certain. In Pompeii several private houses had their own mill 
and bakehouse. That city must also have possessed bakers by 
trade, as loaves of bread have been found, round in form, and 
stamped with the maker's name, possibly to fix responsibility 
for weight and purity. In the time of the Republic, public 
bakehouses were under the control of the aediles. Grain was 
delivered to the public granaries by the Saccarii, while another 
body called Catabolenses distributed the grain to the bakers. 
The latter were known as Pistores or " pounders," a reminiscence 
no doubt of the primitive time when grain was pounded by a 
pestle in a mortar. Slaves were largely employed in the irksome 
work of grinding, and when Constantine abolished slavery the 
staff of the pistrinae was largely recruited from criminals. The 
emperor Trajan incorporated about a.d. 100 the college of 
Pistores (millers and bakers), but its members were employers, 
not operatives. The work of a bakery is depicted in a set of 
bas-reliefs on the tomb of a master Pistor named Eurysaces, 
who flourished about a century before the foundation of the 
college. Here the grain is being brought and paid for; mills 
driven by horse and ass (or mule) power are busy; men are 
sieving out the bran from the flour by hand (bolters); bakers 
are moulding loaves on a board; an oven of domelike shape is 
being charged by means of a shovel (peel) ; and baskets of bread 
are being weighed on the one hand and carried off on men's 
backs on the other. 

Regulation of Sale. — In the middle ages bakers were subjected 
to special regulations in all European lands. These regulations 
were supposed to be conceived in the interests of bread consumers, 
and no doubt were intended to secure fair dealing on the part of 
bread vendors. The legislators appear, however, to have been 
unduly biased against the baker, who was often beset by harass- 
ing restrictions. Bakers were formed into gilds, which were 
under the control, not only of their own officials, but of the 
municipality. In London the bakers formed a brotherhood as 
early as 1155, and were incorporated in 1307. There were two 
distinct corporate bodies concerned with bread-making, the 
Company of White Bakers and the Company of Brown Bakers; 
these were nominally united in 1509, but the union did not 
become complete till the middle of the 17th century. In Austria, 
bakers who offended against police regulations respecting the sale 
of bread were liable, until comparatively recent times, to fine, 
imprisonment and even corporal punishment. In Turkey the 
lot of the baker was very hard. Baron de Tott, writing of Con- 
stantinople in the 18th century, says that it was usual, when 
bread went to famine prices, to hang a baker or two. He would 
have us believe that it was the custom of master bakers to keep 
a second hand, who, in consideration of a small increase of his 
weekly wage, was willing to appear before the cadi in case a 
victim were wanted. A barbarous punishment, inflicted in 
Turkey and in Egypt on bakers who sold light or adulterated 
bread, consisted in nailing the culprit by his ear to the door-post 
of his shop. In France a decree of 1863 relieved bakers from 
many of the restrictions under which they previously suffered, 
\\it it did not touch the powers of the municipalities to regulate 
the quality and sale of bread. It left them the right conferred 



in 1 791, to enforce the taxe du pain, the object of which was to 
prevent bakers from increasing the price of bread beyond a point 
justified by the price of the raw materials ; but the right was 
exercised on their own responsibility, subject to appeal to higher 
authorities, and by a circular issued in 1863 they were invited 
to abolish this taxe officielle. In places where it exists it is fixed 
every week or fortnight, according to the average price of grain 
in the local markets. 

In England an act of parliament was passed in 1266 for 
regulating the price of bread by a public assize, and that system 
continued in operation till 1822 in the case of the city of London, 
and till 1836 for the rest of the country. The price of bread 
was determined by adding a certain sum to the price of every 
quarter of flour, to cover the baker's expenses and profit; and 
for the sum so arrived at tradesmen were required to bake and 
sell eighty quartern loaves or a like proportion of other sizes, 
which it was reckoned each quarter of flour ought to yield. The 
acts now regulating the manufacture and sale of bread in Great 
Britain are one of 1822 (Sale of Bread in the City of London and 
within 10 m. of the Royal Exchange), and the Bread Act of 1836, 
as to sale of bread beyond 10 m. of the Royal Exchange. The 
acts require that bread shall be sold by weight, and in no other 
manner, under a penalty not exceeding forty shillings. This 
does not, however, mean that a seller is bound to sell at any 
particular weight; the words quartern and half-quartern, 
though commonly used and taken to indicate a 4-lb and 2-ft> 
loaf respectively, nave no legal sanction. That is to say, a baker 
is not bound to sell a loaf weighing either 4 lb or 2; all he has 
to do, when a customer asks for a loaf, is to put one on the scale, 
weigh it, and declare the weight. When bread is sold over the 
counter it is usual for the vendor to cut off and tender a piece 
of bread to make up any deficiency in the loaf. This is known 
as the " overweight." There is little doubt the somewhat misty 
wording of the bread acts lends itself to a good deal of fraudulent 
dealing. For instance, when bread is sold over the counter, two 
loaves may be 5 or 6 oz. short, while the piece of makeweight 
may not reach an ounce. The customer sees the bread put on the 
scale, but in ninety-nine cases out of a hundred does not trouble 
to verify the weight, and unless he expressly asks for 2 lb or 
some specific weight of bread, it is very doubtful whether the 
seller, having satisfied the letter of the law by placing the bread 
on the scales, could be convicted of fraud. The provision as to 
selling by weight does not apply to fancy bread and rolls. No 
exact definition of " fancy bread " has ever been laid down, and 
it must be largely a question of fact in each particular case. All 
bakers or sellers of bread must use avoirdupois weight, and must 
provide, in a conspicuous place in the shop, beams, scales and 
weights, in order that all bread there sold may from time to time 
be weighed in the presence of the purchaser. The penalty for 
using any other weight than avoirdupois is a sum not exceeding 
£5 nor less than forty shillings, and for failing to provide beams 
and scales a sum not exceeding £5. Also every baker and seller 
of bread, delivering by cart or other conveyance, must be pro- 
vided with scales and weights for weighing bread; but since the 
Weights and Measures Act 1889, no penalty is incurred by 
omission to weigh, unless there has been a request on the part of 
the purchaser. The acts also define precisely what ingredients 
may be employed in the manufacture of bread, and impose a 
penalty not exceeding £10 nor less than £5 for the adulteration 
of bread. (See further under Adulteration.) 

Although the act of 1836 extends to the whole of the United 
Kingdom (Ireland excepted) out of the city of London and 
beyond 10 m. of the Royal Exchange, yet in many Scottish 
burghs this act is replaced by local acts on the sale of bread. 
These are in all cases of a much more stringent nature, requiring 
all batch or household bread to be stamped with the reputed 
weight. Any deficiency within a certain time from the with- 
drawal of the bread from the oven is an offence. The London 
County Council desired to introduce a similar system into the 
area under their jurisdiction, and promoted a bill to that effect 
in 1905, but it fell through. The bill was opposed not only by 
the National Association of Master Bakers, the London Master 



BREAD 



467 



Bakers' Protection Society, and by the West End metropolitan 
bakers in a body, but also by the Home Office, which objected 
to what it termed exceptional legislation. 

It may be noted that the acts of 1822 and 1836 define pre- 
cisely what may and may not be sold as bread. It is laid down 
in section 2 that " it shall and may be lawful ... to make and 
sell . . . bread made of flour or meal of wheat, barley, rye, oats, 
buckwheat, Indian corn, peas, beans, rice or potatoes, or any of 
them, and with any (common) salt, pure water, eggs, milk, barm, 
leaven, potato or other yeast, and mixed in such proportions 
as they shall think fit, and with no other ingredients or matter 
whatsoever." 

Sanitation of Bakehouses. — The sanitary arrangements of 
bakehouses in England were first regulated by the Bakehouse 
Regulation Act 1863, which was repealed and replaced by the 
Factory and Workshop Act 1878; this act, with various amend- 
ing acts, was in turn repealed and replaced by the Factory and 
Workshop Act 1001. By the act of 1901 a bakehouse is defined 
as a place in which are baked bread, biscuits or confectionery, 
from the baking or selling of which a profit is derived. The act 
of 1863 placed the sanitary supervision of bakehouses in the hands 
of local authorities; from 1878 to 1883 supervision was in the 
hands of inspectors of factories, but in 1883 the supervision of 
retail bakehouses was placed in the hands of local authorities. 
Under the act of 1901 the supervision of bakehouses which are 
" workshops " is carried out by local authorities, and for the 
purposes of the act every bakehouse is a workshop unless within 
it, or its close or curtilage or precincts, steam, water or other 
mechanical power is used in aid of the manufacturing process 
carried on there, in which case it is treated as a non-textile 
factory, and is under the supervision of factory inspectors. 

The more important regulations laid down by the act are: (1) 
No water-closet, &c, must be within or communicate directly with 
the bakehouse; every cistern for supplying water to the bakehouse 
must be separate and distinct from any cistern supplying a water- 
closet ; no drain or pipe for carrying off sewage matter shah have an 
opening within the bakehouse. (2) The interior of all bakehouses 
must be limewashed, painted or varnished at stated periods. (3) 
No place on the same level with a bakehouse or forming part of the 
same building may be used as a sleeping place, unless specially 
constructed to meet the requirements of the act. (4) No under- 
ground bakehouse (one of which the floor is more than 3 ft. below 
the surface of the footway of the adjoining street) shall be used 
unless certified by the district council as suitable for the purpose 
(see Redgrave, Factory Acts; Evans Austin, Factory Acts). 

Bread Stuffs. — As compared with wheat-flour, all other 
materials used for making bread are of secondary importance. 
Rye bread is largely consumed in some of the northern parts of 
Europe, and cakes of maize meal are eaten in the United States. 
In southern Europe the meal of various species of millet is used, 
and in India and China durra and other cereal grains are baked 
for food. Of non-cereal flour, the principal used for bread-making 
is buckwheat (Fagopyrum esculentum), extensively employed in 
Russia, Holland and the United States. The flour of pease, beans 
and other leguminous seeds is also baked into cakes, and in South 
America the meal of the tapioca plant, Jatropha Manihol, is 
employed. But, excepting rye, none of these substances is used 
for making vesiculated or fermented bread. 

A normal sample of wheat-flour consists roughly of 10 parts 
of moisture, 72 of starch, 14 of nitrogenous matter, 2-25 of fatty 
matters, and 1-75% of mineral matter. Starch is thus 
four y ° tne predominating component; it is not, however, the 
dough-forming ingredient. By itself, starch, when 
saturated with water, forms a putty-like mass devoid of coherence, 
and it is the gluten of the nitrogenous matter which is the binding 
constituent in dough-making, because when wetted it forms a 
more or less elastic body. The proportion of gluten in wheat- 
flour varies from 7 to 15%, but the mere quantity of gluten is 
by no means the only standard of the commercial value of the 
flour, the quality also counting for much. One of the functions 
of gluten is to produce a high or well-piled loaf, and its value for 
this purpose depends largely on its quality. This is turn depends 
largely on the variety of wheat; certain races of wheat are much 
richer in nitrogenous elements than others, but such wheats 



usually only flourish in certain countries. Soil and climate are 
undoubtedly factors in modifying the character of wheat, and 
necessarily therefore of the flour. The same wheat grown in the 
same soil will show very varying degrees of strength {i.e. of gluten) 
in different seasons. For instance, the north-western districts 
of America grow a hard spring wheat which in a normal season 
is of almost unequalled strength. In 1904 an excess of moisture 
and deficiency in sun in the Red River Valley during the critical 
months of June and July caused a serious attack of red and black 
rust in these wheat fields, the disease being more virulent in 
the American than the Canadian side of the valley. The result 
was that the quality of the gluten of that season's American 
spring wheat was most seriously affected, its famed strength 
being almost gone. Wheat from the Canadian side was also 
affected, but not nearly to so great an extent. Flour milled 
from hard winter wheat in the American winter districts is 
sometimes nearly as strong as the spring wheat of the North-west. 
Hungarian flour milled from Theis wheat is also very strong, 
and so is the flour milled from some south Russian spring wheats. 
But here again the degree of strength will vary from season to 
season in a remarkable manner. In the main each land has its 
own clearly marked type of wheat. While the United States, 
Canada, Hungary and Russia are each capable of growing strong 
wheat, Great Britain, France and Germany produce wheat more 
or less weak. It follows that the bread baked from flour milled 
from wheat from British, French or German wheat alone would 
not make a loaf of sufficient volume, judged by present British 
standards. As a matter of fact, except in some country districts, 
British bakers either use strong foreign flour to blend with 
English country flour, or, more frequently, they are supplied 
with flour by British millers milled from a blend in which very 
often English wheat has a small, or no place at all. If the baker's 
trade calls for the making of household bread, especially of the 
London type, he must use a strong flour, with plenty of staple 
gluten in it, because it is this element which supplies the driving 
or lifting force, without which a high, bold loaf cannot be pro- 
duced. If the demand is for tin or (as it is called in many parts 
of the north of England) pan bread, a weaker flour will suffice, 
as the tin will keep it up. A Vienna loaf should be made with at 
least a certain proportion of Hungarian patent flour, which is 
normally the highest-priced flour in the market, though probably 
the bulk of the Vienna rolls made in London contain no 
Hungarian flour. A cake of flat shape can be very well made 
with a rather weak flour, but any cake that is required to present 
a domed top cannot be prepared without a flour of some strength. 
It is a general opinion, though contested by some authorities, 
that soft, weak flours contain more flavour than strong, harsh 
flours. The strong wheats of the American and 
Canadian North- West make less flavoury flour than //ouA 
soft red winter from the American South-West. It 
would not, however, be correct to say that all strong wheats are 
necessarily less full of flavour than weak wheats. Hungarian 
wheat, for instance, is one of the strongest wheats of the world, 
but has a characteristic and pleasant flavour of its own. Indian 
wheats, on the other hand, are not particularly strong, but are 
liable to give a rather harsh flavour to the bread. English, 
French and German wheats, when harvested in good condition, 
produce flour of more or less agreeable flavour. None of these 
wheats could be classified as strong, though from each of those 
lands wheat of fair strength may be obtained under favourable 
meteorological conditions. The Australasian continent raises 
white wheat of fine quality which has much affinity with British 
wheat — -it is the descendant in many cases of seed wheats 
imported from England — but it is occasionally stronger. The 
resultant flour is noted for its sweetness. Both millers and bakers 
who are concerned with the supply of high-class bread and flour 
make free use of what may be termed flavoury wheats. The 
proportion of English wheat used in London mills is very small, 
but millers who supply West-End bakeries with what is known 
as top-price flour are careful to use a certain amount of English 
wheat, if it is to be had in prime condition. They term this 
ingredient of their mixture " sugar." London bakers again, 



4 68 



BREAD 



with customers who appreciate nicely flavoured bread, will 
" pitch " into their trough a certain proportion of English country 
flour, that is, flour milled entirely or chiefly from English wheat, 
which under such conditions is strengthened by a blend of strong 
flour, a patent flour for choice. It has been objected that as 
English wheat contains a large proportion of starch, and as 
starch is admittedly destitute of flavour, there is no reason why 
flour milled from English wheat should possess a sweeter flavour 
than any other starchy wheat flour. Experience, however, has 
amply proved that well-ripened English wheat produces bread 
with an agreeable flavour, though it does not follow that all 
English wheat is under all conditions capable of baking bread 
of the highest quality. But it would be as fallacious to hold that 
weak flour is necessarily flavoury, as that all strong flour is 
insipid and harsh. Different wheats are undoubtedly possessed 
of different flavours, but not all these flavours are of a pleasing 
character. In some cases the very reverse is true. Californian 
and Australian wheats have occasionally aromatic odours, due 
to the presence of certain seeds, that will impart an objectionable 
flavour to the resultant bread. 

While the essential character of particular wheats will account 
for a good deal of the flavour that may be detected in the bread 
made from them, the baking process must also be responsible to 
some extent for flavour. The temperature of the oven and the 
degree of fermentation must be factors in the question. It has 
been asserted that the same flour will bake into bread of very 
different flavour according as the fermentation is carried out 
slowly or quickly, or as the oven is hot or the reverse. A high 
temperature seems to have the effect of quickly drawing out the 
subtle essences which go to give flavour to the bread, but it is a 
question whether they are not subsequently rapidly volatilized 
and partially or wholly lost. The rapid formation of a solid crust 
is no doubt likely to retain some of these flavouring essences. A 
moist, or " slack," sponge, or dough, appears distinctly favour- 
able to the retention of flavour, the theory being that under such 
conditions the yeast, having more room to " breathe," works 
more easily, and is therefore less likely to convert into food those 
soluble constituents of the flour which give flavour. 

The colour of flour is a valuable, though not an infallible, 
index to its baking qualities. Thus, a flour of good colour, by 
which bakers mean a flour of bright appearance, white, 
flour. but not a dull dead white, will usually bake into a loaf 

of good appearance. At the same time, a flour of 
pronounced white tint may bake into a dirty grey loaf. This 
has been particularly noted in the case of flours milled in Argen- 
tina. The colour of flour will vary from a rich, creamy white to a 
dull grey, according to its quality. The different shades are many 
and various, but the prevailing tints are comparatively few. 
Perhaps Blandy's classification of the colours as white, yellow, 
red, brown and grey is as serviceable as any. Each of these tints 
is directly caused by the presence of certain substances. White 
denotes the presence of a considerable proportion of starch, while 
a pronounced yellow tint proclaims gluten of more or less good 
quality. Red and brown are tints only found in flours of low 
grade, because they are sure proofs of an undue proportion of 
branny or fibrous particles. A greyish flour invariably contains 
impurities, such as crease dirt, from the wheat, the intensity of 
the tint varying in proportion to their amount. With regard to 
a yellow tint, though this always denotes the presence of gluten, 
it is difficult to estimate the baking quality of the flour by the 
shade of yellow. In the best Hungarian patent flour the whole 
sample will be suffused by an amber tint, known to Budapest 
and Vienna bakers as gelblicher Stick. Rolls baked from the best 
Hungarian flour will not infrequently cut yellow as if eggs had 
been used in making them up, though nothing more than flour, 
yeast and water has been employed. Strong flour milled from 
American or Canadian spring wheat is also yellowish in colour, 
but the tint is not so deep as with Hungarian flour. On the other 
hand, there are flours of no great strength, such as those from 
some Australian wheats, which are apt to look yellow. When 
the colour of flour is not maintained in the bread, the reason is 
generally to be found in the baking process employed. Colour 



is a fairly trustworthy, but not an absolute guide to the chemical 
composition of flour. 

Unfortunately not all flour of good colour is sound for bread- 
making purposes. Wheat which has been harvested in a damp 
condition, or has been thoroughly soaked, by drenching 
showers previous to cutting, or has got wet in the stook, fl „^f "" 
is liable, unless carefully handled, to produce flour 
that will only bake flat, sodden loaves. Wheat which has received 
too rnuch rain as it is approaching maturity, and has then been 
exposed to strong sunlight, is peculiarly liable to sprout. This 
seems to happen not infrequently to La Plata wheat, and though 
wheat shippers in that country are usually careful to clean off 
the little green spikes, this outward cleansing does not remedy the 
mischief wrought to the internal constitution of the berry. Such 
wheat makes flour lacking in strength and stability. Its gluten 
is immature and low in percentage, while the soluble albuminoids 
are in high percentage and in a more or less active diastasic state. 
The starch granules are liable to have weakened or fissured walls, 
and the proportion of moisture and of soluble extract will be 
high. With regard to the beneficial action of kiln or other drying 
on damp flour, William Jago was convinced by a series of experi- 
ments that the gentle artificial drying of flour increases its water- 
absorbing capacity to about three times the amount of water lost 
by evaporation. On the other hand, a damp flour dried too 
quickly and at too great a heat is liable to be made more instead 
of less susceptible to diastasic changes. 

Alum. — Strictly speaking, when employed with weak and unstable 
flours alum is a remedial agent. The popular idea that it acts as a 
kind of bleacher of flour, having the faculty of converting flour that 
is dark-coloured through containing a sensible proportion of branny 
particles and woody fibre, into white-coloured loaves, is erroneous. 
Its action as a producer of white bread is indirect, not direct, though 
it is none the less effective. It seems to act as a brace to or steadier 
of unstable gluten. If from the same wheat a certain proportion of 
gluten be extracted and divided into two parts, of which one is 
placed in a glass of water containing a strong solution of alum, and 
the other in a glass of plain water, the gluten in the latter case will 
become spent days and perhaps weeks before the sample in the 
alumed water is disintegrated. The place of alum in the process of 
fermentation is well marked. By holding together unstable gluten, 
it checks the diastasic action, and the proportion of starch converted 
into glucose (grape sugar) is reduced, with the result that a whiter 
and more porous loaf is produced. It is generally admitted that by 
the use of alum more or less eatable bread may be baked from flour 
which otherwise could hardly be made into bread at all. Strictly, 
therefore, this substance is not an adulterant, inasmuch as it is not a 
substitute in any sense for flour. But it is admittedly unwholesome, 
and therefore its legal interdiction for alimentary purposes is quice 
justifiable. Another aspect of the use of alum is that it is employed 
for the purpose of enabling bakers to use poor flour. 

A fairly satisfactory test for alum in bread (or flour) is afforded by 
an alkaline solution of logwood and a saturated solution of ammonium 
carbonate. The presence of alum is shown by a lavender or full blue 
colour. The depth of the tint is said to be a rough guide to the 
quantity of alum present. According to Jago this test is so sensitive 
that it has resulted in the detection of 7 grains of alum in a 4- lb loaf. 

Besides alum, small quantities of copper sulphate have been used 
for checking diastasis and retarding fermentation. This substance 
has the same effect as alum, but as all copper salts^are active poisons, 
the employment of copper sulphate is most strongly to be condemned. 

Lime-water. — The object of using either alum or copper sulphate 
is to check over-rapid diastasis during fermentation. Baron Liebig 
pointed out a much less objectionable means of attaining the same 
end by means of lime-water, about ij oz. of fresh quicklime being 
dissolved in the water used for doughing one sack of flour. Bread 
made in this way is said to be spongy in texture, of agreeable flavour, 
and perfectly free from acidity. In the baked loaf the lime is trans- 
formed into calcium carbonate (chalk) by the carbon dioxide resulting 
from the panary fermentation. It is said that an increased yield of 
bread may be obtained by the use of lime-water; the explanation 
may be that lime-water, by retarding the degradation of the gluten 
and the diastasis of the starch, increases the water-retaining power 
of the flour, so that the same weight of flour yields a greater volume 
of bread. 

Unvesiculated and Vesiculated Bread. — Wheaten bread may 
be divided into two main divisions, unvesiculated and vesiculated. 
The term vesiculated simply means provided with vesicles, or 
small membranous cavities, such as are found in all' bread that 
has been treated by yeast, leaven or any other agent for rendering 
it spongiform in structure by the action of carbonic acid gas. 
Nearly all bread eaten by civilized folk is vesiculated, though 



BREAD 



469 



there are different methods and processes for attaining this result. 
Into the category of unvesiculated bread enter such products 
as the Australian damper, a flat cake prepared from flour, water 
and salt, and baked in the hot ashes of a wood fire. The dough 
is spread on a fiat stone and covered with a tin plate, while the 
hot ashes are heaped around and over it; the heat should not 
be much in excess of 212 Fahr. The scone, the bannock and 
other similar cakes, still much appreciated in Scotland and the 
north of England, are also examples of unvesiculated bread. 
They are baked on hot pfates or " griddles," on hearths, and 
sometimes in ovens. Biscuits differ from these cakes in the fact 
that they are baked by a high instead of a moderate heat. But 
they enter so far into the class of unvesiculated bread that they 
are generally prepared without the aid of any such aerating agent 
as carbon dioxide. (See Biscuit.) 

Vesiculated bread is now the only article of diet made from 
flour to which the term bread is applied, and there are various 
ways of producing the spongiform texture by which it is char- 
acterized. The ordinary and doubtless the most satisfactory way 
is by developing the carbon dioxide within the dough itself by 
the use of yeast (q.v.) or leaven, which sets up alcoholic fer- 
mentation, splitting up the saccharine matters in the flour into 
alcohol and carbon dioxide. The latter is retained by the dough 
and distends it, causing the bread to "rise." Or the carbon 
dioxide may be artificially introduced, as in the so-called 
"aerated" bread (see below), or it may be produced by the 
agency of certain chemicals, as for instance of baking powders. 

Such powders are mixtures which, under the influence of either 
water or heat, evolve carbon dioxide. These powders have been 

divided by Jago into three groups: — (1) Tartrate 
powders, powders, in which the acid constituent is either free 

or partly combined tartaric acid; (2) Phosphate 
powders, in which the acid is some form of phosphoric acid; 
(3) Alum powders. All these powders have a more or less aperient 
action on the human system. Tartrate powders have the dis- 
advantage that both commercial tartaric acid and cream of 
tartar frequently contain lead, a poisonous substance. Phos- 
phate powders are less open to objection, as they are more easy 
to obtain free from lead and other metallic impurities. Alum 
powders contain potassium bisulphate and alum. It is somewhat 
remarkable that while the presence of alum in bread is regarded 
by the law of England as adulteration, its use in baking powder 
was pronounced legal in James v. Jones, 1894, 1, Q.B. 304, on the 
ground that baking powder is not food within the meaning of the 
Sale of Food and Drugs Act 1875. In making wholemeal bread, 
hydrochloric acid and sodium bicarbonate are often used in such 
proportions that they neutralize each other. Carbon dioxide is 
evolved and raises the dough. In preparing wholemeal bread 
the use of this combination has the advantage that the acid 
acting rapidly on the sodium bicarbonate soon produces enough 
carbon dioxide to aerate the dough, and thus hasten its entry 
into the oven. Wholemeal flour contains so large a proportion 
of cerealin that diastasis is apt to proceed rapidly, the result 
being a clammy, sodden loaf. For this reason, perhaps the so- 
called aerated process is even more suitable for making whole- 
meal than white bread. 

Methods of dough-making differ in different countries, and 
even in different parts of the same land. In the of hand method 

the dough is made right off, without any preliminary 

fmakiae sta 8 es °f ferment or sponge. This plan is sometimes 

dough. adopted for making tin bread, and occasionally for 

crusty loaves. For tin bread a strong flour would be 
used and made into a slack dough, and about i| lb to 2 lb of 
distillers' yeast would be used for the sack (280 lb) of flour, 
occasionally with the addition of a little brewers' yeast. Salt 
is used in the proportion of 3 lb to 3 J lb per sack. Formerly 
also it was the custom to add 10-14 H> of boiled potatoes, but the 
use of potatoes has greatly decreased. A tin-bread dough would 
be made slack, with about 70 quarts of water to the sack, and 
after being mixed, would be fermented at a temperature of 
76-80 Fahr. It should lie for about ten hours. A dough for 
crusty bread such as cottage loaves, would be made much tighter, 



not more than 60 quarts of water being allowed to the sack. It 
would be fermented at a higher temperature, and would not lie 
more than about six hours. A slack dough is much less laborious 
to work (when the dough is hand-made) than a tight dough, for 
which a mechanical kneader is very suitable, but as a matter of 
fact the use of machinery (see below) is still the exception, not 
the rule. When a stiff dough is made by hand, it is usually 
made somewhat slack to begin with, and then " cut back " and 
" dusted " at regular intervals, that is to say, more and more 
flour is added till a dough of the required consistency has been 
obtained. (In the British baker's vocabulary " dust " means 
flour, and good dust stands for good flour.) This system, on the 
one hand, saves the labour involved for "sponging," and other 
operations, and the bread is produced in less time; but on the 
other hand more yeast is used, and bakers generally hold that 
the system sacrifices the colour and texture of the loaf to con- 
venience of working and yield. The high porportion of yeast 
enables the dough to carry a large quantity of water, and about 
104 4-lb loaves to the sack is said by Jago to be a not unusual 
yield in the case of slack doughs. But such a result would only 
be possible with very strong flour. In an ordinary way 96 loaves 
to the sack is a very high yield, unattainable except with strong 
flour, and probably the average yield is not more than 90 loaves 
to the sack. In London the manager of a " tied " shop is usually 
held to account for 92 loaves to the sack. 

In the ferment and dough system, the ferment usually consists of 
10 to 14 lb of potatoes to the sack of flour, boiled or steamed, 
and mashed with water, so as to yield about 3 gallons of 
liquor. There are several substitutes for potatoes, including 
raw and scalded flour, malt, malt extracts, &c. ; brewers' or 
distillers' yeast may also be used. A ferment should contain 
saccharine matters and yeast stimulants in such a form as to 
favour the growth and reproduction of yeast in a vigorous 
condition. Hence it should not be too concentrated. About ~ 
six hours are required for its preparation. It is added, together 
with 2 1 to 3 lb of salt, to the dough, which is prepared with 
about 56 quarts of water to the sack, and worked at a temperature 
of 80-84° Fahr. The dough is allowed to lie from two to five 
hours according to the flour used, the character of the ferment, 
and the working temperature. In this system the proportion 
of strong flour is usually reduced to 40 % of the dough, and no 
doubt in some cases only soft or weak flours are used. Naturally 
the yield of bread is not so high as in the case of an off hand 
dough made entirely from strong flour, and it will probably not 
exceed 90 loaves to the sack. This method has many advantages. 
After the ferment is made the labour required is not much greater 
than with the off hand doughs, and less yeast is required, while 
potatoes, which are somewhat troublesome, from the necessary 
cleaning, can be replaced by the substitutes already mentioned. 
The method produces good-looking and palatable bread, though 
the loaves should be eaten within some twelve hours of leaving 
the oven. 

The sponge and dough system, which is probably in widest use 
in England, is adapted to almost every kind of bread, and has 
the advantage that any kind of flour can be employed. The 
stronger flours which need long fermentation can be and usually 
are used in the " sponge " stage, while soft flours are utilized 
in the dough. (The sponge is a certain proportion, varying from 
a quarter to one-half, of the flour necessary for making the batch.) 
In London the baker often uses for the sponge a bag (140 lb) of 
American spring wheat flour, and for the dough a sack (280 lb) 
of British milled flour, which, whether it be country flour milled 
largely from English wheat or London milled, is always softer 
and weaker than that used for the sponge. The sponge is made 
very slack, 26 to 32 quarts of water being used to say 100 lb of 
flour. Yeast, either distillers' or brewers', must be added, in 
proportions varying according to its character and strength. 
Of distillers' yeast 6 to 10 oz. may be used for 280 lb of flour 
(including sponge and dough). Salt is added to the sponge 
sparingly, at the rate of about \ lb to the sack of 280 lb. The 
object of making the sponge so slack is to quicken the fermenta- 
tion. When set the sponge is allowed to ferment from six to ten 



47° 



BREAD 



hours, according to temperature and other conditions. Some- 
times all the water it is intended to use is put into the sponge, 
which is then known as a " batter " sponge. The sponge, when 
ready, is incorporated with the rest of the flour to which the 
necessary amount of water and salt is added. The whole mass 
is then doughed up into the requisite consistency, the dough 
being allowed to lie for about two hours. Bread made by this 
method, always assuming that over-fermentation has been 
avoided, is of good appearance, presenting a bold loaf, with even 
texture and a nice sheen. Owing to the use of soft flours, the 
flavour should be agreeable, and the loaves ought to keep much 
longer than bread made by ferment and dough. The yield may 
rise as high as 96 loaves per sack, if strong flour has been used 
in the sponge. 

A combination of the above two methods, known as the 
ferment, sponge and dough system, is often used with brewers' 
yeast. In this case the yeast is not added to the sponge direct, 
but goes into the ferment. This method is rather in favour with 
bakers who make their own yeast. 

The system of bread-making generally used in Scotland is 
known as the flour barm, sponge and dough. The barm is a com- 
bination of a malt and hop yeast, with a slow, scalded flour 
ferment. To make the so-called " virgin " barm a Scottish baker 
would use a 30-gallon tub; a smaller vessel for malt-mashing; 
10 lb malt; 3 oz. hops and a jar for infusing them; 40 lb 
flour; 2 to 3 oz. malt; 8 to 12 oz. sugar, and 18 gallons of boiling 
water. With these materials a powerful ferment is produced, 
which it is considered best to use in the sponge the fourth or fifth 
day after brewing. The sponges used in Scotland are " half " 
or " quarter." About 6 lb of malt go to the sack, one-sixth going 
into the sponge. As in England, strong flours are used for the 
sponge, but rather stronger flours are used for the dough than 
is usual in England. Scottish loaves are largely of the " brick" 
type, high and narrow. Such bread has an attractive appear- 
ance and keeps well. It has a rather sharp flavour, approaching 
acidity but avoiding sourness, while the large quantity of malt 
used adds a characteristic taste. The yield rises in some Glasgow 
bread factories to 100 loaves to the sack. 

In many parts of Europe bread is still made from leaven, 
which, properly 1 speaking, consists of a portion of dough held 
over from the previous baking. This substance, 
known to French bakers as levain, is called in Germany 
Sauerteig (anglice " sour dough "). The lump of old 
dough, placed aside in a uniform temperature for some eight 
hours, swells and acquires an alcoholic odour, becoming the 
levain de chef of the French bakers. It is then worked up with 
flour and water to a firm paste double its original volume, when 
it becomes the levain de premiere. Six hours later, by the addition 
of more flour and water its amount is again doubled, though its 
consistency is made rather softer, and it becomes the levain de 
seconde. Finally, by another addition of flour and water, the 
amount is again doubled, and the levain de tous points is obtained. 
This mass is divided into two parts; one is baked yielding 
rather dark sour bread, while the other is mixed with more flour 
and water. This second portion is in turn halved, part is baked, 
and part again mixed with more flour, this last batch yielding 
the best and whitest bread. In North Germany leaven is generally 
used for making rye bread, and loaves baked from a mixture 
of wheat and rye flour. In the bakery of the Krupp works at 
Essen, each batch of the so-called Paderborn bread is prepared 
entirely with leaven from 270 kilos of rye flour (patent quality), 
100 of wheat flour (seconds), 2 of buckwheat meal, 6 of salt, 5 of 
leaven, and one litre of oil. In Vienna leaven is never used for 
making the rolls and small goods for which that city is famous. 
Viennese bakers use either brewers' yeast or a ferment, prepared 
by themselves, of which the basis is an infusion of hops. Brewers' 
yeast is added to the ferment, which takes the form of a very 
slack dough. With 100 kilos (22C46 lb) of flour about 17 litres 
or nearly 2 gallons of ferment are used. 

In the original Dauglish process for the manufacture of aerated 
bread, which was brought into operation in Great Britain in 1859, 
carbonic, acid gas was evolved in a generating vessel by the 



Leavened 
bread. 



Aerated 
bread. 



action of sulphuric acid on chalk, and after purification was 
forced at high pressure into water, which was then used for 
doughing the flour. In this process the flour that had 
to be made into bread was submitted to the action of 
the super-aerated water by direct transference. It was 
found, however, in practice that much difficulty occurred in 
making the gas admix readily with the flour and water, great 
pressure being required, and to lessen the difficulties a new 
process, called the " wine whey," was introduced. To carry 
this out, a vat placed on the upper storey of the factory is charged 
with a portion of malt and flour, which is mashed and allowed 
to ferment until a weak and slightly acid thin wine is produced ; 
this after passing through the coolers is stored until it is trans- 
formed into a vinous whey. This whey is then introduced into 
a strong cylinder partly filled with water, and is aerated by letting 
in the gas (now stored in a highly compressed form in bottles), 
the pressure required being only a quarter of that necessary 
with the original method. The flour having been placed in the 
mixers, which are of globular form containing revolving arms, 
the aerated fluid is admitted, and in a short period the flour and 
fluid are completely incorporated. By means of an ingenious 
appliance termed a dough cock, the exact amount of dough for 
a single loaf of bread is forced out under the pressure of the gas, 
and by reversing the lever the dough, which expands as it falls 
into a baking tin, is cut off. Two sacks of flour can be 
converted with ease into 400 2-lb loaves in forty minutes, 
whereas the ordinary baker's process would require about ten 
hours. At first a difficulty was encountered in the fact that the 
dough became discoloured by the action of the " wine whey " 
on the iron, but it was overcome by Killingworth Hedges, who 
discovered a non-poisonous vitreous enamel for coating the 
interior of the mixers, &c. It has been claimed for the Dauglish 
process that it saves the baker risks attendant on the production 
of carbon dioxide by the ordinary process of fermentation, in that 
he is no longer liable to have his dough spoilt by variations of 
temperature and other incalculable factors, the results being 
certain and uniform. A further claim is the saving of the pro- 
portion of starch consumed by conversion into glucose during 
the process of fermentation. The original objection, that, by 
the absence of fermentation, those subtle changes which help 
to produce flavour are lost, is annulled by the use of the wine 
whey process. The Dauglish process is well suited for producing 
small goods, such as cakes and scones, where flavour can be 
artificially imparted by means of currants, flavouring essences, 
&c. An undoubted advantage of the aerating process of bread- 
making is adaptability for utilizing flour with unstable gluten, 
which can thus be made into an excellent quality of bread. 
For wholemeal bread, too, there is probably no more suitable 
process than the Dauglish. The strong diastasic action of the 
cerealin, inevitable in fermentation, is entirely avoided. The 
Aerated Bread Company have about a hundred depots in 
London, which are supplied from a central factory. 

The essence of the bread-making process recently invented 
by Serge Apostolov is the combination of a flour mill and bakery. 
The wheat, after a preliminary cleaning, is ground into 
flour by a mill composed of metal disks dressed, that 



Apostolov 
process. 



is furrowed, very much like the surfaces of a pair of 
mill-stones. The disks are not set to grind very close, because 
it is desired, by minimizing friction, to keep the meal cool. From 
the middlings obtained by this milling process about 10 % of 
bran is separated, and the remainder of the middlings is treated 
by a peculiar process, akin to mashing, termed " lixiviation." 
The middlings are saturated with tepid water containing a small 
proportion of yeast, which causes a certain amount of fermenta- 
tion. It is claimed that by this process a solution is obtained 
of the floury constituents of the middlings. From the vats the 
solution is poured on an inclined sieve which has a gentle recipro- 
cating motion. The floury particles pass through the meshes, 
while the bran tails over the sieve; the proportion of the wheat 
berry thus rejected is given as about 25 %. On the other hand, 
the milky-looking solution, called " lactus," is caught in a special 
vessel, and delivered by a shoot into a trough, which may be 



BREAD 



471 



either a mechanical kneader of art ordinary trough. This lactus 
takes the place of the ordinary sponge. The flour is added in 
the proportion necessary to make the required batch and the 
whole mass is doughed, either by hand or power. The resultant 
dough is moulded in the ordinary way into loaves, which are 
baked in due course. The advantages claimed for the process 
are that it permits of the utilization in bread-making of about 
87J % of the wheat berry, that the resultant bread is fairly white 
in colour and is agreeable in flavour, and that it is extremely 
simple and provides a ready and cheap means of flour-making. 

Machine Bakeries.— Bread-baking, though one of the most im- 
portant of human industries, was long carried out in a most primitive 
manner, and machinery is still practically unknown in the bulk of 
British bakehouses. The reasons for this apparently anomalous 
condition of things are not very far to seek. Bread, unlike biscuits, 
is a food quite unfitted for long storage, and must be consumed 
within a comparatively short time of being drawn from the oven. 
Hence the bread-baker's output is necessarily limited to a greater 
or lesser degree. This will be the more apparent when it is considered 
that the cost of distributing bread is high relatively to the profits to 
be realized. A baker's bread trade is therefore usually limited to 
local requirements, and trading on a small scale hehas less induce- 
ment to lay out capital on the installation of machinery than other 
classes of manufacturers. But there are now many machine bakeries 
(known in Scotland as bread factories), both in London and in other 
parts of Great Britain, where the manufacture of bread is carried 
out more or less on a large scale. The evolution of the machine 
bakery has been slow, and the mechanical operations of the bake- 
house were long limited to the mixing of the sponge and the kneading 
of the dough, but now the work of the bakery engineer extends over 
almost every operation of bread-making. 

A bread-baking plant should be installed in a building of at least 
two storeys. .The ground floor may be used for the shop, with 
possibly a' bread-cooling and delivery room at the rear. The flour 
may be hoisted to an attic at the top of the building, or to the top 
lioor; in any case there must be sufficient floor space to accommodate 
the flour sacks and bags. Underneath the floor of the flour store 
should be installed a flour sifter, a simple apparatus consisting 
essentially of a hopper through which the flour enters a cylinder 
with a soiral brush, by which it is thoroughly agitated previously to 
passing through one or more sieves placed under the brush. A sack 
of flour may be passed through this sifter in a couple of minutes, 
the operation freeing the flour from lumps and pieces of string or 
other foreign substances which may have found their way into the 
sack. The sifter mav also be combined with a blender or mixer, 
so that the baker may by its means thoroughly blend different flours 
in any desired proportion. The operation of blending is usually 
effected by a revolving blade of suitable design or by a worm con- 
veyor placed underneath the sieve or sleeve. From the sifter and 
blender the flour descends by a sleeve into the dough kneading 
machine on the floor below. But in cases where it is desired merely 
to sift and blend flour ready for future use, it may be received in a 
worm and elevated again to the storage floor by an ordinary belt 
and bucket elevator. The water required for doughing purposes is 
contained in an iron ank, fixed to the wall in convenient proximity 
to the dough kneader. This tank, known as a water attemperating 
and measuring tank, is provided with a gauge and thermometer, 
and from it the exact quantity of water needed for doughing can be 
rapidly drawn off at the desired temperature. The cold water supply 
may be let into the tank at the top, and the hot water supply at 
the bottom, the idea being that each supply shall permeate the 
whole mass by gravity, the hot water ascending and the cold descend- 
ing. The chief types of dough kneader will be described subse- 
quently, but here it should be noted that not only have machines 
been devised for cutting out the exact sizes of dough required for 
small goods, such as buns and tartlets, but that the operations of 
weighing and dividing dough for quartern and half-quartern loaves 
r a also be neatly and economically effected by machinery. Further, 
it least two machines have been built which successfully mould 
loaves (of simple shape), and the problem of moulding household 
bread by machinery has certainly been solved, but whether delicate 
twists and other fancy _ shapes could be equally well moulded 
mechanically is less certain. 

The machine bakery, however complete, is not likely ever to be 
quite automatic and continuous like a modern flour mill, where the 
plant is connected throughout and virtually forms one machine (see 
Flour and Flour Manufacture), and though the engineer has 
at least managed to effect every operation of the bakehouse by 
mechanical means, it is not yet possible to shoot a sack of flour 
into the hopper of the sifter on the top floor, and to turn it into 
bread, without any human intervention whatever, though as things 
are, the moulded dough can be put into the oven without undergoing 
actual contact with human hands. In practice, some of the machines 
mentioned above are often dispensed with, even in so-called machine 
bakeries. The flour sifter and blender is indeed found in many 
bakeries where mechanical kneaders are unknown, while not in all 
machine bakeries would be found dough weighers and dividers, still 



less moulding machines. The economical side of the argument on 
behalf of machinery is presented in the familiar shape that a properly 
equipped machine bakery can turn out better work at a lower cost 
(by dispensing with labour) , or at any rate can carryon a bigger 
trade with the same staff, ihere is plausibility in this argument, 
but it must be admitted that innumerable bakeries of capacities 
varying from 10 to 20 sacks per week are carried on more or 
less successfully without machinery of any kind, beyond perhaps a 
sifter or blender. Moreover, some of these bakehouses produce bread 
which can hardly be improved on. 

One advantage claimed for flour sifters, besides removing the 
impurities, is that by thoroughly aerating flour they cause it to 
become more " lively," in which condition it kneads more readily. 
It is also quite possible that the air which is thus incorporated with 
the dough has a stimulating effect on the yeast, causing a more 
energetic fermentation. A strong argument in favour of dough 
kneaders is their hygienic aspect. It is agreed that the operation 
of dough stirring by hand, since it involves severe labour conducted 
in a heated atmosphere, must be liable to cause contamination of 
the dough through emanations from the bodies of the operatives. In 
well-managed bakeries the utmost personal cleanliness on the part 
of the staff is exacted, but the unpleasant contingency alluded to is 
certainly possible. It is also contended that the use of machinery 
for dough kneading and batter whisking will ensure better work, in 
the sense that the mass under treatment will be more thoroughly 
worked by mechanically driven arms of iron or steel than by human 
limbs, liable to weariness and fatigue. The better worked the dough, 
the greater its power of expansion, and consequently the greater its 
bread-making value. 

The most widely known machine used in connexion with bread- 
baking, next to the sifter, is the dough kneader. The dough kneader 
is no new invention. As far back as 1760, a kind of dough Dou „ fi 
kneader was constructed in France by one Salignac. It kaesders. 
is described as consisting of a trough, inside which the 
dough was agitated by arms shaped somewhat like harrows. This 
machine is said to have been tested before a committee of the 
Academy of Sciences, who reported that in their presence dough 
had been prepared in fourteen to fifteen minutes. The bread baked 
from this dough is said to have been most satisfactory, but for some 
reason the machine never came into general use. For one thing, 
the power problem would have been almost insuperable to a baker 
in the France of those days. In general design this kneader approxi- 
mated to the machines which have since done good work in bakeries 
all the world over. Salignac was quickiy followed by another 
inventor, Cousin, also a Frenchman, who brought out in 1761, or 
thereabouts, a dough-kneading machine, which, however, had no 
better success than its predecessor. The first kneading machine 
which appears to have been in actual use in a bakery was constructed 
by a Paris baker of the name of Lembert, after whom it was called 
the Lembertine. Lembert is said to have been experimenting with 
this apparatus as early as 1796. Be that as it may, it was not brought 
out till 1810, when a prize of 1500 francs (£60) was offered by the 
Societe d'Encouragement pour l'lndustrie Nationale. This reward 
was won by Lembert, and his machine thereupon came into a certain 
amount of use in France. It is remarkable that France long re- 
mained the only country in which dough kneaders were employed, 
but even there their use was limited. 

The Fontaine, another French kneader, called after its inventor, 
was first made in 1835. It had a certain success, but has long passed 
out of use. It appears to have been a copy to a great extent of the 
Lembertine. The objection against both these machines was that 
their blades, while exercising a mixing action, were deficient in 
kneading effect. Probably the first machine which achieved the 
task of efficiently replacing the work of human arms in sponge 
breaking and dough kneading was the Boland kneader. This was 
also a French machine, and dates back to about the middle of the 
19th century. It is believed to have been first used in the Scipion 
bakery in Paris. It consists essentially of a trough, inside which 
revolve a pair of blades so arranged as to work somewhat like 
alternate screws: it is claimed for these blades that their action 
has the effect of tossing the dough backwards and forwards when it 
is slack, and of drawing it out when it happens to be stiff. It is 
further claimed that the blades are so shaped that their revolution 
has the effect of moving the dough from right to left and left to right 
in the trough: The machine is geared to give two speeds, the faster 
being suitable for sponge setting, while the slow and most powerful 
speed is intended for the doughing. The Boland machine has been 
widely adopted in other countries than France, and was certainly 
one of the first dough kneaders to be used in the United Kingdom. 
It was installed in the great Boland bakery in Dublin, where it 
proved a great success. The proprietor of this bakery, with which 
was also connected a flour mill, is said to have had his attention 
first drawn to this machine by the fact that its inventor was his 
namesake, though no relative. 

The Deliry-Desboves dough kneader, also of French _ origin, and 
in general use in France, consists essentially of a cast iron trough, 
shaped somewhat like a basin, and turning on a vertical axis. The 
kneading arms inside the trough are shaped after the pattern of a 
lyre, and have the effect of first working up and then dividing the 
dough right through the kneading process. Two helical blades, 



472 



BREAD 



which also form part of the mechanism, serve to draw out and aerate 
the dough, as effectively, it is claimed, as can be done by the most 
skilled operative. The force of the kneading operations can be 
regulated without stopping the machine. A thoroughly kneaded dough 
can, it is said, be made in this machine in twelve to fifteen minutes. 

In Great Britain the type of machine that used to be most in 
favour was the trough within which the kneading arms worked on 
horizontal axis. The trough was either open or provided with a lid. 
The kneading blades were variously shaped, but generally were 
more or less straight, and were designed to both mix and aerate the 
dough. In some cases the kneading blades were worked on a single 
axis, in others two different sets of arms worked on two axes running 
parallel to one another. Generally the kneader was geared to two 
speeds, the fast motion being most suitable for sponge setting, and 
the earlier stages cf dough-making, while the slower motion was 
intended to draw out and thoroughly aerate the dough. To dis- 
charge the dough, the trough was tilted by means of a worm and 
worm wheel, the latter being secured to the trough. Several varia- 
tions of this type of kneader are still in use. The machine known as 
the " Universal " kneader consists of a trough set horizontally, 
within which rotate on horizontal axes a pair of blades lying in the 
same plane. These blades are curved and are geared together by 
means of differential spur wheels, with the object of running the two 
spindles at unequal speeds. The bottom of the trough is divided 
into two semi-cylindrical cavities, separated by a ridge. Each blade 
plunges into its own cavity, and the action of these arms tends, 
while pressing the dough against the sides and base of the trough, 
to bring it quickly back towards the centre. The differential speed 
has the advantage of effecting a more thorough mixing of the dough, 
as it brings together pieces of dough which have not yet been mingled, 
the blades pushing the dough from one cavity to the other. To 
hasten the kneading process it is desirable occasionally to reverse 
the motion by a turn of a hand wheel on the same shaft as the two 
pulleys. This wheel governs all the motions of the blades. The 
trough, which is set low, is tilted over, when the dough is ready, 
by an endless chain operated by a hand winch. The effort required 
for this operation is very slight, as the trough is balanced by two 
weights. The action of tilting does not interfere with the blades, 
which continue rotating until stopped by the hand wheel. The 
Universal kneader was designed to imitate as closely as possible the 
action of a pair of skilled human arms and hands, but of course 
works at a much greater speed. 

Another form of dough mixer which is extensively used consists 
simply of a drum made of sheet steel supported by two A-shaped 
standards at a sufficient height from the floor to allow a trough to be 
run underneath to receive the dough when ready for the moulding 
board. In this drum are two tight-fitting doors. The interior is 
fitted with no blades or knives, but presents a free cylindrical space, 
with the sole exception that, set not very far from the circumference, 
there are several fixed rods passing from one side of the drum to the 
other. These act as mixers of the dough. The door is opened and 
the flour and water poured in, whereupon the door is again fastened 
and the drum is made to rotate. As the rotation proceeds, the 
dough begins to form, and being lifted up by the revolving drum 
falls by its own weight. In this process, which is repeated again and 
again, the dough is caught by and tumbled over by the rods, which 
act as mixers and take the place of the revolving arms of the trough 
kneader. The kneading action of the rotating arms is absent, but 
the steady tumbling over these rods appears to have a thorough 
mixing effect, and the dough is discharged from the drum in good 
condition for moulding. The time occupied for making a dough by 
this apparatus varies from four to six minutes. The advantages 
claimed for this machine are that it consumes comparatively little 
power, and that there is not so much danger of " felling " or over- 
kneading dough as in some of the machines with revolving blades. 
The compactness of this rotating drum mixer, often known as the 
Rotary mixer, recommends it on shipboard and in other places 
where space is limited. 

In the earlier days of machine bakeries the accurate dividing of 
dough, and still more the moulding of loaves by mechanical means, 
Doutth was cons idered an unattainable ideal. The first step in 

divid-rs tn ' s direction was made by the Lewis-Pointon dough 
gnd " divider and weigher, which was intended for dividing and 

moulders, weighing out dough ready for the moulding table. In an 
ordinary way a baker who wishes to bake a batch of half- 
quartern or 2- lb loaves scales off 2 lb 2 oz. of dough for each loaf. 
The 2 oz. are a sort of insurance against light weight. The evapora- 
tion of moisture from dough in the oven is bound to reduce to some 
extent the weight of the baked loaf, but with normally baked bread, 
2 lb 2 oz. in the case of half-quarterns, and 4 lb 4 oz. in the case of 
quartern loaves, is sufficient to ensure full weight. As the accurate 
scaling of dough requires some pains and trouble, it would be sur- 
prising if hand scaling were always accurate. The Lewis-Pointon 
machine can, it is claimed, be set to turn out lumps of dough of the 
exact weight required either for i-lb, 2-lb, or 4-Ib loaves. The 
apparatus does not measure the dough by weight but by volume 
by an ingenious piston arrangement. The machine when first put 
on the market was a little complicated, but its mechanism has since 
been simplified. It has been successfully worked on doughs of all 
descriptions, ranging from the tightest to those made with 20 



gallons of water to the sack. The same firm which brought out this 
dough divider has also produced a dough-moulding machine, which 
has a wide range of work. In this apparatus the dough is introduced 
between a trough and a revolving table at a point on the outer 
periphery of the latter. The order of things observed in hand 
moulding is here reversed, as the trough, unlike the hand, is fixed, 
while the table revolves around a vertical axis. This table is sharply 
coned, and can be made to work the dough as much or as little as 
may be required. In working dough for tin or Coburg loaves only 
one trough is used, but for cottage loaves two parallel troughs are 
fitted, one taking the lower and the other the upper half of the loaf. 
In the latter case, a single piece of dough is fed into the machine 
and passed through an automatic splitter, the two portions being 
automatically carried into the troughs and simultaneously delivered 
at the other side of the machine ready to be put together. With 
doughs which require " handing-up," two machines may be used 
for moulding, the dough being automatically fed from the divider 
to the handing-up machine, and after a short proof passed through 
the finisher. But the moulding machine may also be used as a 
" hander-up." 

Another ingenious dough moulder, known as the Baker-Callow, 
works on a rather different principle. Here the pieces of dough 
coming from the divider are fed into the moulder by a canvas band, 
and are worked between a large cylindrical roller and a vertically 
running canvas and leather belt. To prevent pieces from dropping 
through, and to assist the moulding process, a smaller roller is 
placed under and between the cylindrical roller and canvas belt. 
A wooden puncher also assists in working the loaves, which are 
finished by being rolled between a band and a special shaped wooden 
moulding. This machine delivers the dough in spherical shaped 
pieces. If intended for cottage bread they are at once placed on 
the dough table at the side, and one piece is put on the top of the 
other ready for the oven. It is claimed the machine will deal equally 
well with large and small pieces at the same time, so that the tops 
and bottoms can be made together. Should the machine be intended 
for tinned bread, a special attachment is used, into which the 
spherical pieces are delivered from the machine and rolled into 
cylindrical shapes, ready to be dropped into the pan. A capacity of 
sixty loaves per minute is claimed for this moulder. 

Ovens. — The ordinary baker's oven is a vaulted chamber, about 
10 ft. in length, by 8 ft. in width and 30 in. in height ; it is constructed 
of brick or stone, and has a small door in front through which the 
oven is charged (by means of a " peel " or long wooden shovel) and 
the batch withdrawn. The furnace and fire-grate are often placed 
at the side of the oven door, but with the oldest ovens, which were 
heated by wood, there generally was only one door for the fuel and 
for the bread. Whether the furnace is heated by coal, as is usual in 
England, or by coke, as is often the case in Scotland, the oven 
mouth remains in the bakehouse itself; hence the stoking and 
scuffling must be carried out within the bakehouse. This is in many 
ways objectionable. For one thing, the fuel must almost of necessity 
be kept in the bakehouse itself, and it is obvious that the products 
of combustion are liable to get into the oven. In the old type of 
oven a flue was frequently placed on the other side of the furnace 
door, both furnace and flue being on the front of the oven. After 
firing the furnace, the oven is allowed to " lie down " for a certain 
time, and secure an even distribution of heat. The furnace and flue 
are then shut, and the oven charged, the batch being baked by the 
heat stored within the oven chamber. With ovens of this type, 
each batch of bread requires a separate firing. This kind of oven 
has undergone several improvements of detail, but the principle of 
internal heating, that is, of firing the furnace inside the bakehouse, 
has remained unchanged. 

A new era in bakers' ovens began about the middle of the 19th 
century with the introduction of the " Perkins " oven, a system 
which, with slight modifications, has persisted till to-day. In this 
oven the baking chamber is heated by steam pipes. The latter 
consist of tubes of iron or mild steel which are partly filled with 
water and are hermetically sealed by welded ends. The pipes are 
arranged in two parallel rows, the one at the crown and the other 
at the sole of the oven. The pipes project at one end into the furnace, 
which is set at the back of the oven and is usually outside the bake- 
house. This is termed an externally heated oven. As the ends of 
the pipes get red hot the water is converted into superheated steam, 
which being under high pressure soon raises the chamber to baking 
heat, say 450° to 500° F. In an oven of this description the heat 
can be continuously maintained, and batch after batch can be baked 
without refiring. The only drawback is that a flash heat cannot be 
raised. In another type of externally fired oven the heat is conveyed 
by flues placed at the bottom and top of the oven, which discharge 
into a chimney. Excellent results have been attained with ovens 
of this kind. The distribution of the heat can be well regulated ; 
for instance, it is quite possible to build ovens to be cooler at the 
back than front, an arrangement which is useful when the bread is 
withdrawn by means of a hand peel. As the baker has to withdraw 
each loaf one at a time, it is clear that the withdrawal of the batch 
through the oven door must take time, probably not less than half- 
an-hour. Hence the bread drawn from near the oven's mouth may 
be underbaked as compared with that at the back of the chamber. The 
latter, on the other hand, may be overbaked and deficient in weight. 



BREAD ALBANE 



473 



By means of a draw-plate, however, an oven can be expeditiously 
charged. This appliance consists of a sliding plate or tray, mounted 
on wheels running on rails, which is drawn out of the oven loaded 
with bread, and then returned. The plate itself is often made of 
iron, but one well-knpwn oven is fitted with a withdrawable iron 
frame, in which are laid, edge to edge, tiles of a special make, which 
are cemented in place, and form a continuous baking surface. This 
seems an excellent arrangement, as the baker has all the advantages 
of a brick oven, that is to say, his bread is baked both on top and 
bottom by heat evolved from tiled surfaces, and the undoubted 
drawbacks incidental to baking bread on an iron surface are avoided. 
A draw-plate fitted to an oven capable of baking a batch made from 
a sack (280 lb) of flour can be run out, charged and run in again, in 
about two minutes. The draw-plate has the incidental advantage, 
by expediting the loading and discharge of the oven, of ensuring a 
more uniform baking of the batch, and therefore of minimizing the 
loss of weight. Some bakers have gone so far as to estimate the 
saving in this respect from the use of a draw-plate at half an ounce 
per 2-lb loaf. With decker ovens a double draw-plate may be used, 
the feet of the pedestal supporting the upper draw-plate running 
on a rail outside, but parallel to the rail on which the lower draw- 
plate runs. This arrangement, however, is more applicable to small 
than large ovens. Or the lower oven may be fitted with a draw-plate 
while the upper oven is served with a peel. The draw-plate being at 
a lower level than the sole of an ordinary oven, the upper deck may 
be worked with a peel without much difficulty. 

The decker oven is, as its name implies, an oven built over another 
oven: in fact, sometimes a tier of three ovens is employed, placed 
•one above the other. The object is to secure a double or treble baking 
surface without a very much larger outlay on fuel than would be 
necessary for one oven. It is easy to understand that a double or 
three decker oven might be constructed under conditions where it 
would be impossible to place two or three ordinary ovens side by side. 
Practical bakers are somewhat divided as to the actual economy of 
the decker system; possibly it is a question of management. The 
upper oven is heated by the gases which have passed under the oven 
beneath. A double-decker oven on the flue principle could be heated 
by three flues, one beneath the lower oven, another passing between 
the crown of the lower and the sole of the top oven, and the third 
over the crown of the upper oven. If a third oven were built over 
the second, then a fourth flue would pass over the crown of the third 
and top oven. In such an arrangement of flues the distribution of 
heat to the ovens would be fairly equal, but no doubt the lower 
oven would be the hottest. In addition to the flues, which should be 
straight and accessible for cleaning, there ought also to be auxiliary 
flues by which heat may be allowed to pass dampers to the upper 
portions of the series of ovens. In this way the heat of the upper 
oven or ovens can be regulated independently to a great extent of 
the bottom oven. The power of regulating the heat of the ovens 
is very necessary, because a baker doing what is called a mixed trade, 
that is to say, producing cakes and pastry in addition to bread, must 
work his ovens at varying temperatures. Cakes cannot be baked at 
the heat (about 450 F.) required by a batch of household bread. 
The richest fancy goods, such as wedding and Christmas cakes, 
require the coolest ovens. Flue ovens are best worked with coke, 
as coal is apt to choke the flues; retort coke is recommended in 
place of oven coke. An oven should be fitted with some kind of 
thermal register, and both high-temperature thermometers and 
pyrometers are used for this purpose. (G. F. Z.) 

BREADALBANE, JOHN CAMPBELL, ist Earl of (c. 1636- 
1717), son of Sir John Campbell of Glenorchy, Bart., and of the 
Lady Mary Graham, daughter of William, earl of Airth and 
Menteith, was born about 1636. He took part in the abortive 
royalist rising under Glencairn in 1654, and was one of those who 
urged Monk to declare a free parliament in England to facilitate 
the restoration. He sat in the Scottish parliament as member for 
Argyllshire from 1669 to 1674. As principal creditor he obtained 
in October 1672, from George, 6th earl of Caithness, a conveyance 
of his dignities, lands and heritable jurisdictions; and after the 
Iatter's death he was created on the 28th of June 1677 earl of 
Caithness and viscount of Breadalbane. In 1678 he married 
the widowed countess of Caithness, an economical step which 
saved him the alimentary provision of 12,000 merks a year he 
had covenanted to pay. In 1680 he invaded Caithness with a 
band of 700 men and defeated and dispossessed the earl's heir 
male. The latter, however, was subsequently confirmed in his 
lands and titles, and Campbell on the 13th of August 168 1 
obtained a new patent with the precedency of the former one, 
creating him earl of Breadalbane and Holland, viscount of Tay 
and Paintland, Lord Glenorchy, Benederaloch, Ormelie and 
Weick in the peerage of Scotland, with special power to nominate 
his successor from among the sons of his first wife. In 1685 
he was a member of the Scottish privy council. Though nomin- 
ally a Presbyterian he had assisted the intolerant and despotic 



government of Lauderdale in 1678 with 1700 men. He is 
described as having " neither honour nor religion but where 
they are mixed with interest," as of " fair complexion, of the 
gravity of the Spaniard, cunning as a Fox, wise as a Serpent and 
supple as an Eel." : He was reputed the best headpiece in Scot- 
land. 2 His influence, owing to his position and abilities, was 
greater than that of any man in Scotland after Argyll, and it 
was of high moment to King William to gain him and obtain 
his services in conciliating the Highlanders. Breadalbane at 
first carried on communications with Dundee and was implicated 
in the royalist intrigue called the " Montgomery plot," but after 
the battle of Killiecrankie in July 1689 he made overtures to the 
government, subsequently took the oath of allegiance, and was 
entrusted with a large sum of money by the government to secure 
the submission of the clans. On the 30th of June 1691 he met 
the Jacobite chiefs and concluded with them secret articles by 
which they undertook to refrain from acts of hostility till October, 
gaining their consent by threats and promises rather than by the 
distribution of the money entrusted to him, the greater part of 
which, it was believed, he retained himself. When asked to give 
an account of the expenditure he replied: " The money is spent, 
the Highlands are quiet, and this is the only way of accounting 
between friends." 3 

On the 27th of August a proclamation was issued offering 
indemnity to all those who should submit and take the oath of 
allegiance before the ist of January 1692, and threatening all 
those who should refuse with a military execution and the 
penalties of treason. All the chiefs took the oath except Maclan, 
the chief of the MacDonalds of Glencoe, who postponed his 
submission till the 31st of December, and was then prevented 
from taking the oath till the 6th of January 1692 through the 
absence of a magistrate at Fort William, whither he had repaired 
for the purpose. This irregularity gave Breadalbane an 
immediate opportunity of destroying the clan of thieves which 
had for generations lived by plundering his lands and those of 
his neighbours. Accordingly, together with Argyll and Sir John 
Dalrymple (afterwards Lord Stair), Breadalbane organized the 
atrocious crime known as the " Massacre of Glencoe," when the 
unfortunate MacDonalds, deceived by assurances of friendship, 
and at the moment when they were lavishing their hospitality 
upon their murderers, were butchered in cold blood on the 13th 
of February 1692. Breadalbane's astuteness, however, prevented 
the disclosure of any evidence against him in the inquiry after- 
wards instituted in 1695, beyond the deposition of a person who 
professed to have been sent on Breadalbane's behalf to obtain 
a declaration of his innocence from Maclan's sons, who had 
escaped. The discovery of his former negotiations with the 
Jacobite chiefs caused his imprisonment in Edinburgh .Castle 
in September, but he was released when it was known that he had 
been acting with William's knowledge. 

Breadalbane did not vote for the Union in 1707, but was chosen 
a representative peer in the parliament of Great Britain of 1713- 
1 7 1 5 . His co-operation with the English governmen t i n securing 
the temporary submission .of the Highlands was inspired by no 
real loyalty or allegiance, and he encouraged the attempted 
French descent in 1708, refusing, however, to commit himself 
to paper. On the occasion of the Jacobite rising in 1715 he 
excused himself on the 19th of September from obeying the 
summons to appear at Edinburgh on the ground of his age and 
infirmities; but nevertheless the next day visited Mar's camp 
at Logierait and afterwards the camp at Perth, his real business 
being, according to the Master of Sinclair, " to trick others, 
not to be trickt," and to obtain a share of the French subsidies. 
He had taken money for the whole 1 200 men he had promised and 
only sent 300. His 300 men were withdrawn after the battle 
of Sheriff muir, and his death, which took place on the 19th of 
March 171 7, rendered unnecessary any inquiry into his conduct. 
He married (1) Mary, daughter of Henry Rich, ist earl of Holland, 

1 Memoirs of John Macky (Roxburghe Club, 1895), 121. 

2 Corr. of Col. N. Hooke (Roxburghe Club, 1870), i. 49. 

3 Note by Sir W. Scott in Sinclair's Mem. of Insurrection in 
Scotland (Abbotsford Club, 1858), 185. 



474 



BREADALBANE— BREAD-FRUIT 



by whom he had two sons, Duncan, styled Lord Ormelie, who was 
passed over in the succession, and John, 2nd earl of Breadalbane; 
(2) Mary, daughter of Archibald, marquis of Argyll, and widow 
of George, 6th earl of Caithness, by whom he had one son, 
Colin. By Mrs Mildred Littler, who has sometimes but probably 
in error been named as his third wife, he had a daughter, Mary. 
John Campbell, 2nd earl of Breadalbane (1662-1752), an 
eccentric nobleman, who was known as " Old Rag," was suc- 
ceeded by his only son, John (c. 1696-1782). This earl was a 
diplomatist, being British ambassador to Denmark and to 
Russia, and a politician, being for a long time a member of the 
House of Commons and a supporter of Sir Robert Walpole, 
in addition to holding several official positions. All his sons 
having predeceased their father, the title passed on his death, 
on the 26th of January 1782, to a cousin, John (1762-1834), 
who became 4th earl and was created a British peer as marquess 
of Breadalbane in 1831. His son John, the 2nd marquess (1796- 
1862), a prominent leader of the Free Church during the ecclesi- 
asticahdisputes in Scotland, died without sons in November 1862. 
The marquessate now became extinct, but the Scottish earldom 
passed to a cousin John Alexander (1824-1871), whose son and 
successor, Gavin (b. 1851), was created marquess of Breadalbane 
in 1885. 

BREADALBANE, a large district of Perthshire, Scotland, 
bordered N. by Atholl, E. by Strathtay, S. by Strathearn and 
W. by the districts of Argyll and Lome, and occupying some 
1020 sq. m. Most of the surface is mountainous, Ben Lawers 
(3984 ft.), Ben More (3843), and Ben Lui (3708), being the prin- 
cipal hills. Loch Tay is the chief lake, and among the rivers are 
the Orchy, Dochart, Lochay, Lyon, Almond and the Tay (during 
the early part of its course). Population mostly centres in 
Aberfeldy, Fortingal, Kenmore and Killin. The soil is not 
cultivable excepting in some of the glens and straths. Game 
is plentiful, the lakes and rivers afford good sport, and the deer 
forests and shootings are valuable. The district has given the 
titles of earl and marquess to the Campbells of Glenorchy. 

BREAD-FRUIT. This most important food staple of the 
tropical islands in the Pacific Ocean is the fruit of Artocarpus 
incisa (nat. ord. Moraceae) . The tree attains a moderate height, 
has very large, acutely lobed, glossy leaves, the male flowers 
in spikes, and the female flowers in a dense head, which by con- 
solidation of their fleshy carpels and receptacles form the fruit. 
The fruit is globular in shape, about the size of a melon, with a 
tuberculated or (in some varieties) nearly smooth surface. Many 
varieties of the tree are cultivated, the fruits of some ripening 
numerous seeds, which are eaten as chestnuts; but in the best 
kinds the seeds are aborted, and it is only these that are highly 
prized as vegetables. The tree is a native of the South Sea 
Islands, where its fruit occupies the important position that is 
held by cereals in temperate latitudes. The fruit, which on dis- 
tinct varieties ripens at different periods, affording a nearly 
constant supply throughout the year, is gathered for use just 
before it ripens, when it is found to be gorged with starchy 
matter, to which its esculent value is due. It may be cooked 
and prepared for use in a great variety of ways, the common 
practice in the South Sea Islands being to bake it entire in hot 
embers, and scoop out the interior, which when properly cooked 
should have a soft smooth consistence, fibrous only towards 
the heart, with a taste which has been compared to that of 
boiled potatoes and sweet milk. Of this fruit A. R. Wallace, 
in his Malay Archipelago, says: " With meat and gravy it is a 
vegetable superior to anything I know either in temperate or 
tropical countries. With sugar, milk, butter or treacle it is a 
delicious pudding, having a very slight and delicate but char- 
acteristic flavour, which, like that of good bread and potatoes, one 
never gets tired of." In the Pacific Islands the fruit is preserved 
for use by storing in pits, where the fruits ferment and resolve 
themselves into a mass similar in consistency to new cheese, 
in which state they emit an offensive odour; but after baking 
under hot stones they yield a pleasant and nutritious food. 
Another and more common method of preserving the fruit 
for use consists in cutting it into thin slices, which are dried 



in the sun. From such dried slices a flour is prepared which fs 
useful for the preparation of puddings, bread and biscuits, or 
the slices are baked and eaten without grinding. The tree 
yields other products of economic value, such as native cloth 
from the fibrous inner bark of young trees; the wood is used 
for canoes and articles of furniture; and a kind of glue and 
caulking material are obtained from the viscid milky juice 
which exudes from incisions made in the stem. 

The bread-fruit is found throughout the tropical regions of 
both hemispheres, and its first introduction into the West Indies 
is connected with the famous mutiny of the " Bounty," and the 
remarkable history of a small company of the mutineers at 
Pitcairn Island. Attention was directed to the fruit in 1688 by 




Artocarpus incisa, the Bread-fruit tree. 
Fig. I. Branch reduced about a 6th Fig. 5. Female flowers. 

natural size, with cuneate-ovate Fig. 6. Single female flower 
pinnatifid leaves, male flowers in a separated, with ovary, 

club-shaped deciduous catkin, and style and bifid stigma, 

female flowers in rounded clusters. Fig. 7. Ovary. 
Fig. 2. Transverse section of the Fig. 8. Ovary laid open to 

male spike with numerous flowers. show the ovule. 

Fig. 3. Male flowers. Fig. 9. A variety of the ovary 

Fig. 4. Single male flower separated, with 2 loculaments. 

with a perianth in 2 segments and Fig. 10. Transverse section of 
a single stamen. a bilocular ovary. 

Captain Dampier, and later by Captain Cook, who recommended 
its transplantation to the West Indian colonies. In 1787 the 
" Bounty " was fitted out under command of Lieutenant 
William Bligh {q.v.) to proceed to Tahiti to carry plants thence 
to the West Indian Islands; and it was after the cargo had been 
secured and the vessel was on her way that the mutiny broke 
out, and Lieutenant Bligh and some of his crew were turned 
adrift in a small boat in the open sea. The mutineers returned 
with the vessel to Tahiti, whence a number of them, with a few 
native men and women, sailed to the desolate and lone islet of 
Pitcairn. Lieutenant Bligh ultimately reached England, and was 
again commissioned to undertake the work of transplanting the 
plants, which in the year 1 79 2-1 793 he successfully accomplished. 

A somewhat similar but inferior fruit is produced by an allied 
species, the Jack or Jak, Artocarpus integrifolia, growing in 
India, Ceylon and the Eastern Archipelago. The large fruit 



BREAKING BULK— BREAKWATER 



475 



is from 12 to 18 in. long by 6 to 8 in. in diameter, and is much 
eaten by the natives in India. This tree is chiefly valuable on 
account of its timber, which has a grain very similar to mahogany, 
and although at first light-coloured it gradually assumes much 
of the appearance of that wood. 

BREAKING BULK, a nautical term for the taking out of a 
portion of the cargo of a ship, or the beginning to unload; and 
used in a legal sense for taking anything out of a package or 
parcel, or in any way destroying its entirety. It was thus 
important in connexion with the subject of bailment, involving 
as it did the curious distinction that where a bailee received 
possession of goods in a box or package, and then sold them as a 
whole, he was guilty only of a breach of trust, but if he " broke 
bulk " or caused a separation of the goods, and sold a part or 
all, he was guilty of felony. This distinction was abolished by 
the Larceny Act 1861, which enacted that whoever, being a 
bailee of any chattel, money or valuable security, should fraudu- 
lently take or convert the same to his own use, or the use of any 
person other than the owner, although he should not break bulk 
or otherwise determine the bailment, should be guilty of larceny 

(s- 3). 

BREAKWATER. When a harbour (g.v.) is proposed to be 
established on an exposed coast, whether for naval or commercial 
purposes, to provide a protected approach to a port or river, 
or to serve as a refuge for vessels from storms, the necessary 
shelter, so far as it is not naturally furnished by a bay or project- 
ing headlands, has to be secured by the construction of one or 
more " breakwaters." These breakwaters, having to prevent 
the waves that beat upon the coast from reaching the site which 
they are designed to protect, must be made sufficiently strong 
to withstand the shocks of the waves during the worst storms 
to which they are exposed. It is therefore essential, before 
constructing a breakwater, to investigate most carefully the 
force, periods and duration of the winds from the quarters to 
which the work will be exposed, the distance of any sheltering 
land from the site in the most stormy direction, the slope of the 
beach and the depth of the sea in the neighbourhood of the 
shore, and the protection, if any, afforded by outlying shoals 
or sandbanks. In a tidal sea, the height required for a break- 
water is affected by the amount of tidal range; and the extent 
of breakwater exposed to breaking waves depends upon the 
difference in level between low and high water. The existence, 
also, of any drift of sand or shingle along the shore must be 
ascertained, and its extent; for the projection of a solid break- 
water out from the shore is certain to affect this littoral drift, 
which, if large in amount, may necessitate important modifica- 
tions in the design for the harbour. 

Observations of the force and prevalence of the winds from the 
different quarters at the various periods of the year, and the 
instruments by which they are recorded, belong to the 
science of meteorology ; but such records are very 
valuable to the maritime engineer in indicating from which 
directions, open to the sea, the worst storms, and, consequently, 
the greatest waves, may be expected, and against which the most 
efficient shelter has to be provided. Moreover, it is necessary, 
.for constructing or repairing a breakwater, to know the period 
of the year when the calmest weather may be safely anticipated, 
and also the stormy season during which no work should be 
attempted, and in preparation for which unfinished works have 
to be guarded by protective measures. In the parts of the 
world subject to periodical winds, such as the monsoons, the 
direction and force of the winds vary with remarkable regularity 
according to the seasons; and even such uncertain occurrences 
as hurricanes and cyclones generally visit the regions in their 
track at definite periods of the year, according to the locality. 
Even in western Europe, where the winds are extremely variable, 
violent gales are much more liable to beat upon the western and 
northern coasts in the winter months than at any other period 
of the year; whilst the calmest weather may be expected 
between May and August. 

The size of waves depends upon the force of the wind, and the 
distance along which it blows continuously, in approximately 



Winds. 



Waves. 



the same direction, over a large expanse of ocean. The greatest 
waves are, accordingly, encountered where the maximum distance 
in a certain direction from the nearest land, or, as it is 
termed, the " fetch," coincides with the line travelled 
by the strongest gales. The dimensions, indeed, of waves in 
the worst storms depend primarily on the extent of the sea in 
which they are raised; though in certain seas they are occasion- 
ally greatly increased by the exceptional velocities attained by 
hurricanes and typhoons, which, however, are fortunately 
restricted to fairly well defined and limited regions. Waves 
have been found to attain a maximum height of about 10 ft. 
in the Lake of Geneva, 17 ft. in the Mediterranean Sea, 23 ft. in 
the Bay of Biscay, and 40 ft. in the Atlantic Ocean; whilst 
waves of 50 to 60 ft. in height have been observed in the Pacific 
Ocean off the Cape of Good Hope, where the expanse of sea 
reaches a maximum, and the exposure to gales is complete. The 
length of large waves bears no definite relation to their height, 
and is apparently due, in the long waves often observed in 
exposed situations, to the combination of several shorter waves 
in their onward course, which is naturally dependent on the 
extent of the exposure. Thus waves about 560 ft. in length 
have been met with during severe gales in the Atlantic Ocean; 
whilst waves from 600 to 1000 ft. long are regarded as of common 
occurrence in the Pacific Ocean during storms. 

The rate of transmission of the undulation also varies with 
the exposure; for the ordinary velocity of the apparent travel 
of waves in storms has been found to amount to about 22 m. 
an hour in the Atlantic Ocean, and to attain about 27 m. an hour 
off Cape Horn. The large waves, however, observed in mid-ocean 
do not reach the coast, because their progress is checked, and 
their height and length reduced, by encountering the shelving 
sea-bottom, which diminishes the depth of water on approaching 
the shore; and the actual waves which have to be arrested by 
breakwaters depend on the exposure of the site, the existence 
of continuous deep water close up to the shore, and the depth 
in which the breakwater is situated. On the other hand, the 
height, and, consequently, the destructive force of waves, is 
increased on running up a funnel-shaped bay, by the increasing 
concentration of the waves in the narrowing width, just as the 
tidal range of a moderate tidal current is much augmented by 
its passage up the Bay of Fundy, or up the Bristol Channel into 
the Severn estuary, or by filling the shallow enclosed bay of 
St Malo. This effect is intensified when the bay faces the 
direction of the strongest winds. Thus at Wick a mass of 
masonry weighing 1350 tons, placed at the head of the break- 
water projecting half-way across the bay and facing the entrance, 
was moved by the waves during a violent storm; and a portion 
of Peterhead breakwater, weighing 3300 tons, was shifted 2 in. 
in 1898, indicating a wave-stroke of 2 tons per sq. ft. South- 
westerly gales, blowing up the Gulf of Genoa, cause large waves 
to roll into the bay, reaching a height of about 21 ft. in the 
worst storms. 

Where outlying sandbanks stretch in front of a coast, as for 
instance the Stroombank in front of Ostend and the adjacent 
shore, and the sandbanks opposite Yarmouth sheltering Yar- 
mouth Roads, large waves cannot approach the land, for they 
break on the sandbanks outside. Waves, indeed, always break 
when, on running up a shoaling beach, they reach a depth 
approximately equal to their height; and the largest waves 
which can reach a shore protected by intervening sandbanks, 
are those which are low enough to pass over the banks without 
breaking. 

The force of the wind, as transmitted by degrees to the sea, 
is manifested as a series of progressing undulations without any 
material displacement of the body of water, each undulation 
transmitting its accumulated force to the next in the direction 
the wind is blowing, till at last, on encountering an obstacle to 
its onward course, each wave, no longer finding any water to 
which to communicate its energy, deals a blow against the 
obstacle proportionate to its size and rate of transmission; or 
on reaching shoal water near the shore, the undulation is finally 
transformed into a breaking wave rushing up the sloping beach, 



476 



BREAKWATER 



till, on its energy being spent, it recoils back to the sea down the 
beach. A breaking wave concentrates its transmitted force on 
a portion of the water forming the undulation, which, conse- 
quently, strikes a more powerful blow over a limited area 
against any structure than the more distributed shock of a 
simple undulation beating against a vertical wall. Moreover, 
the recoil of broken waves down a sloping beach or rubble 
mound produces a greater scour than the simple reflection of an 
undulation from a vertical wall, especially where the depth is 
sufficient to provide a cushion of water below the undulation, 
protecting the toe of the wall from the wash of recoil. 

Types of Breakwaters. — There are three distinct types of 
breakwaters: — (i) A simple rubble or concrete-block mound; 
(2) a mound for the bottom portion, surmounted on the top 
by a solid superstructure of masonry or concrete; and (3) an 
upright-wall breakwater, built up solid from the sea-bottom to 
the top. The second type forms a sort of combination of the 
first and third types; and each type presents several varieties. 
In a few harbours, two different types have been adopted for 
different situations at the same place; but generally the choice 
of type is determined by the materials available at the site for 
the construction of the breakwater, the nature of the sea-bottom 
and the depth into which the breakwater has to be carried. 

I. Rubble and Concrete-Block Mound Breakwaters. — A rubble 
mound consists merely of a mass of rubble stone, just as it is obtained 
R hhl from a neighbouring quarry, tipped into the sea along a 

" e . predetermined line, till the mound emerges out of water. 
moun . rj.^ e ruD ble stone is deposited, either from barges, as 
adopted for the construction of the detached breakwater sheltering 
Plymouth Bay, or from wagons, having hinged opening flaps at the 
bottom for dropping their load, run out from the shore along staging 
erected in the proposed line, according to the method employed for 
the outer breakwater enclosing Portland Harbour, and the north-east 
breakwater at Colombo Harbour. The mound thus deposited is 
gradually consolidated under the action of the sea ; and a tolerably 
stable form is by degrees attained by continued deposits of stone. 
This system of construction is very wasteful of materials, and can 
only be resorted to where extensive quarries close at hand are able 
to furnish readily and cheaply very large quantities of stone, especi- 
ally where, as at Portland and Table Bay, convict labour has been 
advantageously utilized in quarrying. When the site is very exposed, 
the large waves in storms, dashing over a rubble-mound breakwater, 
carry the stones on the top, if unprotected, over on to the harbour 
slope, and in recoiling down the outer slope, draw down the stones 
on the face, so that the top and sea slope of the mound need re- 
plenishing with a fresh deposit of stones after severe storms. 

Under the action of the breaking and recoiling waves, the mound 
assumes a very flat slope on the sea side, from a few feet above high- 
water down to several feet below low- wafer level (fig. 1). The flatness 



H.W.O.S.T 



Concrete 

blocks 

with 

rubble 

mound. 



Practically the chief point of importance is to cover the outer slope 
and the top of the mound with the largest stones that can be pro- 
cured, and where large stones are not readily obtainable 
concrete blocks furnish a very convenient substitute. 
These blocks are generally deposited as the outer covering 
on the top and sea slope of a rubble mound, as for example 
at the mound breakwaters in deep water sheltering Algiers 
harbour, and at the French perts of Cette and Bona on 
the Mediterranean; whilst they furnish the protection of the top 
and upper part of the sea slope of the rubble-mound extension of 
Marseilles breakwater down to 20 ft. below sea-level. At Alexandria, 
concrete blocks compose the outer half of the mound, sheltering 
the inner half consisting of small rubble (fig. 2) ; at Biarritz the 
mound breakwater is 
formed mainly of con- 
crete blocks, with rubble 
stone filling the inter- 
stices and on the top; 
whereas at the outer end 
of the western break- 
water at Port Said, pro- 
tecting the entrance to 
the Suez Canal, a bottom 
layer of rubble is sur- 
mounted by concrete 
blocks. These blocks are generally deposited at random; but at 
Cette (fig. 3), and at the breakwater in deep water at Civita Vecchia, 
the concrete blocks covering the rubble have been laid in stepped, 
horizontal courses. This arrangement necessitates more care and 
better appliances in construction; but, in compensation, the blocks 
so placed are less exposed to disturbance and injury by the waves. 

Concrete blocks' possess the great advantages for breakwaters 
that they can be made wherever sand and shingle can be procured, 
and of a size only limited by the appliances which are available for 




Fig. 2. — Alexandria Breakwater. 





Fig. 1. — Table Bay Breakwater. 

of the sea slope depends on the exposure of the site, and the limited 
size of the stones covering the outer portion of the mound; and 
its extent increases with the range of tide, as a large tidal rise exposes 
a greater length of slope to the action of the waves. This flattening 
of the sea slope greatly increases the amount of stone required for 
a rubble-mound breakwater, in proportion to the exposure and the 
range of tide; and the amount is also affected, but in a proportion- 
ately minor degree, by the depth in which the breakwater is situated. 
In order to avoid the injuries to which an ordinary rubble mound is 
subjected by waves, certain methods have been devised for protecting 
the top and sea slope of the mound. For instance, the upper portion 
of Plymouth breakwater has been covered over by granite paving 
set in cement, to diminish the displacement of the stones by the 
waves. Frequently, on the continent of Europe, rubble mounds 
have been formed of materials so sorted that the smallest stones are 
placed in the centre of the lower part of the mound, and covered 
over along the slopes and top by layers of larger stones, increasing 
in size towards the outer part of the mound, so that the largest stones 
obtainable are deposited on the outside, and especially on the top 
and sea slope of the mound. This is, no doubt, theoretically the 
correct method of construction of rubble mounds exposed to the 
sea ; but it involves a considerable amount of trouble and expense. 



Fig. 3. — Cette Breakwater. 

handling them. In fact, in places where stone of any kind is difficult 
to procure at a reasonable cost, as for instance at Port Said, concrete 
blocks are indispensable for the construction of breakwaters. Large 
concrete blocks, moreover, by enabling a comparatively steep slope 
to be formed with them on the sea side of a mound breakwater, 
reduce considerably the amount of materials required, especially 
at exposed sites, and also for breakwaters extended into deep water, 
such as those of Algiers and Marseilles. 

Occasionally, in the absence of suitable rubble stone, a mound 

breakwater has been formed 
entirely with concrete blocks; 
and of this the main 
portion of the western 
breakwater at Port 
Said furnishes a 
notable example (fig. 4). Some- 
times, in exposed situations, the 
mounds of the composite type 
of breakwaters have been con- 
structed exclusively with con- 
crete blocks, such, for instance, 
as in the curved breakwater 



Concrete 

block 

mound. 



protecting the outer harbour at Leghorn, and in the central break- 
water in deep water sheltering the harbour of St Jean de Luz, and 
directly facing the Bay of Biscay. These large concrete blocks are 
deposited by cranes from staging, tipped into the sea from a sloping 
platform on barges, or floated out between pontoons, or slung out 
from floating derricks. This last method proved so expeditious 
for the upper blocks at 
Alexandria, that, in con- 
junction with the tipping 
of the lower blocks from 
the inclined planes on the 
decks of barges and the 

deposit of the rubble from "' •••••■•' -'v--- •■'■:■'•■;• .'•'.■. •■-■v..--.- 

hopper barges, provided 

W°w th ^ flaps f° r * he Fig. 4 .-Port Said Western Breakwater, 
higher portions, the de- ^ 

tached breakwater, nearly 2 m. long, sheltering a very spacious 

harbour, was constructed in two years (1870-1872). Sometimes, 

when a mound breakwater has been raised out of water, advantage 

is taken of a calm period of the year and a low tide to form large 

blocks of concrete within timber framing on the top of the mound, 

so as to provide a very efficient protection. 




BREAKWATER 



477 



The large masses composing mound breakwaters give them great 
stability against the attacks of the sea; and, moreover, the wide 
base of the mounds enables them to be deposited on a sandy or silty 
sea-bottom, without any fear of settlement or undermining. A 
mound breakwater, however, has the disadvantages of requiring a 
large amount of material, and of occupying a wide space on the bed 
of the sea, more especially where the mound consists of rubble 
stone and is in deep water, so that the system, though simple, is 
costly, and is unsuited for harbours where the available space to be 
sheltered is limited. Nevertheless, a mound breakwater can be 
rapidly constructed by the employment of a large number of barges ; 
and by the adoption of large concrete blocks, the quantity of 
materials and the space occupied by the mound can be considerably 
reduced. This form of breakwater, with its long outer slope exposed 
to breaking waves, particularly where the tidal range is considerable, 
is, indeed, more subject to frequent small injuries than the other 
types, but they are readily repaired ; and a mound is not generally 
liable to the serious breaches which occasionally are formed in solid 
superstructures and upright walls in exceptional storms. 

2. Breakwaters formed of a Mound surmounted by a Superstructure. 
—The second type of breakwater consists of a mound, composed of 
rubble or concrete blocks, or generally a combination of the two, 
carried up from the sea-bottom, on the top of which some form of 
solid superstructure is erected. This superstructure reduces con- 
siderably the amount of materials required (which, on account of 
the slopes of the mound, increases rapidly with the height) in pro- 
portion to the depth at which the superstructure is founded; and 
the solid capping on the mound serves also to protect the top of the 
mound from the action of the waves. In the case, however, of a 
mound breakwater, portions of the highest waves generally pass 
over the top of the mound, and also to some extent expend their 
force in passing through the interstices between the blocks ; whereas 
a superstructure presents a solid face to the impact of the waves. 
A superstructure, accordingly, must be very strongly built in 
proportion to the exposure, and also to the size of the waves liable 
to reach it, which depends upon the height andflatness of the slope 
of the mound just in front of it on the sea side. Special care, more- 
over, has to be taken to prevent the superstructure from being 
undermined ; for the waves in storms, dashing up against this nearly 
vertical, solid obstacle, tend in their recoil down the face to scour 
out the materials of the mound at the outer toe of the superstructure, 
and thereby undermine it, especially where the superstructure is 
founded on the mound near low-water level, and there is, therefore, 
no adequate cushion of water above the mound to diminish the effect 
of the recoil on the foundation. 

The mound constituting the lower portion of the composite type 
of breakwater has been formed in the same varied way as simple 
mound breakwaters, namely, of rubble, sorted rubble, rubble 
protected by concrete blocks, and wholly of concrete blocks. The 
only differences introduced in the mound in this case are, that it is 
not carried up so high, that the top portion covered by the super- 
structure needs no further protection, and that special 
protection has to be provided on the slope of the 
mound adjacent to the outer toe of the super- 
structure. 

The forms of the superstructures exhibit consider- 
able variations, ranging from a few concrete blocks 
laid in courses on the top of the mound, or 
t cT a P avm S furnishing a quay protected by a 
structures. narrow p ara p et wa n on the sea side, up to 

a large, solid structure, only differing from an upright- 
wall breakwater in being founded upon a mound, 
instead of on the sea-bottom. Notwithstanding, 
however, this great variety in design, these break- 
waters may be divided into two distinct classes, 
namely, breakwaters having their superstructures 
founded at or near low-water level, and breakwaters 
with superstructures founded some depth below low 
water. The object in the first case is to lay the foun- 
dations of the superstructure on the mound at the 
lowest level consistent with building a solid struc- 
ture with blocks set in mortar, out of water, in the ordinary 
manner; and, in the second case, to stop the raising of the 
mound at such a depth under water as to secure it from dis- 
placement by the waves. In fact, the solidity and facility of 
construction of the superstructure were the primary considerations 
in the older form of breakwater ; whereas the stability of the mound 
and the avoidance of the undermining of the superstructure have 
been regarded as the most important provisions in the more modern 
form. 

Well-known examples of breakwaters formed of a rubble mound 
surmounted by a superstructure founded at or near low water or 
sea-level, are furnished by Cherbourg and Holyhead 
breakwaters, the inner breakwater at Portland, and the 
breakwaters at Marseilles, Genoa, Civita Vecchia, Naples, 
Trieste and other Mediterranean ports. The very ex- 
posed breakwater at Alderney was commenced on this 
principle about the middle of the 19th century; and the 
outer breakwaters at Leghorn and St Jean de Luz have super- 
structures founded at low water on concrete-block mounds. 



The long, detached breakwater sheltering the series of basins 
formed by wide projecting jetties along the sea coast at Marseilles 
(see Dock), is a typical instance of a breakwater where a quay has 
been formed on the top of a sorted rubble mound, sheltered on the 
sea side by a high wall, or narrow superstructure, founded at sea- 
level, and protected on the sea slope of the mound from under- 
mining by large concrete blocks deposited at random (fig. 5). In 
this case the quay has been rendered accessible for vessels on the 
harbour side by a quay wall, formed of concrete blocks deposited 




Fig. 5. — Marseilles Breakwater, central portion. 

one above the other, providing a vertical face to a depth of about 
22 § ft. below sea-level; and a similar arrangement has been adopted 
at Trieste, and in a less effective manner at Civita Vecchia and 
Naples. At Marseilles, however, when the breakwater reached great 
depths, the quay was abandoned on account of the increased ex- 
posure, and the extension made of a simple rubble mound, protected 
on the sea side, from the top down to 20 ft. below sea-level, by large 
concrete blocks deposited at random. 

The superstructures at Holyhead and Portland, being built on 
the old weak system of a sea wall and a harbour wall, with rubble 
filling between, are protected on the sea side by raising the rubble 
against them from low water up to high water of spring tides; 
whereas the superstructure of Cherbourg breakwater, being built 
solid and less exposed, is only protected on the sea side by large 
rubble and some concrete blocks, forming an apron raised slightly 
above low water. These three breakwaters are provided with a 
quay sheltered by a raised wall or promenade on the sea side; but 
as the mound on the harbour side is raised up to, or a little above 
low water, the quay is only accessible for vessels near high water. 
This, however, is of comparatively little importance, since these 
quays, though very useful for access to the end of the breakwater in 
fairly calm weather, are inaccessible in exposed situations with a 
rough sea; and quays for the accommodation of vessels are better 
provided well within the sheltered harbour. 

The outer portions of the main breakwaters at Genoa and at 
Naples (fig. 6), extending into depths of about 75 ft. and no ft. 
respectively, have been provided with superstructures, similar in 
type, but more solid than the superstructure at Marseilles; and 
the sorted rubble mounds upon which the superstructures rest are 




Super- 
structures 
at low- 
water 
level 



Fig. 6. — San Vincenzo Breakwater, Naples. 

protected on the sea slope by stepped courses of concrete blocks 
from a depth of 26 ft. below sea-level, covered over at the top by a 
masonry apron forming a prolongation of the superstructure. The 
outer extension of the main breakwater at Civita Vecchia furnishes 
an interesting example of a composite form of breakwater, in which 
the rubble mound has been protected, and greatly reduced in 
volume and extent in deep water, by stepped courses of concrete 
blocks carried up from near the bottom of the mound (fig. 7). 

The breakwaters in front of Havre, constructed in 1 896-1 907, for 
sheltering the altered entrance to the port, were formed of a sorted 
rubble mound, protected on the sea slope by concrete blocks, and 
raised a little above low water of spring tides, upon which large 
blocks of masonry, built on land, were deposited with their upper 
surfaces about 18 in. above low water of neap tides. As soon as 
settlement of the mound under the action of the sea appeared to 
have ceased, these masonry blocks were connected together by filling 
the spaces between them with masonry; and a solid masonry 
superstructure was built during low tide on this foundation layer, as 
shown in fig. 8. 



47 8 



BREAKWATER 



The breakwaters constructed for forming harbours on the sea 
coast of the United States are almost all rubble-mound breakwaters. 
The two old detached breakwaters sheltering Delaware Harbour near 
the south-eastern extremity of Delaware Bay, were formed of simple 
rubble mounds raised about 13 ft. above low water; but in closing 
the gap between them towards the close of the 19th century, the 
rubble mound was stopped at low water, and a sort of superstructure, 
consisting of stepped courses of large rectangular blocks of stone 
on the sea and harbour sides, with tightly packed rubble between 
them and capped across the top for a width of 20 ft. with a course of 
large blocks, was raised to 14 ft. above low water, resembling, on a 




Fig. 7.— Civita Vecchia Outer Breakwater. 

small scale, the upper part of the Civita Vecchia mound (fig. 7). A 
similar construction was adopted for the new breakwater formed in 
1897-1901 forprovidinga harbour of refuge at the mouth of Delaware 
Bay ; but in this instance the mound was made considerably wider 
at the top, and had to be protected along the toe of the superstructure 
on the sea side by large stones. The same form of superstructure., 
also, on a narrower base, was resorted to for a breakwater in deeper 
water at San Pedro in California with satisfactory results. When, 
however, a breakwater of the Delaware type was in progress for 
forming a harbour of refuge in Sandy Bay, Massachusetts, in front of 
Rockport to the north of Boston, the upper 13 ft. of the 600 ft. of 
completed superstructure were carried away during a severe storm 
in 1898, leaving only a portion about 5 ft. in height above low water, 
the average rise of tide there being 8| ft. The design was, accord- 
ingly, modified in 1902, by commencing the stepped courses of large 
stones at 12 ft. below mean low water on each slope, instead of at 
low water, raising this kind of superstructure to 22 ft. above low 
water in place of 18 ft., and capping the stepped courses at the top 
by large blocks of stone, 20 ft. long and 5 ft. deep, laid across the 
breakwater, which thus presented a marked resemblance to the upper 
section of the mound at Civita Vecchia. 

The breakwater at Sandy Bay just referred to, and the one at 
Civita Vecchia, which it somewhat resembles, approximate to that 
class of breakwater which has a superstructure founded 
* Pe Jt" below low-water level, so far as stepped courses of blocks 
structure can bg regarc j e d a s forming part of a superstructure; 
beiow low- faut ag the protect j on a ff or ded by these courses differs 
w , only in the arrangement of the blocks from that ob- 

eve ' tained by blocks deposited at random.it appears expedient 

to restrict this class to the more solid structures, resembling upright- 
wall breakwaters, founded on a mound at some depth below low 
water. As the main object of this class of breakwater is to keep the 
mound below the zone of disturbance by waves in severe storms, 
it is evident that the depth at which the superstructure is founded 

should vary directly with 
the exposure of the site, 
h.w.o.s.t. anc j inversely with the 
size of the materials form- 
ing the mound. 

The depth at which 
waves striking against a 
superstructure may affect 
a rubble mound near its 
toe by the recoil, has 
been only very gradually 
realized. Thus, in 1847, 
the Alderney breakwater. 




Fig. 8. — Havre Breakwater. 



though fully exposed to the Atlantic Ocean, was begun with a super- 
structure founded at low water of spring tides upon a rubble mound ; 
but within two years the foundations had to be carried down 12 ft. 
below low water, and this was adhered to till close to the head, 
though the breakwater, completed in 1864, extended 4700 ft. from 
the shore into a depth of 130 ft. at low tide, the rise of springs being 
17 ft. The great recoil of the waves in storms from the promenade 
wall on the sea side of the superstructure, raised 33 ft. above low 
water, disturbed the sea slope of the mound along the outer portion, 
situated in depths of 80 to 130 ft. at low water, out to a distance of 
90 ft. from the superstructure and to a depth of 20 ft. ; whilst the 



outer toe of the superstructure was only preserved from being 
undermined by frequent deposits of stone along the sea face. 

The south-west breakwater at Colombo Harbour, constructed in 
1876-1884, facing the seas raised by the south-west monsoon, ex- 
tends into a depth of 39 ft. at low water, where the rise of tide is only 
2 ft. at springs, and was built with a superstructure founded upon a 
rubble mound at a depth of 20 ft. below low water, but raised only 
12 ft. above this level without any parapet, and protected along its 
sea face by an apron of concrete in bags. In this case, not only was 
the depth of the sea much less than at Alderney, but the small 
elevation of the superstructure above low water enabled a portion 
of the waves in storms to pass over it without materially 
impairing the shelter inside. These circumstances reduced 
the shock and recoil of the waves; and the greater depth 
of the foundations and the protection of the toe of the 
superstructure greatly diminished the danger of under- 
mining. Consequently, the Colombo breakwater has been 
preserved from the injuries to which the outer part of the 
Alderney breakwater succumbed. Nevertheless, in subse- 
quently constructing the north-west detached breakwater, 
less exposed to the south-west monsoon, but in somewhat 
deeper water (see Colombo), the experience of the action 
of the sea on the south-west breakwater led to the laying of 
the foundations of the superstructure on the rubble mound 
at 30I ft. below low water (fig. 9). 

The breakwater for sheltering Peterhead Bay, where the 
rise of springs is n| ft., was begun in 1888, and designed 
to extend into a depth of 9J fathoms at low water (see 
Harbour). It was built as an upright wall upon the rocky 
bottom for 1000 ft. from the shore; but owing to the 
increase in depth it was decided to construct the outer 
portion with a rubble base, surmounted by a super- 
structure originally designed to be founded 30 ft. below low water. 
As, however, during a storm in October 1898, the recoil of the waves 
from the breakwater, which is provided with a promenade wall rising 
about 35 ft. above low water, disturbed rubble to a depth of 365 ft., 
the superstructure has been founded 43 ft. below low water on the 
rubble base; and its outer toe is protected from being undermined 
by two rows of concrete blocks on the rubble mound. 

Formerly, in constructing a large superstructure upon a rubble 
mound, it was a common practice to build a sea wall and a harbour 
wall several feet apart, and to fill up the intermediate 
space between them with rubble, so as economically to 
form a wide structure on the top of the mound,and provide 
an adequate width for a quay along the top. A sheltering 
wall was also generally erected on the sea side. This, for 
instance, was the system of construction adopted for the super- 
structures, founded at low water, of Holyhead breakwater, Portland 
inner breakwater, and 
St Catherine's, Jersey, 
breakwater. Alderney 
breakwater, the Tyne 
breakwaters and Col- 
ombo south-west break- 
water were also com- 
menced with a precisely 
similar method of con- 
struction. The system, 
however, possesses a 
Very serious defect for 
exposed situations, 
namely, that if once Fig. 9. — Colombo North- West Breakwater, 
the sea can force a small 

opening through the sea wall, the scooping out of the rubble 
filling, and the overthrow of the thinner harbour wall are rapidly 
accomplished if the storm continues or recurs before repairs 
can be effected. Experience soon proved at Alderney and Tyne- 
mouth the unsuitability of the system for very exposed situations; 
and the intermediate rubble filling was replaced by solid hearting 
down to a certain depth. At Colombo, after the first 1326 ft. of 
the south-west breakwater had been built with two walls and 
intermediate rubble for the superstructure, as the exposure proved 
greater than had been anticipated, and a slight displacement of part 
of the sea wall, 24 ft. wide, had occurred, the rubble filling was dis- 
continued, and the two walls were united into a solid superstructure 
34 ft. in width. 

A difficulty experienced in constructing a solid superstructure 
on the top of a rubble mound consists in the settlement of the 
mound which takes place when the weight of the super- sioping- 
structure comes on it, in spite of the consolidation of the block 
rubble under the action of the sea for one or two years system. 
before the erection of the superstructure on it is under- 
taken. When the superstructure is carried out in long stepped- 
forward courses, irregular settlement is particularly liable to occur, 
as the weight is progressively imposed in an uneven manner on the 
yielding rubble, in proportion to the height of the rubble base and 
its deficiency in compactness. The open joints between the blocks 
laid below low water enable the air to penetrate, on the recoil of 
the waves at low tide, into any internal fissures resulting from 
settlement ; and the following wave, on striking the superstructure, 



Construc- 
tion of the 
super- 
structure. 




BREAKWATER 



479- 



compresses the air inside, which, on its expansion when the wave 
recedes, forces out any unconnected face stones. The hole thus 
formed is rapidly enlarged by the sea if the storm continues ; and a 
breach is eventually formed. The sloping-block system was, accord- 
ingly, devised to provide against the dislocation of superstructures 
by the inevitable irregular settlement, by forming them of a series 
of sloping sections, composed of concrete blocks laid at an angle, 
free to settle independently on the mound, as shown in fig. 10. 
In the first superstructure thus constructed, in 1869-1874, at the 
entrance to Karachi harbour, founded 15 ft. below low water on a 
rubble mound and 24 ft. high, the blocks in each section, consisting 
of two rows of three superposed blocks laid at an inclination of 76 
shorewards, were entirely unconnected; and, consequently, though 
the superstructure offered as little opposition as practicable to the 
waves by having its top slightly below high water, the waves in a 
storm, forcing their way into the vertical joint between the two 
rows, threw some of the top 27-ton blocks of the inner row down on 
the harbour slope of the mound. This cause of damage was obviated 
in effecting the repairs, by connecting the top blocks with the next 
ones by stone dowels. The superstructures of the breakwaters 
forming Madras harbour, commenced in 1876, were similarly con- 
structed in sloping, independent sections, i\\ ft. thick, composed of 
two distinct rows of four tiers of blocks founded upon a rubble 
mound 22 ft. below low water (the rise of tide at springs being 3J ft.), 
and raised 32 ft. above high water. The blocks in each row were 
connected by a tenon, projecting at the top of each block, fitting 
into a mortise in the block above it. The retention of the vertical 
joint, however, between the two rows led to the overthrow of the 
greater part of the superstructures of the outer arms at Madras, 
situated in a depth of 45 ft. and facing the Indian Ocean, during a 
cyclone of 1881. In the reconstruction of these superstructures, 
bond was introduced in the successive tiers of each sloping section ; 
and the blocks of the two upper tiers were cramped together. After 

settlement on the 
mound had ceased, a 
thick capping of mass 
concrete was laid all 
along the top of the 
superstructure; and, 
finally, a mound of 
concrete blocks was 
deposited at random 
on the mound in 
front of the sea face 
of the superstructure 
to break the force of 
the waves and pre- 
vent undermining. A 
similar wave-breaker, 
with blocks somewhat 
specially arranged, 
was deposited in front 
of the sloping concrete-block superstructure of the breakwater shelter- 
ing the Portuguese harbour of Marmagao on the west coast of India, 
more particularly with the object of preventing the undermining of 
the superstructure founded only 18 ft. below low water of spring 
tides, on a layer of rubble spread on the muddy sea-bottom, the 
settlement in this case being occasioned by the yielding of the soft 
clay bed. This breakwater having been commenced in 1884, sub- 
sequently to the failure at Madras, the superstructure, formed of 
concrete blocks weighing 285 to 37! tons, was built 
in accordance with the design adopted for the re- 
constructed outer arms at Madras, with the ex- 
ceptions that the separate sections were given a 
slope of 70 ° instead of 76 ° shorewards to ensure 
greater stability, that the superstructure was made 
30 ft. in width instead of 24 ft., that the top tier of 
blocks in each section was secured to the next tier 
by two dowels, each formed of a bundle of four rails, 
penetrating 3I ft. into each tier, so as to enable the 
top courses to be more correctly aligned than with 
tenons and mortises, and that the outer side of the 
continuous concrete-in-mass capping was raised 
about 22 ft. above low water (fig. 11). The rise of 
spring tides at Marmagao is 6 ft. 

At Colombo the superstructures of both the 
south-west and north-west breakwaters were built 
on the sloping-block system in sections 5i ft. thick, 
and built at an angle of 68° shorewards (fig. 10) ; 
and the blocks, from i6i to 31 tons in weight, were 
laid in bonded courses across each section, with four 
tiers of blocks in the south-west breakwater founded 
20 ft. below low water on the rubble mound, and six 
tiers of blocks in the north-west breakwater, founded 
30! ft. below low water. Five oblong grooves, moreover, were 
formed in moulding the blocks, in the adjacent faces of each sloping 
section, extending from top to bottom of the sections. These, when 
settlement on the mound had ceased, were filled with concrete in 
bags, which not only connected the tiers of blocks in each section 
together, but also joined the several sections to one another, and 




RUBBLE MOUND. 



Fig. 10. — Colombo North-West Break- 
water with Titan Crane. 




Fig. 11. — Marmagao Breakwater. 



effectually closed the transverse joints between the successive 
sections, which were further connected together by a continuous 
capping of concrete-in-mass along the whole length of the breakwater. 
These sloping blocks are laid by powerful overhanging, block- 
setting cranes, called Titans (see Cranes), which travel along the 
completed portion of the breakwater, and lay the blocks in advance 
on the mound levelled by divers, as shown in fig. 10. The earlier 
Titans, employed for the sloping-block superstructures at Karachi 
and Madras, were constructed to travel only backwards and forwards 
on the completed work, with sufficient sideways movement of the 
little trolley travelling along the overhanging arm, from which the 
block is suspended at 



the proper angle, to lay 
the blocks for each side 
of the superstructure. 
In later forms, how- 
ever, such for instance 
as the Titan laying the 
14-ton blocks at Peter- 
head breakwater in 
horizontal courses, the 
overhanging arm is 
supported centrally on 
a ring of rollers, placed 
on the top of the truck on which the Titan travels, so that it can 
revolve and deposit blocks at the side of the superstructure 
for protecting the mound, as well as in advance of the finished 
work. These Titans possess the important advantage over the 
timber staging formerly employed for such breakwaters, that, in 
exposed situations, they can be moved back into shelter on the 
approach of a storm, or for the winter or stormy months, instead of, 
as in the case of staging, remaining out exposed to the danger of being 
carried away during stormy weather, or necessitating loss of time in 
erection at the beginning of the working season. 

Though composite breakwaters are still occasionally constructed 
with a superstructure founded on a rubble mound at, or above, low- 
water level, these breakwaters are now almost always constructed 
with the superstructure founded at some depth below low water, 
even at harbours on the continent of Europe, where formerly broad 
quays founded at sea-level, protected by a parapet wall and outer 
concrete blocks, were the regular form of superstructure adopted. 
The breakwater for the extension of the harbour at Naples provides 
an interesting example of this change of design. A solid super- 
structure, formed of large concrete blocks capped with masonry, 
about 50 ft. wide at the base, is laid on a high rubble mound at a 
depth of 31 ft. below mean sea-level, and provides a quay on the top, 
24J ft. wide, protected on the sea side by a promenade wall, 10 ft. 
high and I2jft. wide at the top, raised 19! ft. above sea-level (fig. 12). 
In view of the increased depth at which superstructures are now 
founded upon rubble mounds, causing the breakwaters to approxi- 
mate more and more to the upright-wall type, it might seem at 
first sight that the rubble base might be dispensed with, and the 
superstructure founded directly on the bed of the sea. Two cir- 
cumstances, however, still render the composite form of break- 
water indispensable in certain cases: (1) the great depth into 
which breakwaters have sometimes to extend, reaching about 
56 ft. below low water at Peterhead, and 102 ft. below mean 
sea-level at Naples; and (2) the necessity, where the sea-bottom 
is soft or liable : to be eroded by scour, of interposing a wide 
base between the upright superstructure and the bed of the sea. 




Fig. 12. — Naples Harbor Extension Breakwater. 

The injuries to which composite breakwaters appear to have been 
specially subject must be attributed to the greater exposure and 
depth of the sites in which they have been frequently constructed, 
as compared with rubble mounds or upright walls. The latter types, 
indeed, are not well suited for erection in deep water, in the first 
case, on account of the very large quantity of materials required 



480 



BREAKWATER 



for a high mound with flat slopes, and in the second, owing to the 
increased pressure of air under which divers have to work in laying 
blocks for an upright wall in deep water. The ample depth in which 
superstructures are founded, the due protection afforded to their 
outer toe, the adoption of the sloping-block system for their con- 
struction, and the dispensing in most cases with a high sheltering 
wall on the sea side of the superstructure, render modern super- 
structures as stable as upright-wall breakwaters of similar height. 
Nevertheless, superstructures require to be given a greater thickness 
than similar upright walls, because the greater depth of water in 
which such composite breakwaters are built causes them to be 
exposed to larger waves under similar conditions. 

The superstructures of composite breakwaters erected by the 
United States for harbours on the shores of Lake Superior were 
formerly in some cases composed of timber cribs floated into position 
and sunk by filling them with rubble stone. On account of the cheap- 
ness of timber several years ago in those regions, this simple mode of 
construction was also economical, even though the rapid decay of the 
timber in the portions of the cribs where it was alternately wet and 
dry involved its renewal about every fifteen years on the average. 
Owing, however, to the fact that the price of timber has increased 
considerably, whilst that of Portland cement has been reduced, 
durable concrete superstructures are beginning to be substituted 
for the rapidly decaying cribwork structures. 

With the exception perhaps of the Alderney breakwater, which, 
owing to its exceptional exposure and the unparalleled depth into 
which it extended, had its superstructure so often breached by the 
sea that, owing to the cost of maintenance, the inner portion only 
has been kept in repair, the composite breakwater of Bilbao harbour 
has probably proved the most difficult to construct on account 
of its great exposure. The original design consisted of a wide rubble 
mound up to about i6§ ft. below low water, a mound of large concrete 
blocks up to low water of equinoctial spring tides, and a solid masonry 
superstructure well protected at its outer toe by a projection of 
masonry, and raised several feet above high water, forming a quay 
sheltered by a promenade wall. The rise of equinoctial spring tides 
at the mouth of the river Nervion is 14J ft. In carrying out the work, 
however, the superstructure built in the summer months was for the 
most part destroyed by the following winter storms; and, accord- 
ingly, the superstructure was eventually constructed on a widened 
rubble base, so as to be sheltered to some extent by the outlying 
concrete-block mound already deposited, a system subsequently 
adopted in rebuilding the damaged portion of the North Pier at 
Tynemouth under shelter of the ruins of the previous work. The 
modified superstructure of the Bilbao breakwater was founded on 
the extended rubble mound at a depth of 16} ft. below low water, 
and formed of iron caissons partially filled with concrete and floated 
out, sunk in position, and filled up with concrete blocks and concrete. 
It thus consists of a continuous row of concrete blocks, each of them 
being 42! ft. in width across the breakwater, 23 ft. in length along 
the line of the breakwater, 23 ft. high, and weighing 1400 tons. 
These caisson blocks, raised 6| ft. above low water, form the base 
of the superstructure, upon which the upper part was built of concrete 
blocks on each face with mass concrete filling between them, forming 
a continuous quay, 24 ft. wide, raised 8 ft. above high tide, and 
slightly sheltered by a curved parapet block only 5 ft. high. The 
outer toe of the caisson blocks is protected from being undermined 
by two tiers of large concrete blocks laid flat on the rubble mound. 
This superstructure has successfully resisted the attacks of the 
Atlantic waves rolling into the bay. At this breakwater and at 
Tynemouth advantage has been taken of the protection unin- 
tentionally provided by previous failures, by which the waves are 
broken before reaching the superstructure and pier respectively; 
but instead of introducing a wave-breaker of concrete blocks, for a 
protection to the superstructure, as arranged at Marmagao (fig. 11) 
and the outer arms at Madras, it would appear preferable to increase 
the width of the solid superstructure, if necessary, as carried out at 
Naples (fig. 12), and to dispense with a parapet and keep the super- 
structure low, as being unsuitable for a quay in exposed situations, 
according to the plan adopted at Colombo (fig. 9). 

3. Upright-Wall Breakwaters. — The third type of breakwater 
consists of a solid structure founded directly on the sea-bottom, 
in the form of an upright wall, with only a moderate batter on each 
face. This form of breakwater is strictly limited to sites where the 
bed of the sea consists of rock, chalk, boulders, or other hard bottom 
not subject to erosion by scour, and where the depth does not exceed 
about 40 to 50 ft. If a solid breakwater were erected on a soft yield- 
ing bottom, it would be exposed to dislocation from irregular settle- 
ment ; and such a structure, by obstructing or diverting the existing 
currents, tends to create a scour along its base ; whilst the waves in 
recoiling from its sea face are very liable to produce erosion of the 
sea-bottom along its outer toe. Moreover, when the foundations 
for an upright-wall breakwater have to be levelled by divers, and 
the blocks laid under water by their help, the extension of such a 
breakwater into a considerable depth is undesirable on account of the 
increased pressure imposed upon diving operations. 

The Admiralty pier at Dover was begun about the middle of the 
19th century, and furnishes an early and notable example of an 
upright-wall breakwater resting upon a hard chalk bottom; and it 
was subsequently extended to a depth of about 42 ft. at low tide, in 



connexion with the works for forming a closed naval harbour at 
Dover. This breakwater, the Prince of Wales pier of the commercial 
harbour, and the eastern breakwater and detached south breakwater 
for the naval harbour, were all founded on a levelled bottom, carried 
down to the hard chalk underlying the surface layer, by means of 
men in diving-bells. The extension of the Admiralty pier and the 
other breakwaters of Dover harbour consist of bonded courses of 
concrete blocks, from 26 to 40 tons in weight, as shown in figs. 13 
and 14, the outer blocks above low water being formed on their 
exposed side with a facing of granite rubble. The blocks, composed 
of six parts of sand and stones to one part of Portland cement, 
moulded in frames, and left to set thoroughly in the block- yard 
before being used, are all joggled together, and above low-water 
level are bedded in cement and the joints filled with cement grout. 
The blocks were laid by Goliath travelling cranes running on 
temporary staging supported at intervals of 5oJ ft. by clusters of 
iron piles carried down into the chalk bottom. On each line of 
staging there were four Goliaths, preceded by a stage-erecting 
machine. The front Goliath was used for working a grab for ex- 
cavating the surface layer of chalk, which was finally levelled by 
divers, the second for carrying the diving-bell, the third for laying 
the blocks below low water, and the fourth for setting the blocks 
above low water. This succession of Goliaths enabled more rapid 
progress to be made than with a single Titan at the end of a break- 
water; but it involved a considerable increase in the cost of the plant, 
owing to the temporary staging required. The foundations were 
carried down from 4 to 6 ft. into the chalk bottom, the deepest being 
53 ft. below low water of spring tides, and the average 47 ft. With 
a rise of tide at springs of 18 J ft., the average depth is thus approxi- 
mately 66 ft. at high tide, necessitating a pressure of 29 lb on the 
square inch, which is the limit at which men can work without in- 
convenience in the diving-bells. The breakwaters are raised about 
1 1 ft. above high water of springs. The detached southern breakwater 



^%a 









H.W.O. 



L.W.O. 
















'^WW^^' 



Fig. 13. 
South Breakwater. 



Dover Breakwater. 



Fig. 14. 
Admiralty Pier Extension. 
was finished off at this level ; but the extended western breakwater, 
or Admiralty pier, is provided with a promenade parapet on its 
exposed side, rising 13 ft. above the quay; and the eastern break- 
water also has a parapet on its exposed eastern side, raised, however, 
only 9 ft. above its quay. The breakwaters are protected from scour 
along their outer toe by an apron of concrete blocks, extending 25 ft. 
out from their sea face. 

The levelling of the foundations for laying the courses of an 
upright- wall breakwater is costly and tedious, even in chalk; and 
the expense and delay are considerably enhanced where c t 
the bottom is hard rock. Accordingly, in constructing T?" 
two breakwaters at the entrance to Aberdeen harbour / „ n< j a . 
on a bottom of granite in 1 870-1 877, concrete bags were tlons. 
laid on the sea-bed; and these bags, by adapting them- 
selves to the rocky irregularities, obviated levelling the bottom. They 
formed the foundation for the concrete blocks in the south break- 
water; and by the deposit of successive layers of 50-ton concrete 
bags till they rose above low water, they constituted the whole of the 
submerged portion of the north breakwater. The 50-ton bags were 
deposited from hopper barges towed out to the site ; and the portions 
of both breakwaters above low water were carried up with mass 
concrete. Subsequently, the breakwater at Newhaven was con- 
structed on a foundation of chalk, with 100-ton concrete bags up 
to low water, and mass concrete above. Still later, the two break- 
waters sheltering the approach to the river Wear (see Harbour) 
and the Sunderland docks were built with a foundation mound 
of concrete in bags, 56 to 116 tons in weight, on the uneven sea- 
bottom, raised slightly above low water of spring tides, on which 
a solid upright wall was erected, formed of concrete blocks on each 
side faced with granite, filled in the centre and capped on the top 
with mass concrete. The most exposed northern Roker breakwater, 
raised about 11 ft. above high water of springs where the rise is 14 ft. 
5 in., is devoid of a parapet; but a subway formed near the top 
in each breakwater gives access to the light on the pierhead in stormy 
weather (fig. 15). These concrete bags are made by lining the hopper 
of the barge with jute canvas, which receives the concrete and is 



BREAL— BREAM 



481 




sewn up to form a bag whilst the barge is being towed to the site. 
The concrete is thus deposited unset, and readily accommodates 
itself to the irregularities of the bottom or of the mound of bags; 
and sufficient liquid grout oozes out of the canvas when the bag is 
compressed, to unite the bags into a solid mass, so that with the 

mass concrete on the top, the 
breakwater forms a monolith. 
This system has been extended 
to the portion of the super- 
structure of the eastern, little- 
exposed breakwater of Bilbao 
harbour below low water, where 
the rubble mound is of moderate 
height; but this application of 
the system appears less satisfac- 
tory, as settlement of the super- 
structure on the mound would 
produce cracks in the set con- 
crete in the bags. 

Foundation blocks of 2500 to 
3000 tons have been deposited for raising the walls on each side 
of the wide portion of the Zeebrugge breakwater (fig. 16) from 
the sea-bottom to above low water, and also 4400-ton 
Foanda- blocks along the narrow outer portion (see Harbour), 
tions with ^ building iron caissons, open at the top, in the dry 
blnck ^ed °^ tne Bruges ship-canal, lining them with concrete, 

s ' and after the canal was filled with water, floating them 
out one by one in calm weather, sinking them in position by 
admitting water, and then rilling them with concrete under water 
from closed skips which open at the bottom directly they begin 
to be raised. The firm sea-bed is levelled by small rubble for 
receiving the large blocks, whose outer toe is protected from 
undermining by a layer of big blocks of stone extending out for 
a width of 50 ft. ; and then the breakwater walls are raised above 
high wa^er by 55-ton concrete blocks, set in cement at low tide; 
and the upper portions are completed by concrete-in-mass within 
framing. 

Sometimes funds are not available for a large plant ; and in such 
cases small upright-wall breakwaters may be constructed in a 
moderate depth of water on a hard bottom of rock, chalk 
or boulders, by erecting timber framing in suitable 
lengths, lining it inside with jute cloth, and then depositing 
concrete below low water in closed hopper skips lowered to the 
bottom before releasing the concrete, which must be effected with 
great care to avoid allowing the concrete to fall through the water. 
The portion of the breakwater above low water is then raised 



Fig. 15. — Sunderland Southern 
Breakwater. 



Concrete 
monoliths. 




Fig. 16. — Zeebrugge Harbour Breakwater with Quay. 

by tide-work with mass concrete within frames, in which large 
blocks of stone may be bedded, provided they do not touch one 
another and are kept away from the face, which should be formed 
with concrete containing a larger proportion of cement. As long 
continuous lengths of concrete crack across under variations in 
temperature, it is advisable to form fine straight divisions across 
the upper part of a concrete breakwater in construction, as sub- 
stitutes for irregular cracks. 

Upright-wall breakwaters should not be formed with two narrow 
walls and intermediate filling, as the safety of such a breakwater 
depends entirely on the sea-wall being maintained intact. A warning 
of the danger of this system of construction, combined with a high 
parapet, was furnished by the south breakwater of Newcastle 
harbour in Dundrum Bay, Ireland, which was breached by a storm 
in 1868, and eventually almost wholly destroyed; whilst its ruins 
for many years filled up the harbour which it had been erected 
to protect. In designing its reconstruction in 1897, it was found 
possible to provide a solid upright wall of suitable strength with 
the materials scattered over the harbour, together with an extension 
needed for providing proper protection at the entrance. This work 
was completed in 1906. 

Upright-wall breakwaters and superstructures are generally made 
of the same thickness throughout, irrespective of the differences 
in depth and exposure which are often met with in different parts 
of the same breakwater. This may be accounted for by the general 
custom of regarding the top of an upright wall or superstructure 
as a quay, which should naturally be given a uniform width; and 
this view has also led to the very general practice of sheltering the 
top of these structures with a parapet. Generally the width is 
proportioned to the rnost exposed part, so that the only result is 

IV. 16 



an excess of expenditure in the inner portion to secure uniformity. 
When, however, as at Madras, the width of the structure is reduced 
to a minimum, the action of the sea demonstrates that the strength 
of the structure must be proportioned to the depth and exposure. 
In small fishery piers, where great economy is essential to obtain 
the maximum shelter at limited expense, it appears expedient to 
make the width of the breakwater proportionate to the depth. This 
was done in Babbacombe Bay; and in reconstructing the southern 
breakwater at Newcastle, Ireland, advantage was taken of a change 
in direction of the outer half to introduce an addition to the width, 
so as to make the strength of the breakwater proportionate to the 
increase in depth and exposure. In large structures, however, 
uniformity of design may be desirable for each straight length oi 
breakwater ; though where two or more breakwaters or outer arms 
enclose a harbour, the design should obviously be modified to suit 
the depth and exposure. At Colombo harbour, the superstructure 
of the less exposed north-west breakwater has been made slightly 
narrower than that of the south-west breakwater; and a simple 
rubble mound shelters the harbour from the moderate north-east 
monsoon. In special cases, where a breakwater has to serve as a 
quay, like the Admiralty pier at Dover, a high parapet wall is 
essential; but in most cases, where a parapet merely enables the 
breakwater to be more readily accessible in moderate weather, 
it would be advisable to keep it very low, or to dispense with it 
altogether, as at the southern Dover breakwater, the northern 
breakwater at Sunderland, and the Colombo western breakwaters. 
This course is particularly expedient in very exposed sites, as a high 
parapet intensifies the shock of the waves against a breakwater 
and their erosive recoil. Moreover, when a light has to be attended 
to at the end of a breakwater, sheltered access can be provided by 
a subway, as at Sunderland. 

Structures in the sea almost always require works of maintenance; 
and when a severe storm has caused any injury, it is most important 
to carry out the repairs at the earliest available moment, as the 
waves rapidly enlarge any holes that they may have formed in weak 
places. (L. F. V.-H.) 

BREAL, MICHEL JULES ALFRED (1832- ), French 
philologist, was born on the 26th of March 1832, at Landau 
in Rhenish Bavaria, of French parents. After studying at 
Weissenburg, Metz and Paris, he entered the Ecole Normale 
in 1852. In 1857 he went to Berlin, where he studied Sanskrit 
under Bopp and Weber. On his return to France he obtained 
an appointment in the department of oriental MSS. at the 
Bibliotheque Imperiale. In 1864 he became professor of com- 
parative grammar at the College de France, in 1875 member of 
the Academie des Inscriptions et Belles-lettres, in 1879 inspecteur- 
ge.ne.ral of public instruction for higher schools until the abolition 
of the office in 1888. In 1890 he was made commander of the 
Legion of Honour. Among his works, which deal mainly with 
mythological and philological subjects, may be mentioned: 
L' Etude des origines de la religion Zoroastrienne (1862), for which 
a prize was awarded him by the Academie des Inscriptions; 
Hercule et Cacus (1863), in which he disputes the principles of 
the symbolic school in the interpretation of myths; Le Mylhe 
d'(Edipe (1864); Les Tables Eugubines (1875); Melanges de 
mythologie et de linguistique (2nd. cd., 1882) ; Lecons de mots (1882, 
1886), Dictionnaire elymologique latin (1885) and Grammaire laline 
(1890). His Essai de Semantique (1897), on the signification of 
words, has been translated into English by Mrs H. Cust with 
preface by J. P. Postgate. His translation of Bopp's Comparative 
Grammar (1866-1874), with introductions, is highly valued. He 
has also written pamphlets on education in France, the teaching 
of ancient languages, and the reform of French orthography. 
In 1906 he published Pour mieux connaitre Homere. 

BREAM (Abramis), a fish of the Cyprinid family, characterized 
by a deep, strongly compressed body, with short dorsal and long 
anal fins, the latter with more than sixteen branched rays, and 
the small inferior mouth. There are two species in the British 
Isles, the common bream, A. brama, reaching a length of 2 ft. 
and a weight of 12 lb, and the white bream or bream flat, A. 
blicca, a smaller and, in most places, rarer species. . Both occur in 
slow-running rivers, canals, ponds and reservoirs. Bream are 
usually despised for the table in England, but fish from large 
lakes, if well prepared, are by no means deserving of ostracism. 
In the days of medieval abbeys, when the provident Cistercian 
monks attached great importance to pond culture, they gave 
the first place to the tench and bream, the carp still being un- 
known in the greater part of Europe. At the present day, the 
poorer Jews in large English cities make a great consumption 



482 



BREAST— BRECHIN 



of bream- and other Cyprinids, most of them being imported 
alive from Holland and sold in the Jewish fish markets. In 
America the name bream is commonly given to the golden 
shiner minnow (Abramis chrysoleucus) , to the pumpkin-seed 
sunfish (Eupomotis gibbosus), and to some kinds of porgy 
{Sparidae). 

BREAST (a word common to Teutonic languages, cf. the 
Ger. Brust, possibly connected with an O. Sax. brustian, to bud), 
the term properly confined to the external projecting parts of the 
thorax in females, which contain the mammary glands (for 
anatomy, and diseases, see Mammary Gland); more generally 
it is used of the external part of the thorax in animals, including 
man, lying between the neck and the abdomen. 

BREAUTE, FALKES DE (d. 1226), one of the foreign mercen- 
aries of King John of England, from whom he received in marriage 
the heiress of the earldom of Devon. On the outbreak of the 
Barons' War (121 5) the king gave him the sheriffdoms of six 
midland shires and the custody of many castles. He fulfilled 
his military duties with as much skill as cruelty. The royalists 
owed to his daring the decisive victory of Lincoln (12 17). But 
after the death of William Marshal, earl of Pembroke, Falkes 
joined the feudal opposition in conspiring against Hubert de 
Burgh. Deprived in 1223 of most of his honours, he was drawn 
into a rebellion by the imprudence of his brother, who captured 
a royal justice and threw him into prison (1224). Falkes was 
allowed to go into exile after his submission, and endeavoured 
to obtain a pardon through the mediation of Pope Honorius III. 
But this was refused, and Falkes died at St Cyriac in 1226. 

See Shirjey, Royal Letters, vol. i.; the Patent and Close Rolls; 
Pauli, Geschichte von England, vol. i. pp. 540-545. (H. W. C. D.) 

BRECCIA, in petrology, the name given to rocks consisting 
of angular fragments embedded in a matrix. They may be 
composed of volcanic rocks, limestones, siliceous charts, sand- 
stones, in fact of any kind of material, and the matrix, which 
usually corresponds to some extent to the fragments it encloses, 
may be siliceous, calcareous, argillaceous, &c. The distinctive 
character of the group is the sharp-edged and unworn shapes 
of the fragments; in conglomerates the pebbles are rounded 
and water-worn, having been transported by waves and currents 
from some distance. There are many ways in which breccias 
may originate. Some are formed by ordinary processes of atmo- 
spheric erosion; frost, rain and gravity break up exposed surfaces 
of rock and detach pieces of all sizes; in this way screes are 
formed at the bases of cliffs, and barren mountain-tops are 
covered with broken debris. If such accumulations gather 
and are changed into hard rock by pressure and other indurating 
agencies they make typical breccias. Conglomerates often pass 
into rocks of this type, the difference being merely that the 
fragments are of purely local origin, and are unworn because 
they have not been transported. In caves breccias of limestone 
are produced by the collapse of part of the roof, covering the floor 
with broken masses. Coral reefs often contain extensive areas of 
limestone breccia, formed of detached pieces of rock which have 
been dislodged from the surface and have been carried down 
the steep external slopes of the reef. Volcanic breccias are very 
common near active or extinct craters, as sudden outbursts of 
steam bear fragments from the older rocks and scatter them 
over the ground. 

Another group of breccias is due to crushing; these are 
produced in fissures, faults and veins, below the surface, and 
maybe described as " crush-breccias " and " friction- breccias." 
Very important and well-known examples of this class occur 
as veinstones, which may be metalliferous or not. A fissure 
is formed, probably by slight crustal movements, and is subse- 
quently filled with material deposited from solution (quartz, 
calcite, barytes, &c). Very often displacement of the walls 
again takes place, and the infilling or " veinstone " is torn apart 
and brecciated. It may then be cemented together by a further 
introduction of mineral matter, which may be the same as that 
first deposited or quite different. In important veins this process 
is often repeated several times: detached pieces of the countrv 
rock are mingled with the shattered veinstone, and generally 



experience alteration by the percolating mineral solutions. 
Other crush-breccias occurring on a much larger scale are due to 
the folding of strata which have unequal plasticities. If, for 
example, shales and sandstones are bent into a series of arches, 
the sandstones being harder and more resistant will tend to 
crack, while the shales, which are. soft and flow under great 
pressures, are injected into the crevices and separate the broken 
pieces from one another. Continued movement will give the 
brecciated fragments of sandstone a rounded form by rubbing 
them against one another, and, in this way, a crush-conglomerate 
is produced. Great masses of limestone in the Alps, Scottish 
Highlands, and all regions of intense folding are thus converted 
into breccias. Cherts frequently also show this structure; 
igneous rocks less commonly do so; but it is perhaps most 
common where there have been thin bedded alternations of rocks 
of different character, such as limestone and dolerite, limestone 
and quartzite, shale or phyllite and sandstone. Fault-breccias 
closely resemble vein-breccias, except that usually their frag- 
ments consist principally of the rocks which adjoin the fault 
and not of mineral deposits introduced in solution; but many 
veins occupy faults, and hence no hard and fast line can be 
drawn between these types of breccia. 

A third group of breccias is due to movement in a partly 
consolidated igneous rock, and may be called " fluxion-breccias." 
Lava streams, especially when they consist of rhyolite, dacite 
and some kinds of andesite, may rapidly solidify, and then 
become exceedingly brittle. If any part of the mass is still 
liquid, it may break up the solid crust by pressure from within 
and the angular fragments are enveloped by the fluid lava. 
When the whole comes to rest and cools, it forms a typical 
" volcanic-fluxion-breccia." The same phenomena are some- 
times exemplified in intrusive sills and sheets. The fissures 
which are occupied by igneous dikes may be the seat of repeated 
injections following one another at longer or shorter intervals; 
and the latter may shatter the earlier dike rocks, catching up 
the fragments. Among the older formations, especially when 
decomposition has gone on extensively, these fluxion and 
injection-breccias are often very hard to distinguish from the 
commoner volcanic-breccias and ash-beds, which have been 
produced by weathering, or by the explosive power of super- 
heated steam. (J. S. F.) 

BRECHIN, a royal, municipal and police burgh of Forfarshire, 
Scotland. Pop. (1901) 8941. It lies on the left bank of the South 
Esk, 7J m. west of Montrose, and has a station on the loop line 
of the Caledonian railway from Forfar to Bridge of Dun. Brechin 
is a prosperous town, of great antiquity, having been the site 
of a Culdee abbey. The Danes are said to have burned the town 
in 1012. David I. erected it into a bishopric in n 50, and it is 
still a see of the Episcopal Church of Scotland. In 1452 the 
earl of Huntly crushed the insurrection led by the earl of Crawford 
at the battle of Brechin Muir, and in 1645 the town and castle 
were harried by the marquis of Montrose. James VI. gave a 
grant for founding a hospital in the burgh, which yet supplies 
the council with funds for charity. No trace remains of the old 
walls and gates of the town, but the river is crossed by a two- 
arched stone bridge of very early date. The cathedral church 
of the Holy Trinity belongs to the 13th century. It is in the 
Pointed style, but suffered maltreatment in 1806 at the hands 
of restorers, whose work, however, disappeared during the 
restoration completed in 1902. The western gable with its 
flamboyant window and Gothic door and the massive square 
tower are all that is left of the original edifice. The modern 
stained glass in the chancel is reckoned amongst the finest in 
Scotland. Immediately adjoining the cathedral to the south- 
west stands the Round Tower, built about 1000. It is 86f ft. 
high, has at the base a circumference of 50 ft. and a diameter of 
16 ft., and is capped with a hexagonal spire of 18 ft., which was 
added in the 15th century. This type of structure is somewhat 
common in Ireland, but the only Scottish examples are those at 
Brechin, Abernethy in Perthshire, and Egilshay in the Orkneys. 
Brechin Castle played a piominent part in the Scottish War of 
Independence. In 1303 it withstood for twenty days a siege in 



BRECKINRIDGE— BRECON 



483 



force by the English under Edward I., surrendering only when 
its governor, Sir Thomas Maule, had been slain. From the Maule 
family it descended to the Dalhousies. Its library contains 
many important MSS., among them Burns's correspondence 
with George Thomson, and several cartularies including those 
of St Andrews and Brechin. In the Vennel (alley or small street) 
some ruins remain of the maison dieu, or hospitium, founded in 
1256 by William of Brechin. Besides these historical buildings 
the principal public structures include Smith's school, the 
municipal buildings, the free library, the episcopal library 
(founded by Bishop Forbes, who, as well as Bishop Abernethy- 
Drummond, presented a large number of volumes). The 
principal industries include manufactures of linen and sailcloth, 
bleaching, rope-making, brewing, distilling, paper-making, in 
addition to nurseries and freestone quarries. Brechin — which 
is controlled by a provost, bailies and council- — unites with 
Arbroath, Forfar, Inverbervie and Montrose to return one 
member to parliament. 

Edzell (pronounced Edyell, and, locally, Aigle) lies about 
6 m. north of Brechin, with which it is connected by rail. It is 
situated on the North Esk and near the West Water^ which falls 
into the Esk 2 m. south-west. Edzell is on the threshold of 
romantic Highland scenery. The picturesque ruins of Edzell 
Castle lie a mile to the west of the town. Once the seat of the 
Lindsays the estate now belongs to the earl of Dalhousie. The 
church of the parish of Farnell, 35 m. south-east of Brechin, 
was erected in 1806 after the model, so it is stated,of the famous 
Holy House (Casa Santa) of Loreto in Italy. It was here that 
the old sculptured stone giving a version of the Fall was found. 
Between Farnell and Brechin lies Kinnaird Castle, the seat of the 
earl of Southesk. 

BRECKINRIDGE, JOHN CABELL (1821-1875), American 
soldier and political leader, was born near Lexington, Kentucky, 
on the 21st of January 182 1. He was a member of a family 
prominent in the public life of Kentucky and the nation. 
His grandfather, John Breckinridge (1760-1806), who revised 
Jefferson's draft of the " Kentucky Resolutions " of 1798, was 
a United States senator from Kentucky in 1801-1805 and 
attorney-general in President Jefferson's cabinet in 1 805-1 806. 
His uncles, John Breckinridge (1797-1841), professor of pastoral 
theology in the Princeton Theological Seminary in 1836-1838 
and for many years after secretary of the Presbyterian Board of 
Foreign Missions, and Robert Jefferson Breckinridge (1800-1871), 
for several years superintendent of public instruction in Kentucky, 
an important factor in the organization of the public school 
system of the state, a professor from 1853 to 1871 in the Danville 
Presbyterian Theological Seminary at Danville, Kentucky, and 
the temporary chairman of the national Republican convention 
of 1864, were both prominent clergymen of the Presbyterian 
Church. His cousin, William Campbell Preston Breckinridge 
(1837-1904), was a Democratic representative in Congress from 
1885 to 1893. Another cousin, Joseph Cabell Breckinridge 
(1842- ), served on the Union side in the Civil War, was a 
major-general of volunteers during the Spanish-American War 
(1898), became a major-general in the regular United States 
army in 1903, and was inspector-general of the United States 
army from 1899 until his retirement from active service in 1904. 

John Cabell Breckinridge graduated in 1838 at Centre College, 
Danville, Kentucky, continued his studies at Princeton, and 
then studied law at Transylvania University, Lexington, Ken- 
tucky. He practised law in Frankfort, Kentucky, in 1 840-1 841 
and in Burlington, Iowa, from 1841 to 1843, and then returned 
to Kentucky and followed his profession at Lexington. In 1847 
he went to Mexico as major in a volunteer regiment, but arrived 
too late for service in the field. In 1849 he was elected a Demo- 
cratic member of the Kentucky legislature, and in 1851-1855 
he served in the national House of Representatives. President 
Pierce offered him the position of minister to Spain, but he 
declined it. In 1856 he was chosen vice-president of the United 
States on the Buchanan ticket, and although a strong pro-slavery 
and states rights man, he presided over the Senate with con- 
spicuous fairness and impartiality during the trying years before 



the Civil War. In i860 he was nominated for the presidency by 
the pro-slavery seceders from the Democratic national conven- 
tion, and received a total of 72 electoral votes, including those 
of every Southern state except Virginia, Kentucky, Tennessee 
and Missouri. As vice-president and presiding officer of the 
Senate, it was his duty to make the official announcement of 
the election of his opponent, Lincoln. He succeeded John J. 
Crittenden as United States senator from Kentucky in March 
1 86 1, but having subsequently entered the Confederate service 
he was expelled from the Senate in December 1861. As brigadier- 
general he commanded the Confederate reserve at Shiloh, and in 
August 1862 he became major-general. On the 5th of this month 
he was repulsed in his attack on Baton Rouge, but he won 
distinction at Stone River (December 31, 186 2- January 2, 1863), 
where his division lost nearly a third of its number. He took 
part in the battle of Chickamauga, defeated General Franz Sigel 
at Newmarket, Virginia, on the 15th of May 1864, and then 
joined Lee and took part in the battles of Cold Harbor on the 
1st and on the 3rd of June. In the autumn he operated in the 
Shenandoah Valley, and with Early was defeated by Sheridan 
at Winchester on the 19th of September. Being transferred to 
the department of South-west Virginia, he fought a number of 
minor engagements in eastern Tennessee, and in January 1865 
became secretary of war for the Confederate States. At the 
close of the war he escaped to Cuba, and from there went to 
Europe. In 1868 he returned to the United States and resumed 
the practice of law at Lexington, Kentucky, where he died on 
the 17th of May 1875. 

BRECON, or Brecknock, a market town and municipal 
borough, the capital of Breconshire, Wales, 183 m. from London 
by rail, picturesquely situated nearly in the centre of the county, 
at the confluence of the Honddu with the Usk. Half a mile 
higher up the Tarell also falls into the Usk from the south. The 
ecclesiastical parish of Brecon consists of the two civil parishes 
of St John the Evangelist and St Mary, both on the left bank of 
the Usk, while St David's in Llanfaes is on the other side of the 
river, and was wholly outside the town walls. Pop. (1901) 5875. 
There is only one line of railway, over which several companies, 
however, have running powers, so that the town may be reached 
by the Brecon & Merthyr railway from Merthyr, Cardiff and 
Newport, by the Cambrian from Builth Wells, or by the Midland 
from Hereford and Swansea respectively. The Great Western 
railway has also a service of road motors between Abergavenny 
and Brecon. A canal running past Abergavenny connects Brecon 
with Merthyr. 

The Priory church of St John, a massive cruciform building, 
originally Norman with Early English and Decorated additions, 
is the finest parish church in Wales, and even taking into account 
the cathedrals it is according to E. A. Freeman " indisputably 
the third church not in a state of ruin in the principality," its 
choir furnishing " one of the choicest examples of the Early 
English style." Previous to the dissolution, a rood-screen 
bearing a gigantic rood, the object of many pilgrimages, stood 
to the west of the tower. The church was restored under Sir 
Gilbert Scott between 1861 and 1875. St Mary's, in the centre 
of the town, and St David's, beyond the Usk, are now mainly 
modern, though the former has some of the Norman arches 
of the original church. There is also a Roman Catholic church 
(St Michael's) opened in 1851, and chapels belonging to the 
Baptists, Calvinistic and Wesleyan Methodists, and to the 
Congregationalists. In Llanfaes there was formerly a Dominican 
priory, but in 1 542 Henry VIII. granted it with all its possessions 
to a collegiate church, which was transferred thither from 
Abergwili, and was given the name of Christ College. Many of 
the bishops of St David's during the 17th century occasionally 
resided here, and several are also buried here. A small part of the 
revenues went to the maintenance of a grammar-school, but in 
1 84 1 the collegiate body was dissolved, and its revenues, then 
amounting to about £8006 a year, were transferred to the 
ecclesiastical commissioners. In 1853 Henry VIII. 's charter 
was repealed, and under a chancery scheme adopted two years 
later, £1200 a year was appropriated for the school. New school 



4 8 4 



BRECONSHIRE 



buildings were erected at a cost of about £10,000 in 1862, and 
these were enlarged at a cost of about £5000 in 1880. The chancel 
of the old Dominican chapel, dating from the 13th century, was 
restored in 1864, and is now the school chapel. There is also 
a Congregationalist theological college, built in 1869 at a cost of 
£12,000, and now affiliated with the university of Wales. The 
other chief buildings of the town are the shire hall built in 1842 
in the Doric style from designs by T. H. Wyatt; the Guildhall; 
the barracks, which are the headquarters of two battalions 
of the South Wales Borderers; the county infirmary founded 
in 1832; and the prison (in Llanfaes) for the counties of Brecon 
and Radnor. There is a bronze statue of the duke of Wellington 
(erected in 1854) by John Evan Thomas, a native of the town. 
The town commands a magnificent view of the Brecknock 
Beacons, and is noted for its promenades on the banks of the 
Usk, and in the priory groves. Brecon is favourably known as 
a fishing centre, and there is also boating on the Usk and the 
canal. There are several houses of interest, notably the Priory 
and Dr Awbrey's residence (now called Buckingham House), 
both built about the middle of the 16th century, but the finest 
specimen is Newton (about a mile out, near Llanfaes) built in 
1582 by Sir John Games (a descendant of Sir David Gam), but 
now a farmhouse. The " Shoulder of Mutton " Inn, now known 
as the " Siddons Wine Vaults," was the birthplace in 1755 of 
Mrs Siddons. 

The name Brecknock is an anglicized form of Brycheiniog, 
the Welsh name of the territory of Brychan (whence the alter- 
native form of Brecon), a Goidelic chieftain, who gained posses- 
sion of the Usk valley in the 5th century. The Welsh name of 
the town, on the other hand, has always been Aber-Honddu (the 
estuary of the Honddu). There is no evidence of any settlement 
on the site of the present town prior to about 1092, when Bernard 
Newmarch, after defeating Bleddin ab Maenarch, built here a 
castle which he made his residence and the chief stronghold of 
his new lordship. For this purpose he utilized what remained of 
the materials of the Roman fort, 3 m. to the west, at Y Gaer, 
which some identify as Bannium. He subsequently founded, 
near the castle, the Benedictine priory of St John, which he 
endowed and constituted a cell of Battle Abbey. In time a town 
grew up outside the castle, and its inhabitants received a series 
of charters from the de Bohuns, into which family the castle 
and lordship passed, the earliest recorded charter being granted 
by Humphrey, 3rd earl of Hereford. Under the patronage of 
his great-grandson, the last earl of Hereford (who lived in great 
splendour at the castle), the town became one of the chief centres 
of trade in South Wales, and a sixteen days' fair, which he 
granted, still survives as a hiring fair held in November. Further 
charters were granted by Henry IV. (who married Hereford's 
co-heiress), by Henry V., who gave the town two more fairs, and 
by the Stafford family, to which the castle and lordship were 
allotted on the partition of the Bohun estates in 1421. Henry 
Stafford, 2nd duke of Buckingham, resided a good deal at the 
castle, and Morton, bishop of Ely, whose custody as a prisoner 
was entrusted to him, plotted with him there for the dethrone- 
ment of Richard III., for which Stafford was executed in 1483. 
His son, Edward, the 3rd duke, who was born in the castle in 1478, 
had the estates restored to him, but, in 1521, suffered a like fate 
with his father, and the lordship and castle then vested in the 
crown. Both were acquired in the next century by the ancestors 
of Viscount Tredegar, to whom they now belong. By a statute 
of 1535 Brecon was made the county town of the new shire of 
Brecknock, and was granted the right of electing one burgess to 
represent it in parliament, a right which it retained till it was 
merged in the county representation in 1885. A chancery and 
exchequer for the counties of Brecknock and Radnor were also 
established at Brecon Castle, and from 1542 till 1830 the great 
sessions, and since then the assizes, and at all times the quarter 
sessions for the county, have been held at Brecon. The borough 
had also a separate court of quarter sessions till 1835. The town 
was incorporated by a charter granted by Philip and Mary in 
1556 and confirmed by Elizabeth in the nineteenth year of her 
reign. A charter granted by James II. was never acted upon. 



The borough was placed under the Municipal Corporations Act 
1835, and until then the town of Llywel, which is 10 m. off, 
formed a ward of the borough. There were formerly five trade 
gilds in the town, the chief industries being cloth and leather 
manufactures. There are five ancient fairs for stock, and 
formerly each of them was preceded by a leather fair. The fairs 
held in May and November w T ere also for hiring, much of the 
hiring being now done at the Guildhall, and not in the streets as 
used to be the case. 

During the Civil War the greater part of the castle and of 
the town walls (which with their four gates were until then well 
preserved) were demolished by the inhabitants in order to prevent 
the town being either garrisoned or besieged. Charles I., however, 
stayed a night at the priory house shortly after the battle of 
Naseby. The chief ruins of the castle are now enclosed in the 
grounds of the Castle Hotel, the principal object being Ely tower, 
where Bishop Morton was imprisoned. 

Besides those already mentioned the persons of note born in the 
town include Henry Stafford, duke of Buckingham; Dr Hugh 
Price, founder of Jesus College, Oxford; Dr Thomas Coke, the 
first Wesleyan missionary bishop in America; and Theophilus 
Jones, the historian of the county. Henry Vaughan, the Silurist, 
at one time practised here as a doctor of medicine. (D. Ll. T.) 

BRECONSHIRE, or Brecknockshire, an inland county in 
South Wales, and the fourth largest in all Wales, bounded N.W. 
by Cardigan, N. and N.E. by Radnor, E. and S.E. by Monmouth, 
S. by Glamorgan and W. by Carmarthen. The general aspect 
of the county is mountainous, and the scenery is marked by 
beauty and grandeur. The climate is moist but temperate and 
healthy, and the soil of the valleys, often consisting of rich 
alluvial deposits, is very fertile. The loftiest mountains in South 
Wales, extending from Herefordshire and Monmouthshire 
(where their eastern spurs form the Hatteral Hills) in a south- 
easterly direction into Carmarthenshire, completely encircle the 
county on the east and south except for the break formed by 
the Vale of Usk at Crickhowell. Their highest summit north 
of the Usk, on the eastern side, where they are known as the 
Black Mountains, or sometimes the Black Forest Mountains, is 
Pen y Gader (2624 ft.) between Talgarth and Llanthony, and on 
the south-west the twin peaks of the Mynydd Du (" Black 
Mountain ") or the so-called Carmarthenshire Vans or Beacons, 
only the higher of which, Fan Brycheiniog (2632 ft.), is, however, 
in Breconshire; while the centre of the crescent is occupied by 
the masses of the Brecknockshire Beacons or Vans (often called 
the Beacons simply), the highest point of which, Pen y Fan, 
formerly also known as Cadair Arthur, or Arthur's Chair, attains 
an altitude of 2910 ft. In the north, a range of barren hills, 
which goes by the general designation of Mynydd Eppynt (a 
name more properly limited to its central portion), stretches 
right across the county in a north-easterly direction, beginning 
with Mynydd Bwlch-y-Groes on the boundary to the east of 
Llandovery, and terminating near Builth. In the dreary country 
still farther north there is a series of rounded hills covered with 
peat and mosses, the chief feature being Drygarn Fawr (2115 ft.) 
on the confines of Cardiganshire. 

Of the valleys, the most distinguished for beauty is that of 
the Usk, stretching from east to west and dividing the county 
into two nearly equal portions. The Wye is the chief river, and 
forms the boundary between the county and Radnorshire on 
the north and north-east, from Rhayader to Hay, a distance of 
upwards of 20 m.; its tributary, the Elan, till it receives the 
Claerwen, and then the latter river, continue the boundary 
between the two counties on the north, while the Towy separates 
the county from Cardigan on the north-west. The hilly country 
to the north of the Eppynt is mainly drained by the Irfon, which 
falls into the Wye near Builth. The Usk rises in the Carmarthen- 
shire Van on the west, and flowing in a direction nearly due east 
through the centre of the county, collects the water from the 
range of the Beacons in the south, and from the Eppynt range 
in the north by means of numerous smaller streams, of which the 
Tarell and the Honddu (which join it at Brecon) are the most 
important, and it enters Monmouthshire near Abergavenny. 



BRECONSHIRE 



485 



The Taff, the Nedd (with its tributaries the Hepste and the 
Mellte) and the Tawe, all rise on the south of the Beacon range, 
and passing through Glamorganshire, flow into the Bristol 
Channel, the upper reaches of the Nedd and its tributaries in 
the Vale of Neath being deservedly famous for its scenery. The 
mountains of the county constitute one of the best water-pro- 
ducing areas in Wales. Recognizing this, the corporation of 
Birmingham, under an act of 1892, acquired the watershed of the 
Elan and Claerwen, and constructed on the Elan three impound- 
ing reservoirs whence the water is conducted through an aqueduct 
to Birmingham (q.v.). Swansea obtains its chief supply from a 
reservoir of one thousand million gallons constructed in 1898-1006 
on the Cray, a tributary of the Usk. A large industrial area 
around Neath is supplied from Ystradfellte. Merthyr Tydfil 
draws its supply from the lesser Taff, while Cardiff's main supply 
comes from the Great Taff valley, where, under acts of 1884 and 
1894, two reservoirs with a capacity of 668 million gallons have 
been constructed and a third authorized. 

In the east of the county, at the foot of the Black Forest 
Mountains, is Llyn Safaddan, or Brecknock Mere, now more 
generally known as Llangorse Lake (from being partly situated 
in the parish of that name). It is about 3 m. long by 1 m. broad, 
being the largest lake in South Wales. Upon an artificial island 
in the lake traces of lake-dwellings were discovered in 1869, 
together with the bones of red deer, wild boar and Bos longifrons. 

Geology. — The oldest rocks in Brecknockshire are the Llandeilo 
shales and intrusive diabases of pre-Llandovery age which near 
Builth extend across the Wye from Radnorshire; another patch 
with volcanic outflows comes up at Llanwrtyd, and at both places 
they give rise to mineral springs. Next follow the Bala Beds, which, 
with the succeeding Lower and Upper Llandovery shales, sandstones 
and conglomerates, form the sparsely populated sheepwalks and 
valleys which occupy most of the north-western part of the county. 
These rocks are much folded and the shales are locally cleaved into 
slates, while the sandstones and conglomerates form scarps and 
ridges. To the south-east of this region a narrow outcrop of Upper 
Llandovery, Wenlock and Ludlow sandstones and mudstones follows, 
uncomformably overlying the Llandeilo and Bala rocks, and dipping 
conformably under the Old Red Sandstone; they extend from 
Newbridge-on-Wye and Builth through Llangammarch (where 
there are mineral springs) towards Llandovery, while a tongue of 
Ludlow rocks brought up by faulting extends from Erwood on the 
Wye for 8 m. south-westwards into the Old Red Sandstone. The 
remainder and greater part of the county is occupied chiefly by the 
gently inclined Old Red Sandstone; in the dissected plateau of the 
Black Mountains north of Crickhowell the lower marls and cornstones 
are laid open, while south of Brecon the conglomeratic upper beds 
form the escarpment and plateaus of the Beacons. The southern 
edge of the county is formed by the scarps and moorlands of the 
Carboniferous Limestone and Millstone Grit (both of which form 
also the outlier of Pen-ceryg-calch north of Crickhowell), while the 
lowest beds of the Coal Measures of the South Wales coalfield are 
reached in the Tawe and Neath valleys (where the beds are much 
folded) and near Tredegar and Brynmawr. Glacial deposits spread 
over the lower grounds and striae occur at great heights on the 
Black Mountains. 

Industries. — Agriculture is the chief industry, and the Agri- 
cultural Society of the county, dating from 1755, is the oldest 
in Wales. About one-fourth only of the area of the county is 
under cultivation, and the chief crops grown are wheat and 
barley, but above all, turnips and oats. The acreage devoted 
to any other crop is practically infinitesimal, though in the 
eastern part more attention is paid to fruit-growing than perhaps 
in any other part of South Wales. The farming is, however, 
chiefly pastoral, nearly one-third of the county is common or 
waste land, and its number of sheep (mainly of the Radnor Forest 
breed) far exceeds that of any other county in Wales. The" 
breeding of cobs and ponies comes next in importance, and 
thirdly that of cattle, now mostly Herefords, though Speed 
mentions a native breed, long since extinct, all white with red 
ears. These, together with pigs, wool, butter, and (in small 
quantities) cheese, form the staple of a considerable trade with 
the Midlands and the industrial districts to the south and south- 
west. The farms are of comparatively small size, the average 
cultivated area of the holdings in 1894 being 63 acres, and the 
hired labour averages about two men for each farm. A large 
share of the work, especially on the highland farms, is done by 
the occupiers and members of their own families, with the aid, 



where required, of an indoor servant or two. Few hands are 
employed in manufactures, but the mining industry is more 
important, coal being extensively worked — chiefly anthracite 
in the upper reaches of the Swansea and Neath valleys, and 
bituminous in the south-eastern corner of the county. There 
are also limestone and fireclay, firebrick and cement works, 
chiefly on the northern outcrop of the carboniferous limestone, 
as at Abernant in the Vale of Neath and at Penwyllt. 

The Central Wales section of the London & North- Western 
railway from Craven Arms to Swansea crosses the north-west 
corner of the county, and is intersected at Builth Road by a 
branch of the Cambrian, which, running for the most part on the 
Radnorshire side of the Wye, follows that river from Rhayader 
to Three Cocks; the Midland railway from Hereford to Swansea 
runs through the centre of the county, effecting junctions at 
Three Cocks with the Cambrian, at Talyllyn with the Brecon & 
Merthyr railway (which connects the county with the industrial 
areas of East Glamorgan and West Monmouthshire), and at Capel 
Colbren with the Neath and Brecon line. The North- Western 
and Rhymney joint line skirts the south-eastern boundary of 
the county. Brecon is also connected with Newport by means 
of the Brecknock and Abergavenny Canal, which was completed 
in 1801 and is 35 m. in length. The Swansea Canal and that of 
the Vale of Neath have also their northern terminal within the 
county, at Ystradgynlais and Abernant respectively. The main 
roads of the county are probably the best in South Wales. 

Population and Administration. — The area of the ancient 
county is 475,224 acres, with a population in 1891 of 57,031 and 
in 1901 of 59,907. The area of the administrative county is 
469,301 acres. The only municipal borough is Brecon, which 
is the county town, and had in 1901 a population of 5741. The 
other urban districts are Brynmawr, Builth Wells and Hay, 
with populations of 6833, of 1805 and of 1680 respectively 
in 1901. Crickhowell and Talgarth are market towns, while 
Llanwrtyd Wells is a rapidly developing health resort. The 
county forms part of the South Wales circuit, and the assizes 
are held at Brecon. It had one court of quarter sessions, and is 
divided into ten petty sessional divisions. The borough of 
Brecon has a separate commission of the peace, but no separate 
court of quarter sessions. There arc 94 civil parishes, while the 
ecclesiastical parishes or districts wholly or in part within the 
county number 70, of which 67 are in the diocese of St David's 
and the archdeaconry of Brecon, the remaining 3 being in the 
diocese of Llandaff . The county is not divided for parliamentary 
purposes, and returns one member to parliament. It contains 
a small part of the parliamentary borough of Merthyr Tydfil. 

In the eastern parts and along the Wye valley, English has 
become the predominant language, but in the rest of the county, 
especially north of the Eppynt range, Welsh occupies that 
position. In 1901 about 51% of the population above three 
years could speak both English and Welsh, 38% could speak 
English only and 1 1 % Welsh only. The majority of the popula- 
tion is Nonconformist in religion, the chief denominations being 
the Baptists, Calvinistic Methodists and Congregationalists. 
Besides an endowed grammar-school (Christ College) at Brecon, 
there are in the county four secondary schools, established under 
the Welsh Intermediate Education Act 1899, viz. separate schools 
for boys and girls at Brecon, and dual schools at Builth and 
Brynmawr. Most of the county institutions are in the town of 
Brecon, but the joint asylum for the counties of Brecon and 
Radnor is at Talgarth. It was opened in February 1903. At 
Trevecca, near the same town, was a theological college for 
ministerial students attached to the Calvinistic Methodist body, 
but in October 1906 the institution was removed to Aberystwyth, 
and the buildings have since been utilized for a preparatory 
school belonging to the same body. 

History. — There are no traces or record of Breconshire being 
inhabited before the Neolithic period, but to that period may be 
ascribed a number of cairns, menhirs and one cromlech (near 
Glanusk) . In Roman times the eastern half of the county formed 
part of the territory of the Silures, a pre-Celtic race, whose 
governing class at that time probably consisted of Brythonic 



4 86 



BREDA— BREDAEL 



Celts. But an earlier wave of Celtic invasion represented by the 
Goidels had passed westwards along the valleys of the Usk and 
Wye, leaving traces in place-names (e.g. llwch, lake), and in the 
Ogham inscribed stones found at Glanusk, Trallwng and Tre- 
castle, and probably surviving into historic times around the 
Beacon range and farther south even to Gower and Kidwelly. 
The conquest of the district by the Romans was effected between 
about a.d. 75 and 80, and they established a frontier fort (which 
some have called Caer Bannau, identifying it as Bannium) some 
3 m. out of the present town of Brecon, with smaller stations 
on roads leading thereto at Y Gaer near Crickhowell, and at 
Capel Colbren in the direction of Neath. On the departure of 
the Romans, the Goidelic hill-tribes, probably with help from 
Gower and Ireland, seem to have regained possession of the Usk 
valley under the leadership of a chieftain of their own race, 
Brychan, who became the ancestor of one of the three chief 
tribes of hereditary Welsh saints. His territory (named after 
him Brycheiniog, whence Brecknock) lay wholly east of the 
Eppynt range, for the lordship of Buallt, corresponding to the 
modern hundred of Builth, to the west, remained independent, 
probably till the Norman invasion. Most of the older churches 
of central Brecknockshire and east Carmarthenshire were founded 
by or dedicated to members of Brychan's family. 

From the middle of the 8th century to the 10th, Brycheiniog 
proper often bore the brunt of Mercian attacks, and many of 
the castles on its eastern border had their origin in that period. 
Subsequently, when Bernard de Newmarch and his Norman 
followers obtained possession of the country in the last quarter 
of the nth century, these were converted into regular fortresses. 
Bernard himself initiated this policy by building a castle at 
Talgarth on the Upper Wye, but in 1001 he moved southwards, 
defeated the regulus of Brycheiniog, Bleddyn ab Maenarch, and 
his brother-in-law Rhys ap Tewdwr, the prince of south-west 
Wales, and with materials obtained from the Roman fort of 
Caer Bannau, built a castle at Brecon, which he made his caput 
baroniae. Brycheiniog was then converted into a lordship 
marcher and passed to the Fitzwalter, de Breos, the Bohun and 
the Stafford families in succession, remaining unaffected by the 
Statute of Rhuddlan (1282), as it formed part of the marches, and 
not of the principality of Wales. 

The Irfon valley, near Builth, was, however, the scene of the 
last struggle between the English and Llewelyn, who in 1282 
fell in a petty skirmish in that district. The old spirit of inde- 
pendence flickered once again when Owen Glendower marched 
to Brecon in 1403. Upon the attainder of Edward, duke of 
Buckingham, in 1521, the lordship of Brecon with its depend- 
encies became vested in the crown. In 1536 it was grouped with 
a whole series of petty lordships marcher- and the lordship of 
Builth' to form the county of Brecknock with Brecon as the 
county town, and the place for holding the county court. The 
county returns one member to parliament, and has done so since 
1536; the borough of Brecon, with the town of Llywel, had also 
a separate representative from the same date till 1885, when it 
became merged in the county. 

BREDA, a fortified town in the province of North Brabant, 
Holland, at the confluence of the canalized rivers Merk and Aa, 
15 m. by rail E.N.E. of Roozendaal. Pop. (1900) 26,296. It is 
connected by steam tramway with Antwerp (30 m. S.S.W.), and 
with Geertruidenberg in the north, and the island of Duiveland 
on the west. The fortress of Breda, which was once considered 
impregnable, has been dismantled, but the town is still protected 
by extensive lines of fortification and lies in the midst of a district 
which can be readily laid under water. It has a fine quay, town- 
hall and park. There are several Roman Catholic and Protestant 
churches. The principal Protestant church is a Gothic building 
dating from the end of the 13th century, with a fine tower, and 
a choir of later date (1410). Among the many interesting monu- 
ments is the imposing tomb of the stadtholder Count Engelbert 
II. of Nassau and his wife. This is the work of Tomasino Vijicenz 
of Bologna, who, though a pupil of Raphael in painting, in 
sculpture followed Michelangelo, to whom the work is some- 
times ascribed. Since 1828 Breda has been the seat of a royal 



military academy for all arms of the service. It also possesses 
a Latin school, an arsenal, and a modern prison built on the 
isolated-cell principle. The prison is in the form of a rotunda, 
58 yds. in diameter, and covered by a high dome. In the middle 
is the office of the administration, and on the top of this a small 
watch-tower. Round the walls of the rotunda are the cells, 208 
in number, and arranged in four tiers with balconies reached 
by iron staircases. Each cell measures 35 cub. yds., is provided 
with an electric bell communicating with the warder in the 
tower, heated by hot-air pipes, and lighted by day through a 
window on the outer wall of the rotunda, and from sunset till 
ten o'clock by electric light. The industries of Breda comprise 
the manufacture of linen and woollen goods, carpets, hats, beer 
and musical instruments. In the neighbourhood of the town are 
the villages of Ginneken and Prinsenhage, situated in the midst 
of pretty pine woods. They form favourite places of excursion, 
and in the woods at Ginneken is a Kneipp sanatorium. 

History. — Breda was in the nth century a direct fief of the Holy 
Roman Empire, its earliest known lord being Henry I. (1098- 
11 25), in whose family it continued, though, from the latter part 
of the 13th century, in the female line, until Alix, heiress of 
Philip (d. 1323), sold it to Brabant. In 1350 the fief was resold 
to John (Jan) of Polanen (d. 1377), the heiress of whose line, 
Joanna (d. 1445), married Engelbert of Nassau-Dillenburg (d. 
1442). Henceforth it remained in the house of Nassau, passing 
ultimately to William I. (1533-1584), the first stadtholder of the 
Netherlands. Breda obtained municipal rights in 1252, but was 
first surrounded with walls in 1534 by Count Henry of Nassau, 
who also restored the old castle, originally built by John of 
Polanen in 1350. From this period until late in the 19th century 
it remained the most important of the line of fortresses along 
the Meuse. Breda was captured by surprise by the Spaniards 
in 1 581; but in 1590 it fell again into the hands of Maurice of 
Nassau, 68 picked men contriving to get into the town concealed 
under the turf in a peat-boat. The so-called " Spaniard's Hole " 
still marks the spot where the peat-boat lay. Its surrender in 
1625, after a ten months' siege, to the Spaniards under Spinola 
is the subject of the famous picture by Velasquez in the Museo 
del Prado in Madrid. In 1637 Breda was recaptured by Frederick 
Henry of Orange after a four months' siege, and in 1648 it was 
finally ceded to Holland by the treaty of Westphalia. During 
the wars of the French Revolution, it was taken by Dumouriez 
in 1793, evacuated soon after and retaken by Pichegru in 1795, 
after the whole of Holland had already succumbed to the French. 
In 1813, a sally being made by the French garrison on an advance- 
guard of the Russians under Benckendorff, the citizens of Breda 
again made themselves masters of the town. 

Breda was the residence, during his exile, of Charles II., who, 
by the declaration of Breda (1660), made known the conditions 
of his acceptance of the crown of England. In 1696 William, 
prince of Orange and king of England, built the new castle, one 
of the finest buildings of the period, which now serves as the 
military academy. Breda also derives some celebrity from the 
various political congresses of which it has been the scene. In 
1575 a conference was held here between the ambassadors of 
Spain and those of the United Provinces; in 1667 a peace was 
signed between England, Holland, France and Denmark; and 
in 1 746-1 747 the representatives of the same powers met in the 
town to discuss the terms of another treaty. 

BREDAEL, JAN FRANS VAN (1683-1750), Flemish painter, 
son of Alexander van Bredael (d. 1720), who was also an artist, 
was born in Antwerp. He imitated the style of Wouverman 
and Breughel with such dexterity that even connoisseurs are 
often unable to distinguish his copies of their pictures from the 
originals. He visited England, where he was so well employed 
that in a few years he was able to retire to his native country with 
a competency. The earl of Derwentwater was one of his chief 
patrons. There were several other van Bredaels, who won 
honour as artists — notably Pieter (1622-1719), Alexander's 
father, and Jozef (1688-1739). They were formerly known as 
" Breda," but this apparently is incorrect, though it occurs as a 
signature on a picture by Jan Frans in the Amsterdam gallery. 



BREDERODE— BREGENZ 



487 



BREDERODE, HENRY, Count of (1531-1568), was born at 
Brussels in 153 1. He was the descendant of an ancient race, 
which had for some centuries been settled in Holland, and had 
taken an active part in the affairs of war and peace. Count 
Henry became a convert to the Reformed faith and placed him- 
self at the side of the prince of Orange and Count Egmont in 
resisting the introduction of the Spanish Inquisition and Spanish 
despotism into the Netherlands. In 1566 he was one of the 
founders cf the confederacy of nobles who bound themselves to 
maintain the rights and liberties of the country by signing a 
document known as " the Compromise." On the 5th of April 
of that year Brederode accompanied to the palace a body of 250 
confederates, of whom he acted as the spokesman, to present to 
the regent, Margaret of Parma, a petition setting forth their 
grievances, called " the Request." It was at a banquet at the 
Hotel Culemburg on the 8th of April, presided over by Brederode, 
that the sobriquet of les Gueux, or " the Beggars," was first 
given to the opponents of Spanish rule. Brederode was banished 
from the Netherlands by Alva, and died in exile shortly afterwards 
at the early age of thirty-six. 

BREDOW, GOTTFRIED GABRIEL (1773-1814), German 
historian, was born at Berlin on the 14th of December 1773, and 
became successively professor at the universities of Helmstadt, 
Frankfort-on-Oder and Breslau. He died at Breslau on the 
5th of September 1814. Bredow's principal works are Handbuch 
der alten Geschichte, Geographic und Chronologie (Eutin, 1799; 
English trans., London, 1827); Chronik des ig. Jahrhunderts 
(Altona, 1801); Entwurf der Weltkunde der Alten (Altona, 1816); 
Weltgeschichte in Tabellen (Altona, 1801; English trans, by 
J. Bell, London, 1820); Grundriss einer Geschichte der merk- 
wiirdigsten Welthdndel von 1796-1810 (Hamburg, 1810). 

Bredow's posthumous writings were edited by J. G. Kunisch 
(Breslau, 1S23), who added a biography of the author. 

BREDOW, a village of Germany, in the kingdom of Prussia, 
immediately north of Stettin, of which it forms a suburb. Here 
are the Vulcan iron-works and shipbuilding yards, where the 
liners " Deutschland " (1900), the " Kaiserin Augusta Victoria " 
(1906), and the " George Washington " (1908), the largest vessel 
(722 ft. long, 27,000 tons) in the German mercantile marine, 
were built; and also sugar, cement and other factories. 

BREECH (common in early forms to Teutonic languages), a 
covering for the lower part of the body and legs. The Latin 
braca or bracca is a Celtic word, probably cognate with the 
Teutonic. The word in its proper meaning is used in the plural, 
and, strictly, is confined to a garment reaching to the knees only. 
The meaning of " the hinder part of the body " is later than, 
and derived from, its first meaning; this sense appears in the 
" breech " or hinder part of a gun. The word is also found in 
" breeches buoy," a sling life-saving apparatus, consisting of a 
support of canvas breeches. The " Breeches Bible," a name 
for the Geneva Bible of 1560, is so called because " breeches " 
is used fo.r the aprons of fig-leaves made by Adam and Eve. On 
the stage the phrase a " breeches " part is used when a woman 
plays in male costume. " Breeching " is a strap passed round 
the breech of a harnessed horse and joined to the shafts to allow 
a vehicle to be backed. 

BREEDS AND BREEDING. Breeds may be defined as domestic 
varieties of animals or plants which man has been able to bring 
into existence and to maintain in existence. The process of 
breeding includes all the modifying influences which man may 
bring to bear on a wild stock for the purpose, conscious or 
unconscious, of establishing and maintaining breeds. Charles 
Darwin's Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication 
(1868) was the starting-point of exact knowledge on this subject; 
when it appeared, it contained not only the best collection of 
empirical facts, but the only rational theory of the facts. The 
first relations between man and domesticated animals and plants 
were due to unconscious or accidental selection of wild stocks 
that tolerated the vicinity of man and that were useful or 
attractive to him. The new conditions must have produced 
modifications in these stocks, whether these were caused by a 
survival in each generation of individuals with the power of 



response to the new environment, or were due to a conscious 
selection of individuals capable of such favourable response. 
The essence of the process, however, came to be a conscious 
selection in each generation of the best individuals, that is to say, 
of those individuals that seemed to man to be most adapted to his 
wants. The possibility of establishing a breed depended, there- 
fore, in the first place on the natural variability of wild animals 
and plants, then on the variations induced in animals and plants 
under subjection to the new conditions brought about by man's 
interference, next on the extent to which these variations, 
natural or artificial, persisted through the series of generations, 
and finally on man's intelligence in altering or maintaining the 
conditions of the environment, and in selective mating. The 
theory of breeds and breeding depends, in fact, on knowledge of 
variation, of modification by the environment, and of heredity. 
Any attempt to give an account of what actually has been done 
by man in establishing breeds would be little more than an 
imperfect summary of Darwin's work. The articles Heredity, 
Mendelism and Variation' and Selection show that what 
may be called the theoretical and experimental knowledge of 
variation and heredity is far in advance of the practical art 
of breeding. Even horticulturists, who have been much more 
successful than those who deal with animals, are still far from 
being able to predict the result of their selections and crossings. 
None the less it may be stated definitely that such prediction 
is already so nearly within the power of the practical breeder 
that it would be a waste of time to give a summary of the existing 
rule-of-thumb methods. The art of breeding is so immediately 
destined to become a science of breeding that existing knowledge 
and conceptions must be dismissed as of no more than historical 
interest. (P. C. M.) 

BREEZE. (1) A current of air generally taken as somewhat 
less than a " wind," which in turn is less than a " gale." The 
term is particularly applied to the light wind blowing landwards 
by day, " sea-breeze," and the counter wind, blowing off the 
land at night, " land-breeze." The word appears in Fr. brise 
(admitted by the Academy in 1762). The Span, brisa, Port. 
briza, and Ital. brezza are used for a wind blowing from the 
north or north-east. According to Cotgrave, Rabelais uses 
brize in the sense of bise, the name of a dry north or north-east 
wind prevalent in Switzerland and the bordering parts of France, 
Italy and Germany. The word is first used in English as applied 
to the cool sea-breeze blowing usually from the east or north-east 
in the West Indies and Atlantic sea-coast of Central America. 
It was then applied to sea-breezes from any quarter, and also 
to the land-breeze, and so to any light wind or current of air. 
(2) Fine ashes or cinders, the refuse of coal, coke and charcoal 
burning. This is probably from the O. Fr. brese, modern braise, 
a word connected with braser, whence Eng. brazier, a pan for 
burning coals, charcoal, &c. 

BREGENZ (anc. Brigantium), the capital of the Austrian, 
province of Vorarlberg, as well as of the administrative district 
of Bregenz. In 1900 its population was 7595, German-speaking 
and Roman Catholic. It is situated at the south-east angle 
of the Lake ef Constance, and, besides communications by water 
with the other towns on the shores of that lake, is connected by : 
rail with Feldkirch on the Arlberg line (24 m.) and with Munich. 
The old town is on a hillock, crowned by the ancient castle, while 
the new town is built on the level ground at the foot of the hill. 
The fine parish church (dedicated "to St Gall) stands on another 
mound more to the south. In the local museum are collections 
of various kinds, especially of the Roman antiquities which have 
been dug up on the site of the old town. The position of the town 
on the lake has always made it an important port and commercial 
centre. Nowadays the main trade is in grain, but much is done 
also in cattle and in the products of the cotton-spinning factories 
of Vorarlberg. 

We hear of counts of Bregenz as early as the 10th century, 
their heirs in the early 13 th century being the counts of Montfort 
(a castle north of Feldkirch), who gradually acquired most of 
the surrounding country (including Feldkirch and Bludenz). 
But little by little the Habsburgers, counts of Tirol since 1363 



"488 



BREHON LAWS 



bought from them most of their domains — first Feldkirch in 
1375, next Bludenz and the Montafon valley in 1394, finally the 
county of Bregenz in two parts, acquired in 1451 and 1523. In 
1408 the Appenzellers were defeated before Bregenz, while in 
1647, during the Thirty Years' War, the town was sacked by 
the Swedes under Wrangel. (W. A. B. C.) 

BREHON LAWS, the English but incorrect appellation of 
the ancient laws of Ireland, the proper name for which is Fein- 
eachas, meaning the laws of the Feine or Feini (fainyeh), who 
were the free Gaelic farmers. Dlighthe Feine is another name 
for the laws, with the same meaning. Laws of universal applica- 
tion which could be administered only by duly qualified judges 
were called Cdin law, while minor laws administered by nobles 
and magistrates were called Urradhus law. Regular courts and 
judges existed in Ireland from prehistoric times. The Anglo- 
Irish word " Brehon " is derived from the Gaelic word Brethem 
( = judge). 

The extant remains of these laws are manuscript transcripts 
from earlier copies made on vellum from the 8th to the 13th 
century, now preserved with other Gaelic manuscripts in Trinity 
College and the Royal Irish Academy, Dublin, the British 
Museum, Oxford University, some private collections and several 
libraries on the continent of Europe. The largest and most 
important of these documents is the Senchus Mdr or " Great Old 
Law Book." No copy of it now existing is complete, and some 
portions are missing from all. What remains of it occupies the 
first, second, and a portion of the third of the volumes produced 
by the Brehon Law Commission, which was appointed in 1852. 

In the Annals of the Four Masters it is said: " The age of 
Christ 438, the tenth year of King Laeghaire (Lairy), the Senchus 
M6r and Feineachas of Ireland were purified and written." 
This entry has ample historical corroboration. Of many separate 
treatises dealing with special branches of the law, the Book of 
Aicill, composed of opinions or placita of King Cormac Mac Art, 
otherwise Cormac ua Quim, Ard-Rig of Erinn from a.d. 227 until 
266, and Cennfaeladh the Learned, who lived in the first part 
of the 7th century, is the most important. 

The text and earlier commentaries are in the Bearla Feini — 
the most archaic form of the Celtic or Gaelic language. From 
gradual changes in the living tongue through a long expanse of 
time many words, phrases and idioms in the Bearla Feini became 
obsolete, and are so difficult to translate that the official transla- 
tions are to some extent confessedly conjectural. In many cases 
only opening words of the original text remain. Wherever the 
text is whole, it is curt, elliptical, and yet rhythmical to a degree 
attainable only through long use. The rigorously authentic 
character of these laws, relating to, and dealing with, the actual 
realities of life, and with institutions and a state of society 
nowhere else revealed to the same extent, the extreme antiquity 
both of the provisions and of the language, and the meagreness 
of continental material illustrative of the same things, endow 
them with exceptional archaic, archaeological and philological 
interest. 

In the earliest times all learned men, whether specially learned 
in law or not, appear to have acted as judges. Gradually as 
literature and learning increased, judgments delivered by men 
without special legal training fell into disfavour. In the 1st 
century of the Christian era, when Conchobhar or Conor Mac 
Nessa was king of Ulster, a crisis was reached, the result of which 
was that no man was allowed to act as Brehon until he had 
studied the full law course, which occupied twenty years, and 
had passed a rigorous public examination. The course of study 
for Brehon and Ollamh, advocate and law-agent respectively, is 
carefully laid down in the law itself. The Brehonship was not 
an office of state like that of the modern judge, but a profession 
in which success depended upon ability and judgment. The 
Brehon was an arbitrator, umpire, and expounder of the law, 
rather than a judge in the modern acceptation. It appears, 
without being expressly stated, that the facts of a case were 
investigated and ascertained by laymen, probably by the 
Aireachtas — a local assembly or jury — before submission to a 
Brehon for legal decision. A Brehon whose decision was reversed 



upon appeal was liable to damages, loss of position and of free 
lands, if any, disgrace, and a consequent loss of his profession. 
No Brehon had any fixed territorial jurisdiction. A party 
initiating proceedings could select any Brehon he pleased, if 
there were more than one in his district. Every king or chief 
of sufficient territory retained an official Brehon, who was pro- 
vided with free land for his maintenance. In ordinary cases the 
Brehon's fee was said to have been one-twelfth of the amount 
at stake. 

Assemblies, national, provincial and local, were a marked 
characteristic of ancient Irish life. They all, without exception, 
discharged some legal functions, legislative or administrative, 
and even in those in which amusement predominated, the Cdin 
law was publicly rehearsed. Most of the assemblies were annual, 
some triennial, some lasted only a day or two, others a week and 
occasionally longer. All originated in pagan funeral or com- 
memorative rites, and continued to be held, even in Christian 
times, in very ancient cemeteries. They were called by different 
names — Feis, Aenach, Aireachtas, Dal, &c. 

The Feis of Tara, in Meath, was from its origin seven centuries 
before Christ down to a.d. 560, mainly national and political, 
being convened by the Ard-Rig, held at his residence, presided 
over by him, and consisting of the provincial kings, tanists, 
flaiths, Brehons, warriors, historians, poets and other distin- 
guished men from the whole of Ireland. It was due to be held 
every third year for the purpose of " preserving the laws and 
rules," and it might be called specially on any urgent occasion. 
After the statesmen had consulted, the laws were proclaimed, 
with any modifications agreed upon. Then the proceedings 
became festive, queens and great ladies taking part. The Feis 
of a.d. 560 was the last regular one held at Tara because the 
monarch ceased to reside there. One national assembly of an 
exceptional character was held at Tara in a.d. 697, by a decree 
of which women were emancipated from liability to military 
service. 

The Aenach held annually at Tailltenn, also in Meath, was a 
general assembly of the people without restriction of rank, clan 
or country, and became the most celebrated for athletic sports, 
games and contests. Yet even here the laws were read aloud, 
and it is not without significance that the last national assembly 
held at Tailltenn under King Rhoderic O'Connor in n 68 was 
a political one. 

The Ddl-Criche ( = territorial assembly), held at Uisneach in 
Westmeath, was a gathering for political and quasi-legislative 
purposes. At one assembly there about a century before Christ, 
a uniform law of distraint for the whole of Ireland was adopted 
on the motion of Sen, son of Aige. This did not prevent the 
gatherings at Uisneach from being for ages celebrated for gaiety 
and amusement. 

Each provincial kingdom and each tuath had assemblies of 
its own. Every flaith and flaith-fine was a member of a local 
assembly, the clan system conferring the qualification, and there 
being no other election. 

An assembly when convened by the Bruigh-fer for the special 
purpose of electing a tanist or successor to the king was called 
a Tocomra. 

Very careful provision is made for the preparation of the sites 
of great assemblies, and the preservation of peace and order at 
them is sanctioned by the severest penalties of the law. The 
operation of every legal process calculated to occasion friction, 
such as seizure of property, was suspended during the time the 
assemblies lasted. 

The term Rig (reeh=rex, king) was applied to four classes or 
grades of rulers, the lower grades being grouped, each group being 
subject to one of their number, and all being subject to, and owing 
tribute and allegiance to the Ard-Rig ( = supreme king of Erinn). 
The Ard-Rig had an official residence at Tara and the kingdom 
of Meath for his special use. The provincial king, Rig Cuicidh, 
also had an official residence and kingdom of his own, together with 
allegiance and tribute from each Rig-mor-Tuatha in his province, 
who in his turn received tribute and allegiance from each Rig- 
Tuatha under subjection to him. The Rig-Tuatha received 



BREHON LAWS 



489 



tribute and allegiance from the flaiths or nobles in his tuath. 
The tuath was the political unit, and the ruler of it was the lowest 
to whom the term " king " was applied. For each payment of 
tribute a king always made some return. Every king was obliged, 
on his inauguration, to swear that he would govern justly and 
according to law, to which he remained always subject. The 
Ard-Rig was selected by the sub-kings and other leading men 
who legally constituted the Feis of Tara, the sub-kings by those 
under them in their respective spheres. No person not of full 
age, imperfectly educated, stupid, blind, deaf, deformed or other- 
wise defective in mind or body, or for any reason whatsoever 
unfit to discharge the duties or unworthy to represent the man- 
hood of the nation, could be king, even though he were the 
eldest son of the preceding king. "It is a forbidden thing for 
one with a blemish to be king at Tara." 

Tuath, Cinel and Clann were synonyms meaning a small 
tribe or nation descended from a common ancestor. A king and 
clan being able, subject to certain limitations, to adopt new 
members or families, or amalgamate with another clan, the 
theory of common origin was not rigidly adhered to. Kinship 
with the clan was an essential qualification for holding any office 
or property. The rules of kinship largely determined status with 
its correlative rights and obligations, supplied the place of 
contract and of laws affecting the ownership, disposition and 
devolution of property, constituting the clan an organic, self- 
contained entity, a political, social and mutual insurance co- 
partnership. The solidarity of the clan was its most important 
and all-pervading characteristic. The entire territory occupied 
by a clan was the common and absolute property of that clan. 
Subject to this permanent and fundamental ownership, part of the 
land was set apart for the maintenance of the king as such. 
Warriors, statesmen, Brehons, Ollamhs, physicians, poets, and 
even eminent workers in the more important arts, were, in 
different degrees, rewarded with free lands for their respective 
public services. On the death of any person so rewarded, the 
land in theory reverted to the clan; but if like services continued 
to be rendered by the son'or other successor, and accepted by the 
clan, the land was not withdrawn. The successors of statesmen, 
for whom the largest provision was made, became a permanent 
nobility. Flaith (flah = noble chief) was a term applied to a man 
of this rank. Rank, with the accompanying privileges, juris- 
diction and responsibility, was based upon a qualification of 
kinship and of property, held by a family for a specified number 
of generations, together with certain concurrent conditions; and 
it could be lost by loss of property, crime, cowardice or other dis- 
graceful conduct. The flaiths in every tuath and all ranks of 
society were organized on the same hierarchical pattern as 
royalty. A portion of land called the Cumhal Senorba was devoted 
to the support of widows, orphans and old childless people. 

Fine (finna), originally meaning family, came in course of time 
to be applied to a group of kindred families or to a whole clan. 
From differences between incidental accounts written in different 
ages, it appears that the social system underwent some change. 
For the purpose of conveying some idea, one theory may be 
taken, according to which the fine was made up of seventeen 
clansmen, with their families, viz. the Geilfine consisting of 
the flaith-fine and four others in the same or nearest degree of 
kinship to the centre, and the Deirbhfine, Tarfine and Innfine, 
each consisting of four heads of families, forming widening 
concentric circles of kinship to which the rights and liabilities 
of the fine extended with certainty, but in diminishing degrees. 

In course of time a large and increasing proportion of the good 
land became, under the titles so far described, limited private 
property. The area of arable land available for the common use 
of the clansmen was gradually diminished by these encroachments, 
but was still always substantial. A share of this was the birth- 
right of every law-abiding member of the Feini who needed it. 
To satisfy this title and give a start in life to some young men 
who would otherwise have got none, this land was subject to 
Gabhailcine ( = clan- resumption), meaning that the clan resumed 
the whole area at intervals of a few years for a fresh distribution 
after some occupants had died, and young men by attaining 



manhood had become entitled. Hence the Anglo-Irish word 
gavelkind. Anciently this re-distribution extended throughout 
the clan at the same time. Later it extended only to the land of 
a fine, each fine making its own distribution at its own time and 
in its own way as determined by the seventeen men above 
specified. In this distribution men might or might not receive 
again their former portions. In the latter case compensation 
was made for unexhausted improvements. This land could not 
be sold, nor evea let except for a season in case of domestic 
necessity. The Feini who used it had no landlord and no rent 
to pay for this land, and could not be deprived of it except by 
the clan for a crime. They were subject only to public tributes 
and the ordinary obligations of free men. Presumably their 
homesteads were not on this land and were not subject to 
Gabhailcine. Neither were the unfenced and unappropriated 
common lands — waste, bog, forest and mountain — which all 
clansmen were free to use promiscuously at will. 

There was hardly any selling and little letting of land in ancient 
times. Flaiths and other persons holding large areas let to 
clansmen, who then became Ceiles, not land, but the privilege 
of feeding upon land a number of cattle specified by agreement. 
Flaiths and Bo-aires also let cattle to a ceile who had none or 
not enough, and this was the most prevalent practice. There 
were two distinct methods of letting and hiring — saer ( = free) 
and daer ( = base), the conditions being fundamentally different. 
The conditions of saer-tenure were largely settled by the law, 
were comparatively easy, did not require any security to be 
given, left the ceile free within the limits of justice to end the 
connexion, left him competent in case of dispute to give evidence 
against that of the flaith, and did not impose any liability on 
the fine of the ceile. By continued user of the same land for some 
years and discharge of the public obligations in respect of it in 
addition to the ciss or payment as tenant, a ceile became a sub- 
owner or permanent tenant and could not be evicted. There is 
no provision in these laws for evicting any one. For the hire of 
cattle a usual payment was one beast in seven per annum for 
seven years; after which the cattle that remained became the 
property of the hirer. A saer-ceile on growing wealthy might 
become a bo-aire. Daer-tenure, whether of cattle or of the 
right to graze cattle upon land, was subject to a ciss-ninsciss 
( = wearisome tribute), for the payment of which security had to 
be given. A man not in the enjoyment of full civil rights, if 
able to find security, could become a daer-ceile. A free clansman 
by becoming a daer-ceile lowered his own status and that of his 
fine, became incompetent to give evidence against that of a flaith, 
and could not end the connexion until the end of the term except 
by a large payment. The members of his fine were liable, in 
the degree of their relationship, to make good out of their own 
property any default in the payments. Hence this tenure could 
not be legally entered into by a free clansman without the permis- 
sion of his fine. Daer-ceiles were also exposed to casual burdens, 
like that of lodging and feeding soldiers when in their district. 
All payments were made in kind. When the particular kind was 
not specified by the law or by agreement, the payments were 
made according to convenience in horses, cattle, sheep, pigs, 
wool, butter, bacon, corn, vegetables, yarn, dye-plants, leather, 
cloth, articles of use or ornament, &c. As the clan system 
relaxed, and the fine lost its legal power of fixing the amounts 
of public tributes, which were similarly payable to the flaith, 
and neglected its duty of seeing that those tributes were duly 
applied, the flaith became able to increase these tributes with 
little check, to confuse them with rent, to confuse jurisdiction 
with ownership, and to exalt himself at the expense of his fellow- 
clansmen. A flaith by arranging that his tenants should make 
their payments at different periods of the year, secured a constant 
and copious supply without an inconvenient surplus. 

People who did not belong to the clan and were not citizens were 
in a base condition and incompetent to appear in court in suit 
or defence except through a freeman. The Bothach ( = cottier) 
and the Sen-cleithe ( = old dependent) were people who, though 
living for successive generations attached to the families 
of flaiths, did not belong to the clan and had no rights of 



49° 



BREHON LAWS 



citizenship. Fuidhirs, or manual labourers without property, were 
the lowest section of the population. Some were born in this 
condition, some clansmen were depressed into it by crime, con- 
sequences of war or other misfortune; and strangers of a low class 
coming into the territory found their level in it. The fuidhirs 
also were divided into saer and daer; the former being free by 
industry and thrift to acquire some property, after which five 
of them could club together to acquire rights corresponding to 
those of one freeman. The daer-fuidhirs were«tramps, fugitives, 
captives, &c. 

Fosterage, the custom of sending children to be reared and 
educated in the families of fellow-clansmen, was so prevalent, 
especially among the wealthy classes, and the laws governing it are 
so elaborate and occupied such a large space, that some mention 
of it here is inevitable. Beyond mention, there is little to be 
said, owing to the absence of general principles in an infinity of 
specific details, mostly domestic and apparently trivial. A child 
in fosterage was reared and educated suitably for the position 
it was destined to fill in life. There was fosterage for affection, 
for payment and for a literary education. Fosterage began 
when the child was a year old and ended when the marriageable 
age was reached, unless previously terminated by death or crime. 
Every fostered person was under an obligation to provide, if 
necessary, for the old age of foster-parents. The affection 
arising from this relationship was usually greater, and was 
regarded as more sacred than that of blood relationship. 

The solidarity of clan and fine in their respective spheres, the 
provisions of the system, the simple rural life, and the prevalence 
of barter and payments in kind, left comparatively little occa- 
sion for contracts between individuals. Consequently the rules 
relating to contract are not very numerous. They are, however, 
sufficiently solemn. No contract affecting land was valid unless 
made with the consent of the fine and in the presence of the 
Aire-Forgaill. Contracts relating to other kinds of property 
are more numerous. When important or involving a consider- 
able amount, they had to be made in the presence of a flaith or 
magistrate. The A irc-Coisring presided over most of the contracts 
of the common people. The parties to a contract should be free 
citizens, of full age, sound mind, free to contract or not, and 
under no legal disability. " The world would be in a state of 
confusion if express contracts were not binding." From the 
repeated correlative dicta that " nothing is due without deserv- 
ing," and that a thing done " for God's sake," i.e. gratis, imposed 
little obligation, it is clear that the importance of valuable con- 
sideration was fully recognized. So also was the importance 
of time. " To be asleep avails no one "; " Sloth takes away a 
man's welfare." Contracts made by the following persons were 
invalid: (i) a servant without his master's authority; (2) a 
monk without authority from his abbot or manager of tempor- 
alities; (3) a son subject to his father without the father's 
authority; (4) an infant, lunatic, or " one who had not the full 
vigilance of reason "; (5) a wife in relation to her husband's 
property without his authority. She was free to hold and deal 
with property of her own and bind it by contract. If a son 
living with his father entered into a contract with his father's 
knowledge, the father was held to have ratified the contract 
unless he promptly repudiated it. " One is held to adopt what 
he does not repudiate after knowledge, having the power." 
Contract of sale or barter with warranty could be dissolved for 
fraud, provided action was taken within a limited time after the 
fraud had become known. Treaties and occasional very im- 
portant contracts were made " blood-covenants " and inviolable 
by drawing a drop of blood from the little finger of each of the 
contracting parties, blending this with water, and both drinking 
the mixture out of the same cup. The forms of legal evidence 
were pledges, documents, witnesses and oaths. In cases of 
special importance the pledges were human beings, " hostage 
sureties." These were treated as in their own homes accord- 
ing to the rank to which they belonged, and were discharged on 
the performance of the contract. If the contract was broken, 
they became prisoners and might be fettered or made to work as 
slaves until the obligation was satisfied. Authentic documents 



were considered good evidence. A witness was in all cases 
important, and in some essential to the validity of a contract. 
His status affected the force of the contract as well as the value 
of his evidence; and the laws appear to imply that by becoming 
a witness, a man incurred liabilities as a surety. The pre- 
Christian oath might be by one or more of the elements, powers 
or phenomena of nature, as the sun, moon, water, night, day, 
sea, land. The Christian oath might be on a copy of the Gospels, 
a saint's crozier, relic or other holy thing. 

These laws recognized crime, but in the same calm and deliberate 
way in which they recognized contract and other things seriously 
affecting the people. Although we find in the poems of Dubh- 
thach, written in the 5th century and prefixed to the Senchus 
Mor, the sentences, " Let every one die who kills a human being," 
and " Every living person that inflicts death shall suffer death," 
capital punishment did not prevail in Ireland before or after. 
The laws uniformly discountenanced revenge, retaliation, the 
punishment of one crime by another, and permitted capital 
punishment only in the last resort and in ultimate default of 
every other form of redress. They contain elaborate provision 
for dealing with crime, but the standpoint from which it is 
regarded and treated is essentially different from ours. The 
state, for all its elaborate structure, did not assume jurisdiction 
in relation to any crimes except political ones, such as treason 
or the disturbance of a large assembly. For these it inflicted 
the severest penalties known to the law — banishment, confisca- 
tion of property, death or putting out of eyes. A crime against 
the person, character or property of an individual or family was 
regarded as a thing for which reparation should be made, but the 
individual or family had to seek the reparation by a personal 
action. This differed from a civil action only in the terms 
employed and the elements used in calculating the amount of 
the reparation. The function of a judge in a criminal as in a 
civil action was to see that the facts, with modifying circum- 
stances, were fully and truly submitted to him, and then by 
applying the law to these facts to ascertain and declare the 
amount of compensation that would make a legal adjustment. 
For this amount the guilty person, and in his default his kindred, 
became legally debtor, and the injured person or family became 
entitled to recover the amount like a civil debt by distraint, if 
not paid voluntarily. There were no police, sheriffs or public 
prisons. The decisions of the law were executed by the persons 
concerned, supported by a highly organized and disciplined 
public opinion springing from honour and interest and inherent 
in the solidarity of the clan. There is good reason to believe 
that the system was as effectual in the prevention and punish- 
ment of crime and in the redress of wrongs as any other human 
contrivance has ever been. 

In calculating the amount of compensation the most char- 
acteristic and important element was Einechlan ( = honour-price, 
honour- value), a value attaching to every free person, varying 
in amount from one cow to thirty cows according to rank. It was 
the assessed value of status or caput. It was frequently of con- 
sequence in relation to contracts and other clan affairs; but it 
emerges most clearly in connexion with crime. By the commis- 
sion of crime, breach of contract, or other disgraceful or injurious 
conduct, Einechlan was diminished or destroyed, a capitis 
diminulio occurred, apart from any other punishment. Though 
existing apart from fine, Einechlan was the first element in almost 
every fine. Dire was the commonest word for fine, whether great 
or small. Eric ( = reparation, redemption) was the fine for 
"separating body from soul"; but the term was used in lighter 
cases also. In capital cases the word sometimes meant Einechlan, 
sometimes coirp-dire ( = body-fine) , but most correctly the sum 
of these two. It may be taken that, subject to modifying cir- 
cumstances, a person guilty of homicide had to pay (1) coirp-dire 
for the destruction of life, irrespective of rank; (2) the honour- 
value of the victim; (3) his own honour-value if the deed was 
unintentional; and (4) double his own honour- value if committed 
with malice aforethought. The sum of these was in all cases 
heavy; heaviest when the parties were wealthy. The amount 
was recoverable as a debt from the criminal to the extent of his 



BREISACH 



49 1 



property, and in his default from the members of his fine in sums 
determined by the degree of relationship; and it was distribut- 
able among the members of the fine of a murdered person in the 
same proportions, like a distribution among the next of kin. 
The fine of a murderer could free themselves from liability by 
giving up the murderer and his goods, or if he escaped, by giving 
up any goods he had left, depriving him of clanship, and lodging 
a pledge against his future misdeeds. In these circumstances 
the law held the criminal's life forfeit, and he might be slain or 
taken as a prisoner or slave. He could escape only by becoming 
a daer-fuidhir in some distant territory. When the effect of a 
crime did not go beyond an individual, if that individual's fine 
did not make good their claim while the criminal lived, it lapsed 
on his death. " The crime dies with the criminal." If an un- 
known stranger or person without property caught red-handed 
in the commission of a crime refused to submit to arrest, it was 
lawful to maim or slay him according to the magnitude of the 
attempted crime. " A person who came to inflict a wound on 
the body may be safely killed when unknown and without a 
name, and when there is no power to arrest him at the time of 
committing the trespass." For crimes against property the 
usual penalty, as in breach of contract, was generic restitution, 
the quantity, subject to modifying circumstances, being twice 
the amount taken or destroyed. 

Distress of seizure of property being the universal mode of 
obtaining satisfaction, whether for crime, breach of contract, 
non-payment of debt, or any other cause, the law of distress 
came into operation as the solvent of almost every dispute. 
Hence it is the most extensive and important branch, if not 
more than a branch, of these ancient laws. Of several words 
meaning distress, athgabail was the most frequently used. A 
person having a liquidated claim might either sue a debtor or 
proceed at his peril to seize without this preliminary. In the 
latter case the defendant could stop the progress of the seizure 
by paying the debt, giving a pledge, or demanding a trial; and 
he then could choose a Brehon. Distress was of two kinds — 
(i) athgabal ar jut ( = distress on length, i.e. with time, with 
delays); and (2) athgabail tulla ( = immediate distress). Which 
method was pursued depended partly upon the facts of the case 
and partly upon the respective ranks of the parties. A person 
entitled to seize property had to do it himself, accompanied, if 
the amount was large, by a law agent and witnesses. No man 
was entitled to seize unless he owned, or had a surety who owned, 
sufficient property for indemnity or adjustment in case the 
seizure should be found to have been wrongful. The formalities 
varied in different circumstances and also at different times in 
the long ages in which these laws prevailed. Some forms may, 
in the Irish as in other legal systems, have become merely cere- 
monial and fictitious. 

Tellach ( = seizure of immovable property) was made in three 
periods or delays of ten days each ( = 30 days) . The first step 
was a notice that unless the debt was paid immediately seizure 
would be made. Ten days later, the plaintiff crossed the fence 
in upon the land, with a law agent, a witness and a pair of 
horses yoked or harnessed, and in a loud voice stated the amount 
of the debt and called upon the defendant to pay it according 
to law. On receiving no answer, or an unsatisfactory one, he 
withdrew. After an interval of ten days more, the creditor 
entered with his law agent, two witnesses and four horses, went 
farther in upon the land, repeated his demand, and if refused 
withdrew. Finally, after a further interval of ten days, he 
entered once more with his law agent, three witnesses and eight 
horses, drove up to the debtor's house, repeated his demand, and 
if not satisfied drove a herd of cattle or a flock of sheep in upon 
the farm and left men to care for them. 

Athgabail ordinarily meant the seizure of movable property. 
The following technical terms will indicate the procedure in 
distress with time: — Aurfocre ( = demand of payment, stating 
the amount in presence of witnesses) ; apad ( = delay) ; athgabail 
( = the actual seizure) ; anad ( = delay after seizure, the thing 
remaining in the debtor's possession) ; loxal ( = the taking away 
of the thing seized) ; fasc ( = notice to the debtor of the amount 



due, the mainder or pound in which the thing seized is impounded, 
and the name of the law agent) ; dithim ( = delay during which 
the thing is in pound) ; lo bad ( = destruction or forfeiture of the 
debtor's ownership and substitution of the creditor's ownership). 
There was no sale, because sale for money was little known. 
The property in the thing seized, to the amount of the debt and 
expenses, became legally transferred from the debtor to the 
creditor, not all at once but in stages fixed by law. A creditor 
was not at liberty to seize household goods, farming utensils, 
or any goods the loss of which would prevent the debtor recover- 
ing from embarrassment, so long as there was other property 
which could be seized. A seizure could be made only between- 
sunrise and sunset. " If a man who is sued evades justice, 
knowing the debt to be due of him, double the debt is payable 
by him and a fine of five seds." When a large debt was clearly 
due, and there was no property to seize, the debtor himself could: 
be seized and compelled to work as a prisoner or slave until the 
debt was paid. 

When a defendant was of rank superior to that of the plaintiff, 
distress had to be preceded by troscad ( = fasting). This is a, 
legal process unknown elsewhere except in parts cf India. The 
plaintiff having made his demand and waited a certain time 
without result, went and sat without food before the door of 
the defendant. To refuse to submit to fasting was considered 
indelibly disgraceful, and was one of the things which legally 
degraded a man by reducing or destroying his honour-value. 
The law said " he who does not give a pledge to fasting is an 
evader of all; he who disregards all things shall not be paid by 
God or man." If a plaintiff having duly fasted did not receive 
within a certain time the satisfaction of his claim, he was entitled 
to distrain as in the case of an ordinary defendant, and to seize 
double the amount that would have satisfied him in the first 
instance. If a person fasting in accordance with law died during 
or in consequence of the fast, the person fasted upon was held 
guilty of murder. Fasting could be stopped by paying the debt, 
giving a pledge, or submitting to the decision of a Brehon. A 
creditor fasting after a reasonable offer of settlement had been 
made to him forfeited his claim. " He who fasts notwithstanding 
the offer of what should be accorded to him, forfeits his legal 
right according to the decision of the Feini." 

Authorities. — Since Sir Samuel Ferguson wrote his article on 
"BrehonLaws" in the 9th editionof this Encyclopaedia ,much research 
has been done on the subject, and Ferguson's account is no longer 
accepted by scholars, either as regards the language or the substance 
of the laws. Pending the work of a second Brehon Law Commission, 
the Laws are best studied in the six imperfect volumes {Ancient 
Laws of Ireland, 1865-1901) produced by the first Commission 
(ignoring their long and worthless introductions), together with , 
Dr. Whitley Stokes's Criticism (London, Nutt, 1903) of Atkinson's 
Glossary (Dublin, 1901). The following are important references 
(kindly supplied by Dr Whitley Stokes) for detailed research : — ■ 
R. Dareste, tttudes d'histoire de droit, pp. 356-381 (Paris, 1889); 
Arbois de Jubainville and Paul Collinet, Etudes sur le droit celtique 
(2 vols., Paris, 1895); Joyce, Social History of Ancient Ireland, 
vol. i. pp. 168-214 (2 vols., London, 1903); Zeitschrift fur celtische 
Philologie, iv. 221, the Copenhagen fragments of the Laws (Halle, 
: 903) ; important letters in The Academy, Nos. 699, 700, 701, 702, 
703, 704, 706, 707 (substantially covered by Stokes's Criticism) ; 
Revue Celtique, xxv. 344; Erin, i. 209-315 (collation by Kuno Meyer 
of the Law-tract Crith Gablach) ; Maine's Early Hist, of Institutions 
(1875) and Early Law and Custom, pp. 162, 180 (1883); Hearn's 
Aryan Household (1879), and Maclennan's Studies in Ancient History, 
pp. 453-507 (1876), contain interesting general reference, but the 
writers were not themselves original students of the laws. L. 
Ginnell's Brehon Laws (1894) may also be consulted. See further 
the article Celt, sections Language and Literature. (L. G.) 

BREISACH, or Altbreisach, a town of Germany, in the 
grand duchy of Baden, on the left bank of the Rhine, standing 
on a basalt rock 250 ft. above the river, 10 m. W. of Freiburg-im- 
Breisgau, and on the railway connecting that city with Colmar. 
Pop. (1900) 3537. It has a fine minster, partly Romanesque, 
partly Gothic, dating from the 10th to the 15th centuries; of 
its two principal towers one is 13th century Gothic, the other 
Romanesque. The interior is remarkable for its rich decorations, 
especially the wood-carving of the high altar, and for many 
interesting tombs and pictures. There is little industry, but a 
considerable trade is done in wines and other agricultural 



4-9^ 



BREISGAU— BREITENFELD 



produce. On the opposite bank of the Rhine, here crossed by a 
railway bridge, lies the little town of Neubreisach and the fort 
Mortier. 

Breisach (Brisiacum), formerly an imperial city and until the 
middle of the 18th century one of the chief fortresses of the 
Empire, is of great antiquity. A stronghold of the Sequani 
(a Gallic tribe, which occupied the country of the Doubs and 
Burgundy), it was captured in the time of Julius Caesar by 
Ariovistus and became known as the Mons Brisiacus. Fortified 
by the emperor Valentian in 369 to defend the Rhine against the 
Germans, it retained its position throughout the middle ages as 
one of the chief bulwarks of Germany and was called the "cushion 
and key (Kissen und Schlttssel) of the German empire." Its 
importance was such that it gave its name to the district Breisgau, 
in which it is situated. In 939 it was taken by the emperor 
Otto I., and after remaining in the exclusive possession of the 
emperors for two centuries, was strengthened and shared for a 
while between them and the bishops of Basel. In 1 254 and 1 262 
the bishops obtained full control over it; but in 1275 it was 
jnade an imperial city by King Rudolph I., and at the beginning 
of the 14th century his son brought it definitively into the posses- 
sion of the Habsburg monarchs, leaving the bishops but few 
privileges. In the Thirty Years' War Breisach successfully 
resisted the Swedes, but after a memorable siege and a defence 
by General von Reisach, one of the most famous in military 
annals, it was forced to capitulate to Duke Bernhard of Saxe- 
Weimar on the 18th of December 1638. The endeavours of the 
emperor Ferdinand III. to retake it were fruitless, and by the 
peace of Westphalia (1648) Breisach was annexed to France. 
By the peace of Ryswick (1697) it was restored to Austria, when 
Louis XIV. built the town and fortress of Neubreisach on the 
left bank of the Rhine. Again in 1703 it fell into the hands of 
the French, owing to treachery, but was ceded to Austria by the 
peace of Rastatt (1714). Yet again, in the War of the Austrian 
Succession, it was captured (1 744) by the French, who dismantled 
the fortifications. They refortined it in 1796, and after passing, 
by the peace of Luneville (1801), together with the Breisgau to 
the duke of Modena, Breisach was by the peace of Pressburg 
(1805) finally incorporated with Baden, when the fortifications 
were razed. During the Franco-German War (1870) Breisach 
suffered severely from bombardment directed against it from 
Neubreisach. 

BREISGAU, a district of Germany, in the grand duchy of 
Baden. It extends along the right bank of the Rhine from Basel 
to Kehl, and includes the principal peaks of the southern Black 
Forest and the Freiburg valley. The Breisgau, originally a pagus 
• or gau of the Frankish empire, was ruled during the middle ages 
by hereditary counts. Of these the earliest recorded is Birtilo 
(962-995), ancestor of the counts and dukes of Zahringen. 
On the death of Berchthold V. of Zahringen in 1218, his co- 
heiresses brought parts of the Breisgau to the counts of Urach 
and Kyburg, while part went to the margraves of Baden. At 
the close of the 13th century the Kyburg part of the Breisgau 
passed to the Habsburgs, who in 1368 acquired also the town 
and countship of Freiburg, which had been sold by the counts 
of Urach to the Freiburgers and given in pledge by them to the 
house of Austria in exchange for a loan of the purchase price, 
which they were unable to repay. The male Urach line becoming 
extinct in 1457, an heiress carried what remained of their posses- 
sions in the Breisgau to the house of Baden. In the struggle 
between France and Austria from the 17th century onwards the 
Breisgau frequently changed masters. In 1801 Austria was 
forced to cede it to Ercole III., duke of Modena, in compensation 
for the duchy of which Napoleon had deprived him. His suc- 
cessor Ferdinand took the title of duke of Modena-Breisgau, but 
on his death in 1805 the Breisgau was divided between Baden 
and Wurttemberg. The latter ceded its portion to Baden in 1810. 
. See Stokvis, Manuel d'histoire, &c. (Leiden, 1890-1893). 

BREISLAK, SCIPIONE (1748-1826), Italian geologist of 
German parentage, was born at Rome in 1748. He early dis- 
tinguished himself as professor of mathematical and mechanical 
philosophy in the college of Ragusa; but after residing there for 



several years he returned to his native city, where he became a 
professor in the Collegio Nazareno, and began to form the fine 
mineralogical cabinet in that institution. His leisure was 
dedicated to geological researches in the papal states. His 
account of the aluminous district of Tolfa and adjacent hills, 
published in 1786, gained for him the notice of the king of Naples, 
who invited him to inspect the. mines and similar works in that 
kingdom, and appointed him professor of mineralogy to the 
royal artillery. The vast works for the refining of sulphur in the 
volcanic district of Solfatara were erected under his direction. 
He afterwards made many journeys through the ancient Cam- 
pania to illustrate its geology, and published in 1798 his Topo- 
grafia fisica delta Campania, which contains the results of much 
accurate observation. Breislak also published an essay on the 
physical condition of the seven hills of Rome, which he regarded 
as the remains of a local volcano, — an opinion shown to be 
erroneous by the later researches of G. B. Brocchi. The political 
convulsions of Italy in 1799 brought Breislak to Paris, where he 
remained until 1802, when, being appointed inspector of the 
saltpetre and powder manufactories near Milan, he removed to 
that city. The mineral Breislakite was named after him. He 
died on the 15th of February 1826. His other publications 
include: — Introduzione alia geologia (1811, French ed. 1819); 
Traite sur la structure exterieure du globe, 3 vols, and atlas 
(Milan, 1818, 1822); Descrizione geologica delta provincia di 
Milano (1822). 

BREITENFELD, a village of Germany in the kingdom of 
Saxony, 5§ m. N.N.W. of Leipzig, noted in military history. 
The first battle of Breitenfeld was fought on the 17th of Sep- 
tember 1 63 1, between the allied Swedish and Saxon armies 
under Gustavus Adolphus and the imperial forces under Count 
Tilly. The battlefield is a low ridge running east and west 
between the villages of Gobschelwitz and Breitenfeld, the 
position of the Imperialists lying along the crest from Gobschel- 
witz on the right to a point about 1 m. short of Breitenfeld on 
the left; opposite this position, and behind a group of villages 
on the Loberbach stream, lay the Swedish forces, flanked on 
their left by the Saxon contingent under the elector, who was 
assisted by Arnim. The villages formed the only obstacle on 
the gentle slope lying between the Loberbach and Tilly's line; 
through these villages the Swedes defiled slowly, and formed up 
on the open ground beyond them. Tilly's army was drawn up 
in a continuous line, the infantry ranged in heavy battalions in 
the centre, the cavalry on the wings, and the heavy artillery in a 
mass in front of the infantry. Gustavus arrayed the Swedes in 
two lines and a reserve, infantry in the centre, cavalry on the 
flanks, and the Saxons were drawn up in a similar formation on 
the left of the Swedish left-wing cavalry. So far as can be gauged 
the respective numbers were at least 32,000 Imperialists, 22,000 
Swedes and 15,000 Saxons. The Swedish infantry was drawn 
up on an entirely novel system; each brigade of infantry, com- 
posed of several battalions, was formed in many small and handy 
corps of pikemen and musketeers, and parties of musketeers were 
also detached to support the cavalry. The guns were scattered 
along the front. The Saxons were ranged, like Ti'ly's army, in 
heavy masses of foot and horse preceded by a great battery of 
guns. At 2 p.m. Pappenheim, commanding Tilly's left wing, 
led forward the whole of his cavalry in a furious charge. Feeling 
the fire of the musketeers who were intercalated amongst the 
Swedish horse, Pappenheim swung round to his left and charged 
the Swedish right wing in flank. The Swedes of both lines 
promptly wheeled up, and after a prolonged conflict the Imperial 
horse were driven completely off the field. The attack of Tilly's 
right wing under Fiirstenberg directed against the Saxons was 
more successful. The Saxons were at once broken and routed, 
only a handful under Arnim maintaining the ground. Fiirsten- 
berg pursued the fugitives for many miles, and Tilly with the 
centre of infantry (which, considering the depth of its formations, 
must have possessed great manoeuvring power) rapidly followed 
him and formed up opposite the now exposed left of the Swedes. 
Thereupon the Swedes, in their light and handy formation, 
changed position rapidly and easily to meet him. Tilly's attack 



BREMEN 



493 



was strenuously opposed, and at this moment the decisive stroke 
of the battle was delivered by the Swedish right wing, which, 
having disposed of Pappenheim, swung round and occupied the 
ground originally held by the Imperial infantry, seized Tilly's 
guns, and with them enfiladed the enemy's new line. This put 
an end to the attack of the Imperial foot, and before sunset Tilly 
was in full retreat, hotly pursued and losing heavily in prisoners. 
His losses on the field have been estimated at 7000 killed and 
wounded and almost as many prisoners; the Swedes lost about 
2000 and the Saxons over 4000 men. 

The village of Breitenfeld also gives its name to another great 
battle in the Thirty Years' War (November 2, 1642), in which 
the Swedes under Torstensson defeated the Imperialists under 
the archduke Leopold and Prince Piccolomini, who were seeking 
to relieve Leipzig. The Swedish cavalry decided the day on this 
occasion also. 

BREMEN, a free state in the German empire, bearing the title 
Freie Hansestadt Bremen. It falls into three distinct parts: 
(1) the largest portion, with the city of Bremen, lying on both 
banks, but chiefly on the right, of the lower course of the Weser, 
surrounded by the Prussian province of Hanover and the grand- 
duchy of Oldenburg, and consisting in the main of lowland 
country intersected by canals and dykes; (2) the town and 
district of Vegesack, lying separate from, but immediately north 
of the main portion, on the right bank of the river; (3) the port 
of Bremerhaven, 46 m. down the Weser, at its mouth. Of the 
whole territory, which has an area of 99 sq. m., about one-half 
is meadow and grazing land, one-quarter under tillage, and the 
remainder occupied by a little woodland, some unprofitable 
sandy wastes, the bed of the Weser and the towns. Market 
gardening, the rearing of cattle, for which the district is widely 
famed, and fishing, form the chief occupations of the rural 
population. The climate is mild, but the rainfall (26-9 in. 
annually on the average) is relatively considerable. The popula- 
tion is shown as follows: — 





1900. 


1905. 


Bremen, city .... 

Bremerhaven .... 
Rural districts 


186,822 

3.943 
20,315 

37.327 


214.953 

4,130 

24.159 

20,431 


Total .... 


248,407 


263,673 



Of the inhabitants, who belong to the Lower Saxon (Nieder- 
Sachsen) race and in daily intercourse mostly speak the Low 
German (Plattdeutsch) dialect, about two-thirds are natives of 
the state and one-third immigrants from other parts of Germany, 
chiefly from Hanover and Oldenburg. About 93 % are Protest- 



ants, 6 % Roman Catholics, and only 



Jews. The form 



of government is that of a republic, under a constitution pro 
claimed on the 8th of March 1849, revised on the 21st of February 
1854, the 17th of November 1875, and the 1st of January 1894. 
The sovereignty resides jointly in the senate and the Burgerschaft, 
or Convent of Burgesses. The senate, which is the executive 
power, is composed of sixteen life members, elected by the 
convent, on presentation by the senate. Of these ten at least 
must be lawyers and three merchants. Two of the number 
are nominated by their colleagues as burgomasters, who preside 
in succession for a year at a time and hold office four years, one 
retiring every two years. The Burgerschaft consists of 150 
(formerly 300) representatives, chosen by the citizens for six 
years, and forms the legislative body. Fourteen members are 
elected by such citizens of Bremen (city) as have enjoyed a 
university education, forty by the merchants, twenty by the 
manufacturers and artisans, and forty-eight by the other citizens. 
Of the remaining representatives, twelve are furnished by Bremer- 
haven and Vegesack and sixteen by the rural districts. As a 
member of the German empire, the state of Bremen has one voice 
in the Bundesrat and returns one member to the Imperial diet 
(Reichstag). Formerly Bremen was a free port, but from the 1st 
of October 1888 the whole of the state, with the exception of two 
small free districts in Bremen and Bremerhaven respectively, 



joined the German customs union. The state has two Amts- 
gerichte (courts of first instance) at Bremen and Bremerhaven 
respectively, and a superior court, Landgericht, at Bremen, 
whence appeals lie to the Oberlandesgericht for the Hanseatic 
towns in Hamburg. The judges of the Bremen courts are 
appointed by a committee of members of the senate, the Burger- 
schaft and the bench of judges. By the convention with Prussia 
of the 27th of June 1867, the free state surrendered its right to 
furnish its own contingent to the army, the recruits being after 
that time drafted into the Hanseatic infantry regiment, forming 
a portion of the Prussian IX. army corps. 

BREMEN, a city of Germany, capital of the free state of 
Bremen, and one of the Hanseatic towns. It lies on a sandy 
plain on both banks of the Weser, 46 m. from the North Sea and 
71 m. S.W. from Hamburg by rail, on the mainline to Cologne. 
Pop. (1905) 214,953. It has also direct railway communication 
with Berlin via Uelzen, Hanover and Bremerhaven. The city 
consists of four quarters, — the old town (Altstadt) and its 
suburban extensions (Vorstadt) being on the right bank of the 
river, and the new town (Neustadt) with its southern suburb 
(Siidervorstadt) on the left bank. The river is crossed by three 
bridges, the old, the new (1872-1875) Kaiserbriicke, and the 
railway bridge, with a gangway for foot passengers. The 
ramparts of the old town have long been converted into beautiful 
promenades and gardens, the moats forming a chain of lakes. 

The romantic old town, with its winding streets and lanes, 
flanked by massive gabled houses, dates from the medieval days 
of Hanseatic prosperity. On the market square stands the fine 
town hall (Rathaus), dating from the 15th century, with a hand- 
some Renaissance facade of a somewhat later date, and before it 
a stone statue of Roland, the emblem of civic power. Its cele- 
brated underground wine cellar has been immortalized by Wilhelm 
Hauff in his Phantasien im Bremer Ratskeller. The town hall 
is internally richly embellished and has a gallery of interesting 
paintings. In an upper hall a model of an old Hanseatic frigate, 
with the device Navigare necesse est, vivere non est necesse, hangs 
from the ceiling. Among other ancient buildings, situated 
chiefly in the old town, are the following: — the cathedral of 
St Peter (formerly the archiepiscopal and now the Lutheran 
parish church), erected in the 12th century on the site of Charle- 
magne's wooden church, and famous for its Bleikeller, or lead 
vault, in which bodies can be preserved for a long time without 
suffering decomposition; the church of St Ansgarius, built about 
1243, with a spire 400 ft. high; the church of Our Lady, dating 
from the 12th and 13th centuries; the 12th century Romanesque 
church of St Stephen; the Schutting, or merchants' hall, origin- 
ally built in 1619 for the cloth-traders' gild; the Stadthaus (town 
house), formerly the archiepiscopal palace, and converted to its 
present uses only in 181 9. The most important and imposing 
among the more modern architectural additions to the city are 
the handsome Gothic exchange, completed in 1867, the municipal 
theatre, the municipal library, the post office (1878), the law 
courts (1891-1895), the wool exchange, the German bank, the 
municipal museum for natural science, ethnology and commerce, 
and the fine railway station (1888). The principal memorials 
embrace, besides the Roland, the Willehad fountain (1883), the 
monument of the Franco-German War (erected 1875), the centaur 
fountain (1891), an equestrian statue of the emperor William I. 
(1893), and a statue of the poet Theodor Korner. A beautiful 
park, Burgerpark, has been laid out in the Burgerweide, or 
meadows, lying beyond the railway station to the north-east of 
the city. It is a peculiarity of the domestic accommodation of 
Bremen that the majority of the houses, unlike the custom in 
most other German towns, where flats prevail, are occupied by 
a single family only. 

The industries and manufactures of Bremen are of considerable 
variety and extent, but are more particularly developed in such 
branches as are closely allied to navigation, such as shipbuilding, 
founding, engine-building and rope-making. Next in importance 
come those of tobacco, snuff, cigars, the making of cigar boxes, 
jute-spinning, distilling, sugar refining and the shelling of rice. 
Bremen owes its fame almost exclusively to its transmaritime 



494 



BREMER 



trade, mainly imports. By the completion of the engineering 
works on the Weser in 1887-1899, whereby, among other im- 
provements, the river was straightened and deepened, to 18 ft., 
large ocean-going vessels are able to steam right up to the city 
itself. It has excellent railway connexions with the chief 
industrial districts of Germany. Like Hamburg, it does pre- 
dominantly a transit trade; it is especially important as the 
importer of raw products from America. In two articles, tobacco 
and rice, Bremen is the greatest market in the world; in cotton 
and indigo it takes the first place on the continent, and it is a 
serious rival of Hamburg and Antwerp in the import of wool 
and petroleum. The value of the total imports (both sea-borne 
and by river and rail) increased from £22,721,700 in 1883 to 
about £60,000,000 in 1905; the imports from the United States, 
from .£9,755,000 in 1883 to about £25,000,000 in 1905. The 
countries from which imports principally come are the United 
States, England, Germany, Russia, the republics of South 
America, the Far East and Australia. The exports rose from 
a total of £26,096,500 in 1883 to £62,000,000 in 1905. The 
number of vessels which entered the ports of the free state (i.e. 
Bremen city, Bremerhaven and Vegesack) increased from 2869 
of 1,258,529 aggregate tonnage in 1883, to 4024 of 2,716,633 tons 
in 1900. Bremen is the centre for some of the more important 
of the German shipping companies, especially of the North 
German Lloyd (founded in 1856), which, on the 1st of January 
1905, possessed a fleet of 382 steamers of 693,892 tons, besides 
lighters and similar craft. Bremen also shares with Hamburg 
the position of being one of the two chief emigration ports of 
Germany. There are three docks, all to the north-west of the 
city — namely, the free harbour (which was opened in 1888), the 
winter harbour, and the timber and industrial harbour. Internal 
communication is served by an excellent system of electric 
tramways, and there is also a local steamboat service with 
neighbouring villages on the Weser. 

History. — According to Brandes, quoting Martin Luther in 
the Lexicon Philologicum, the name is derived from Bram, Bram, 
i.e. hem = the river-bank, or confine of the land on which it was 
built. In 787 Bremen was chosen by St Willehad, whom Charle- 
magne had established as bishop in the pagi of the lower Weser, 
as his see. In 848 the destruction of Hamburg by the Normans 
led to the transference of the archiepiscopal see of Hamburg to 
Bremen, which became the seat of the archbishops of Hamburg - 
Bremen. In 965 the emperor Otto I. granted to Archbishop 
Adaldag " in the place called Bremen " (in loco Bremun nuncu- 
pate) the right to establish a market, and the full administrative, 
fiscal and judicial powers of a count, no one but the bishop or his 
advocatus being allowed to exercise authority in the city. This 
privilege, by which the archbishop was lord of the city and his 
Vogt its judge, was frequently confirmed by subsequent emperors, 
ending under Frederick I. in 1 1 58. Though, however, there is no 
direct evidence of the existence of any communal organization 
during this period, it is clear from the vigorous part taken by 
the burghers in the struggle of the emperor Frederick with Henry 
the Lion of Saxony that some such organization very early 
existed. Yet in the privilegium granted to the townspeople by 
Frederick I. in 11 86 the emperor had done no more than 
guarantee them their personal liberties. The earliest recognition 
of any civic organization they may have possessed they owed to 
Archbishop Hartwig II. (1 184-1207), who had succeeded in 
uniting against him his chapter, the nobles and the citizens; and 
the first mention of the city council occurs in a charter of Arch- 
bishop Gerhard II. in 1225, though the consules here named 
doubtless represented a considerably older institution. In the 
13 th century, however, whatever the civic organization of the 
townsfolk may have been, it was still strictly subordinate to the 
archbishop and his Vogt; the council could issue regulations 
only with the consent of the former, while in the judicial work of 
the latter, save. in small questions of commercial dishonesty, 
its sole function was advisory. By the middle of the 14th century 
this situation was exactly reversed; the elected town council 
was the supreme legislative power in all criminal and civil causes, 
and in the court of the advocatus two Ratsmanner sat as assessors. 



The victory had been won over the archbishop; but a fresh peril 
had developed in the course of the 13 th century in the growth 
of a patrician class, which, as in so many other cities, threatened 
to absorb all power into the hands of a close oligarchy. In 1304 
the commonalty rose against the patricians and drove them from 
the city, and in the following year gained a victory over the exiles 
and their allies, the knights, which was long celebrated by an 
annual service of thanksgiving. This was the beginning of 
troubles that lasted intermittently throughout the century. 
Bremen had been admitted to the Hanseatic league in 1283, 
but was excluded in 1285, and not readmitted until 1358. Owing 
to the continued civic unrest it was again excluded in 1427, and 
only readmitted in 1433 when the old aristocratic constitution 
was definitively restored. But though in Bremen the efforts of 
the craftsmen's " arts " to secure a share of power had been held 
in check and the gilds never gained any importance, the city 
government did not, as at Cologne and elsewhere, develop into 
a close patrician oligarchy. Power was in the hands of the 
wealthy, but the avenues to power were open to those who knew 
how to acquire the necessary qualification. There was thus no 
artificial restraint put upon individual enterprise, and the 
question of the government having been settled, Bremen rapidly 
developed in wealth and influence. 

The Reformation was introduced into Bremen in 1522 by 
Heinrich von Ziitphen. Archbishop Christopher of Brunswick- 
Wolfenbiittel (1487-1558), a brutal libertine, hated for his lusts 
and avarice, looked on the reforming movement as a revolt against 
himself. He succeeded in getting the reformer burned; but 
found himself involved in a life and death struggle with the city. 
In 1532 Bremen joined the league of Schmalkalden, and twice 
endured a siege by the imperial forces. In 1 547 it was only saved 
by Mansfeld's victory at Drakenburg. Archbishop Christopher 
was succeeded in 1558 by his brother Georg, bishop of Minden 
(d. 1566), who, though he himself was instrumental in introducing 
the reformed model into his other diocese of Verden, is reckoned 
as the last Roman Catholic archbishop of Bremen. His successor, 
Henry III. (1550-1585), a son of Duke Francis I. of Lauenburg, 
who had been bishop of Osnabriick and Paderborn, was a 
Lutheran and married. Protestantism was not, however, 
definitively proclaimed as the state religion in Bremen until 16 18. 
The last archbishop, Frederick II. (of Denmark), was deposed by 
the Swedes in 1644. In 1646 Bremen received the privileges 
of a free imperial city from the emperor Ferdinand III.; but 
Sweden, whose possession of the archbishopric was recognized 
two years later, refused to consent to this, and in 1666 attempted 
vainly to assert her claims over the city by arms — in the so- 
called Bremen War. When, however, in 1720 the elector of 
Hanover (George I. of Great Britain) acquired the archbishopric, 
he recognized Bremen as a free city. In 1803 this was again 
recognized and the territory of the city was even extended. In 
1806 it was taken by the French, was subsequently annexed by 
Napoleon to his empire, and from 1810 to 1813 was the capital 
of the department of the Mouths of the Weser. Restored to 
independence by the congress of Vienna in 1815, it subsequently 
became a member of the German Confederation, and in 1867 
joined the new North German Confederation, with which it 
was merged in the new German empire. 

See Buchenau, Die freie Hansestadt Bremen (3rd ed., Bremen, 
1900, 5 vols.) ; Bremisches Vrkundenbuch, edited by R. Ehmck 
and W. von Bippen (1863, fol.) ; W. von Bippen, Geschichte der 
Stadt Bremen (Bremen, 1892-1898); F. Donandt, Versuch einer 
Geschichte des bremischen Stadtrechts (Bremen, 1830, 2 vols.); 
Bremisches Jahrbuch (historical, 19 vols., 1864-1900); and Karl 
Hegel, Stadte und Gilden, vol. ii. p. 461 (Leipzig, 1891). 

BREMER, FREDRIKA (1801-1865), Swedish novelist, was 
born near Abo, in Finland, on the 17 th of August 1801. Her 
father, a descendant of an old German family, a wealthy iron 
master and merchant, left Finland when Fredrika was three 
years old, and after a year's residence in Stockholm, purchased an 
estate at Arsta, about 20 m. from the capital. There, with occa- 
sional visits to Stockholm and to a neighbouring estate, which 
belonged for a time to her father, Fredrika passed her time till 
1820. The education to which she and her sisters were subjected 



BREMERHAVEN— BRENNER PASS 



495 



was unusually strict; Fredrika's health began to give way; 
and in 1821 the family set out for the south of France. They 
travelled slowly by way of Germany and Switzerland, and 
returned by Paris and the Netherlands. It was shortly after this 
time that Miss Bremer became acquainted with Schiller's works, 
which made a very deep impression on her. She had begun to 
write verses from the age of eight, and in 1828 she succeeded 
in finding a publisher for the first volume of her Teckningar ur 
hvardagslifvet (1828), which at once attracted attention. The 
second volume (1831), containing one of her best tales, Familjen 
H., gave decisive evidence that a real novelist had been found in 
Sweden. The Swedish Academy awarded her their smaller gold 
medal, and she increased her reputation by Presidentens dottrar 
(1834), Grannarne (1837) and others. Her father had died in 
1830, and her life was thereafter regulated in accordance with her 
own wishes and tastes. She lived for some years in Norway with 
a friend, after whose death she travelled in the autumn of 1849 
to America, and after spending nearly two years there returned 
through England. The admirable translations (1846, &c.) of her 
works by Mary Howitt, which had been received with even greater 
eagerness in America and England than in Sweden, secured for 
her a warm and kindly reception. Her impressions of America, 
Hemmen i nya verlden, were published in 1853-1854, and at 
once translated into English. After her return Miss Bremer 
devoted herself to her scheme for the advancement and emancipa- 
tion of women. Her views on these questions were expounded in 
her later novels — Hertha (1856) and Far och dolter (1858). Miss 
Bremer organized a society of ladies in Stockholm for the purpose 
of visiting the prisons, and during the cholera started a society, 
the object of which was the care of children left orphans by the 
epidemic. She devoted herself to other philanthropic and social 
schemes, and gradually abandoned her earlier simple and charm- 
ing type of story for novels directed to the furtherance of her 
views. In these she was less successful. In 1856 she again 
travelled, and spent five years on the continent and in Palestine. 
Her reminiscences of these countries have all been translated into 
English. On her return she settled at Arsta, where, with the 
exception of a visit to Germany, she spent the remaining years of 
her life. She died on the 31st of December 1865. 

See Life, Letters and Posthumous Works of F. Bremer, by her 
sister, Charlotte Bremer, translated by F. Milow, London, 1868. 
A selection of her works in 6 vols, appeared at Orebro, 1868-1872. 

BREMERHAVEN, a seaport town of Germany, in the free state 
of Bremen, on the right bank and estuary of the Weser, at the 
confluence of the Geeste, 38 m. N. of the city of Bremen by rail. 
Pop. (1895) 18,366; (1905) 24,159. It is built on a tract of 
territory ceded to Bremen by Hanover in 1826, and further 
increased by treaty with Prussia in 1869. It forms practically 
a single town with Geestemunde (Prussia), which lies across the 
Geeste and with which it is connected by a drawbridge. The 
port was opened in 1830, and besides an excellent harbour, there 
are three large wet docks, including the Kaiserhafen, enlarged 
in 1897-1899 at a cost of £900,000. This, together with the 
north portion of the Neuerhafen, constitutes the free harbour. 
Here are the workshops and dry docks of the North German 
Lloyd steamship company. The whole internal harbour system 
is furnished with powerful hydraulic cranes and lines of railway 
running alongside the quays. The entrance to the port is free 
from ice nearly all the year round, is excellently buoyed, and 
lighted by two lightships and eight lighthouses, among the 
latter the remarkable Rothesand Leuchtturm, erected 1 884-1885. 
The Hanoverian fort and batteries, which formerly protected the 
town, have been removed, and their place is supplied by four 
modern forts, with revolving turtleback turrets, lower down. 
The town possesses two Protestant and a Roman Catholic church, 
a technical institute, a natural history museum, a library, a 
theatre, a monument to the emperor William I. and one to Johann 
Smidt (1773-1859), the burgomaster of Bremen to whose enter- 
prise the harbour of Bremerhaven is due. Shipbuilding and 
kindred industries are carried on. 

BRENDAN, Brandon, or Brandan (c. 484-578), Irish saint 
and hero of a legendary voyage in the Atlantic, is said to have 



been born at Tralee in Kerry in a.d. 484. The Irish form of his 
name is Brennain, the Latin Brendanus. Medieval historians 
usually call him Brendan of Clonfert, or Brendan son of Finnloga, 
to distinguish him from his contemporary, St Brendan of 
Birr (573). Little is known of the historical Brendan, who died 
in 578 as abbot of a Benedictine monastery which he had founded 
twenty years previously at Clonfert in eastern Galway. The 
story of his voyage across the Atlantic to the " Promised Land 
of the Saints," afterwards designated " St Brendan's Island," 1 
ranks among the most celebrated of the medieval sagas of western 
Europe. Its traditional date is 565-573. The legend is found, 
in prose or verse and with many variations, in Latin, French, 
English, Saxon, Flemish, Irish, Welsh, Breton and Scottish 
Gaelic. Although it does not occur in the writings of any 
Arabian geographer, several of its incidents — such as the landing 
on a whale in mistake for an island — belong also to Arabic folk- 
literature. Many of Brendan's fabulous adventures seem to be 
borrowed from the half-pagan Irish saga of Maelduin or Maeldune, 
and others belong also to Scandinavian mythology. The oldest 
extant version of the legend is the nth century Navigatic 
Brendani. 

St Brendan's island was long accepted as a reality by geo- 
graphers. In a Venetian map dated 1367, in the anonymous 
Weimar map of 1424, and in B. Beccario's map of 1435, it is 
identified with Madeira. Columbus, in his journal for the 9th 
of August 1492, states that the inhabitants of Hierro, Gomera 
and Madeira had seen the island in the west; and Martin Behaim, 
in the globe he made at Nuremberg in the same year, places it 
west of the Canaries and near the equator. During the 16th 
century the progress of exploration in these latitudes compelled 
many cartographers to locate the island elsewhere; and it was 
marked about 100 m. west of Ireland, or afterwards among the 
West Indies. But in Spain and Portugal the older belief as to 
its situation was maintained. In 1526 an expedition under 
Fernando Alvarez left Grand Canary in search of St Brendan's 
island, which had again been reported as seen by many trust- 
worthy witnesses. In 1570 an official inquiry was held, and a 
second expedition undertaken, by Fernando de Villalobos, 
governor of Palma. Similar voyages of discovery were made by 
the Canarians in 1604 and 1721; and only in 1759 was the 
apparition of St Brendan's island explained as an effect of 
mirage. 

Among the numerous books which deal with the legend, the 
following are important : Die altfranzbsische ProsaUbersetzung von 
Brendans Meerfahrt, by C. Wahlund (Upsala, 1900) ; La " Navigatio 
Sancti Brendani " in antico Veneziano, by F. Novati (Bergamo, 
1892) ; Zur Brendanus-Legende, &c, by G. Schirmer (Leipzig, 1888); 
Les Voyages merveitteux de St. Brendan, &c, by F. Michel (Paris, 
1878); and Acta Sancti Brendani .... Original Latin Documents 
connected with the Life of St Brendan, by P. F. Moran (Dublin, 1872). 

BRENHAM, a city and the county-seat of Washington county, 
Texas, U.S.A., situated in the S.E. part of the state, about 68 m, 
N.W. of Houston. Pop. (1890) 5209; (1900) 5968, including 
2701 negroes and 531 foreign-born; (1910) 4718. Brenhara 
is served by the Gulf, Colorado & Santa Fe (controlled by the 
Atchison, Topeka & Santa Fe) and the Houston & Texas Central 
railways. It is the seat of Blinn Memorial College (German 
Methodist Episcopal), opened as " Mission Institute " in 1883, 
and renamed in 1889 in honour of the Rev. Christian Blinn, of 
New York, a liberal benefactor; of Brenham Evangelical 
Lutheran College, and of a German-American institute (1898). 
The municipality owns and operates the waterworks. The city 
is situated in an agricultural and cotton-raising region, and has 
cotton compresses and gins, cotton mills, cotton-seed oil re- 
fineries, foundries and machine shops, and furniture and wagon 
factories. Brenham was settled about 1844, was incorporated 
in 1866, and was chartered as a city in 1873. 

BRENNER PASS, the lowest (4495 ft.) and one of the most 
frequented passes across the Alps in all ages, though the name 
itself rarely occurs in the middle ages, the route over it being 
said to lie through " the valley of Trent." It may be described 
as the great gate of Italy, and by it most of the Teutonic tribes 
made their way to Italy. One reason of its importance is that 



49 6 



BRENNUS— BRENTFORD 



many side passes in the end join this great thoroughfare. It was 
crossed no fewer than 66 times by various emperors, between 
793 and 1402. A carriage road was constructed over it as far 
back as 1772, while the railway over it was built in 1864-1867. 
From Innsbruck to the summit of the pass is a distance by rail 
of 25 m. The line then descends through the Eisack valley past 
Brixen (34 m.) to Botzen (24 m.). Thence it follows the valley 
of the Adige to Trent (35 m.) and on to Verona (565 m.) — in all 
1 745 m. by rail from Innsbruck to Verona. (W. A. B. C.) 

BRENNUS, the name, or perhaps the official title, of two chiefs 
of the Celtic Gauls. 

(1) The first Brennus crossed the Apennines in 391 B.C., 
ravaged Etruria, and annihilated a Roman army of about 40,000 
men on the Allia some 12 m. from Clusium (July 16, 390). Rome 
thus lay at his mercy, but he wasted time, and the Romans were 
able to occupy and provision the Capitol (though they had not 
sufficient forces to defend their walls) and to send their women 
and children to Veii. When on the third day the Gauls took 
possession, they found the city occupied only by those aged 
patricians who had held high office in the state. For a while the 
Gauls withheld their hands out of awe and reverence, but the 
ruder passions soon prevailed. The city was sacked and burnt; 
but the Capitol itself withstood a siege of more than six months, 
saved from surprise on one occasion only by the wakefulness of 
the sacred geese and the courage of Marcus Manlius. At last 
the Gauls consented to accept a ransom of a thousand pounds of 
gold. As it was being weighed out, the Roman tribune com- 
plained of some unfairness. Brennus at once threw his heavy 
sword into the scale; and when asked the meaning of the act, 
replied that it meant Vae victis (" woe to the conquered "). 
The Gauls returned home with their plunder, leaving Rome in a 
condition from which she took long to recover. A later legend, 
probably an invention, represents M. Furius Camillus as suddenly 
appearing with an avenging army at the moment when the 
gold was being weighed, and defeating Brennus and all his 
host. 

See Liyy v. 33-49; Plutarch, Camillus, 17, 22, 28; Polybius i. 6, 
ii. 18; Dion. Halic. xiii. 7. 

(2) The second Brennus is said to have been one of the leaders 
of an inroad made by the Gauls from the east of the Adriatic into 
Thrace and Macedonia (280), when they defeated and slew 
Ptolemy Ceraunus, then king of Macedonia. Whether Brennus 
took part in this first invasion or not is uncertain; but its success 
led him to urge his countrymen to a second expedition, when he 
marched with a large army through Macedonia and Thessaly 
until he reached Thermopylae. To this point the united forces 
of the northern Greeks — Athenians, Phocians, Boeotians and 
Aetolians — had fallen back; and here the Greeks a second time 
held their foreign invaders in check for many days, and a second 
time had their rear turned, owing to the treachery of some of the 
natives, by the same path which had been discovered to the 
Persians two hundred years before. Brennus and his Gauls 
marched on to Delphi, of whose sacred treasures they had heard 
much. But the little force which the Delphians and their 
neighbours had collected — about 4000 men — favoured by the 
strength of their position, made a successful defence. They 
rolled down rocks upon their enemies as they crowded into the 
defile, and showered missiles on them from above. A thunder- 
storm, with hail and intense cold, increased their confusion, and 
on Brennus himself being wounded they took to flight, pursued 
by the Greeks all the way back to Thermopylae. Brennus killed 
himself, " unable to endure the pain of his wounds," says Justin; 
more probably determined not to return home defeated. 

See Justin xxiv. 6; Diod. Sic. xxii. n; Pausanias x. 19-23; 
L. Contzen, Die Wanderungen der Kelten (Leipzig, 1861). 

BRENTANO, KLEMENS (1778-1842), German poet and 
novelist, was born at Ehrenbreitstein on the 8th of September 
1778. His sister was the well-known Bettina von Arnim (q.v.), 
Goethe's correspondent. He studied at Jena, and afterwards 
resided at Heidelberg, Vienna and Berlin. In 1818, weary of 
his somewhat restless and unsettled life, he joined the Roman 
Catholic Church and withdrew to the monastery of Diilmen, 



where he lived for some years in strict seclusion. The latter part 
of his life he spent in Regensburg,Frankfort and Munich, actively 
engaged in Catholic propaganda. He died at Aschaffenburg on 
the 28th of July 1842. Brentano, whose early writings were 
published under the pseudonym Maria, belonged to the Heidelberg 
group of German romantic writers, and his works are marked 
by excess of fantastic imagery and by abrupt, bizarre modes of 
expression. His first published writings were Satiren und poe- 
tische Spiele (1800), and a romance Godwi (1801-1802); of his 
dramas the best are Ponce de Lion (1804), Victoria (1817) and 
Die Grilndung Prags (181 5). On the whole his finest work is the 
collection of Romanzen vom Rosenkranz (published posthumously 
in 1852); his short stories, and more especially the charming 
Geschichte vom braven Kasperl und dem schonen Annerl (1838), 
which has been translated into English, are still popular. 
Brentano also assisted Ludwig Achim von Arnim, his brother- 
in-law, in the collection of folk-songs forming Des'Knaben W under- 
horn (1806-1808). 

Brentano's collected works, edited by his brother Christian, 
appeared at Frankfort in 9 vols. (1851-1855). Selections have been 
edited by J. B. Diel (1873), M. Koch (1892), and J. Dohmke 
(1893). See J. B. Diel and W. Kreiten, Klemens Brentano (2 vols., 
1877-1878), the introduction to Koch's edition, and R. Steig, A. von 
Arnim und K. Brentano (1894). 

BRENTANO, LUDWIG JOSEPH [called Lujo] (1844- ), 
German economist, a member of the same family as the preced- 
ing, was born at Aschaffenburg on the 18th of December 1844. 
He received some of his academical education in Dublin. In 1 868 
he made a thorough study of trade-unionism in England, which 
resulted in his principal work, Die Arbeitergilden der Gegenwart 
(Leipzig, 1871-1872; Eng. trans, by L. T. Smith). The book 
was assailed by B amberger and other economists, but is important 
not only as an authority on modern associations of workmen, 
but for having given an impetus to the study of the gilds of the 
middle ages, and the examination of the great stores of neglected 
information bearing upon the condition of the people in olden 
days. Brentano's other works are of a more theoretical character, 
and chiefly relate to political economy, of which he was professor 
at Breslau from 1872 to 1882, at Strassburg from 1882 to 1888, 
at Vienna 1888-1889, at Leipzig 1889-1891, and at Munich since 
1 89 1 . We may mention Das A rbeitsverhdltnis gemdss dem heutigen 
Recht (1877); Die christlich-soziale Bewegung in England (1883); 
Uber das Verhdllnis von Arbeit slohn und Arbeitszeit zur Arbeits- 
leistung (1893); Agrarpolitik (1897). 

BRENTFORD, a market town in the Brentford parliamentary 
division of Middlesex, England, 10-J m. W. of Waterloo terminus, 
London, by the London & South-Western railway, at the junction 
of the river Brent with the Thames. Pop. of urban district (1901) 
15,171. The Grand Junction Canal joins the Brent, affording 
ample water-communications to the town, which has consider- 
able industries in brewing, soap-making, saw-milling, market- 
gardening, &c. The Grand Junction waterworks are situated 
here. Brentford has been the county-town for elections since 
1 701. 

In 1016 Brentford, or, as it was often called Braynford, was 
the scene of a great defeat inflicted on the Danes by Edmund 
Ironside. In 1280 a toll was granted by Edward I., who granted 
the town a market, for the construction of a bridge across the 
river, and in the reign of Henry VI. a hospital of the Nine Orders 
of Angels was founded near its western side. In 1642 a battle 
was fought here in which the royalists defeated the parliamentary 
forces. For his services on this occasion the Scotsman Ruthven, 
earl of Forth, was made earl of Brentford, a title afterwards 
conferred by William III. on Marshal Schomberg. Brentford 
was during the 16th and 17th centuries a favourite resort of 
London citizens; and its inn of the Three Pigeons, which was 
kept for a time by John Lowin, one of the first actors of Shake- 
speare's plays, is frequently alluded to by the dramatists of the 
period. Falstaff is disguised as the " Fat Woman of Brentford " 
in Shakespeare's Merry Wives of Windsor, and numerous other 
references to the town in literature point, in most cases, to its 
reputation for excessive dirt. The " two kings of Brentford " 
mentioned in Cowper's Task, and elsewhere, seem to owe their 



BRENTON— BREQUIGNY 



497 



mythical existence to the play, The Rehearsal, by George Villiers, 
second duke of Buckingham, produced in 167 1. 

South of Brentford, towards Isleworth, is Sion House, a man- 
sion founded by Lord Protector Somerset in 1547, and rebuilt 
and enlarged by the 10th earl of Northumberland and Sir Hugh 
Smithson, afterwards duke of Northumberland, the architects 
being Inigo Jones and Robert Adam. The gardens are very 
beautiful. The site of Sion or Syon House was previously 
occupied by a convent of Bridgetine nuns established at Twicken- 
ham by Henry V. in 1415 and removed here in 1431. 

BRENTON, SIR JAHLEEL (1770-1844), British admiral, 
was born in Rhode Island, U.S.A., on the 22nd of August 1770. 
He was the son of Rear-Admiral Jahleel Brenton (1720-1802), 
who belonged to a loyalist family which suffered the loss of most 
of its property in the insurrection of the American colonies. 
He was a lieutenant in the British navy when the war began, 
and emigrated with his family to the mother country. Three 
of the sons entered the navy — Jahleel (the eldest), Captain 
Edward Pelham Brenton (1774-1839), and James Wallace 
Brenton, who was killed young in 1799 when attacking a Spanish 
privateer near Barcelona in the boats of the " Petrel," of which he 
was lieutenant. Jahleel went to sea first with his father in 1781, 
and on the return of peace was sent to the "maritime school " 
at Chelsea. He served in the peace before the beginning of the 
war in 1793, and passed his examination as lieutenant, but seeing 
no chance of employment went with other English naval officers 
to serve in the Swedish navy against the Russians. In 1790 
he received his commission and returned home. Till 1799 he 
served as lieutenant, or acting commander, mostly under Earl 
St Vincent, and was present in the battle from which the admiral 
received his title. As commander of the " Speedy " brig he won 
much distinction in actions with Spanish gunboats in the Straits 
of Gibraltar. In 1800 he reached the rank of post-captain, and 
had the good fortune to serve as flag-captain to Sir James 
(afterwards Lord) Saumarez in the action at Algeciras, and in the 
Straits in 1801. During the peace of Amiens he married Miss 
Stewart, a lady belonging to a loyalist family of Nova Scotia. 
After the renewal of the war he commanded a succession of frigates. 
In 1803 he had the misfortune to be wrecked on the coast of 
France, and remained for a time in prison, where his wife joined 
him. Having been exchanged he was named to another ship. 
His most brilliant action was fought with a flotilla of Franco- 
Neapolitan vessels outside of Naples in May 1801. He was 
severely wounded, and Murat, then king of Naples, praised him 
effusively. He was made a baronet in 1812 and K.C.B. in 1815. 
After his recovery from his wound he was unable to bear sea 
service, but was made commissioner of the dockyard at Port 
Mahon, and then at the Cape, and was afterwards lieutenant- 
governor of Greenwich hospital till 1840. He reached flag rank 
in 1830. In his later years he took an active part in philanthropic 
work, in association with his brother, Captain E. P. Brenton, 
who had seen much service but is best remembered by his 
writings on naval and military history, — Naval History of Great 
Britain from the Year 1783 to 1822 (1823), and The Life and 
Correspondence of John, Earl of St Vincent (1838). 

A Memoir of the Life and Services of Vice-Admiral Sir Jahleel 
Brenton, based on his own papers, was published in 1846 by the Rev. 
Henry Raikes, and reissued by the admiral's son, Sir L. C. L. 
Brenton, in 1855. (D. H.) 

BRENTWOOD, a market town in the mid or Chelmsford 
parliamentary division of Essex, England; 18 m. E.N.E. of 
London by the Great Eastern railway (Brentwood and Worley 
station). Pop. of urban district (1901) 4932. The neighbouring 
country is pleasantly undulating and well wooded. The church 
of St Thomas the Martyr, with several chapels, is modern. The 
old assize house, an Elizabethan structure, remains. A free 
grammar school was founded in 1557. The county asylum is in 
the vicinity. There are breweries and brick works. To the 
south lies the fine upland of Worley Common, with large barracks. 
Adjoining Brentwood to the north-east is Shenfield, with the 
church of St Mary the Virgin, Early English and later. Brent- 
wood was formerly an important posting station on the main 



road to the eastern counties, which follows the line of the railway 
to Colchester. The name (Burntwood) is supposed to record an 
original settlement made in a clearing of the forest. The district 
is largely residential. 

BRENZ, JOHANN (1499-1570), Lutheran divine, eldest son 
of Martin Brenz, was born at Weil, Wurttemberg, on the 24th 
of June 1499. In 15 14 he entered the university of Heidelberg, 
where Oecolampadius was one of his teachers, and where in 15 18 
he heard Luther discuss. Ordained priest in 1 520, and appointed 
preacher (1522) at Hall in Swabia, he gave himself to biblical 
exposition. He ceased to celebrate mass in 1523, and re- 
organized his church in 1524. Successful in resisting the peasant 
insurrection (1525), his fortunes were affected by the Schmal- 
kaldic War. From Hall, when taken by the imperial forces, he 
fled on his birthday in 1548. Protected by Duke Ulrich of 
Wurttemberg, he was appointed (January 1553) provost of the 
collegiate church of Stuttgart. As organizer of the reformation 
in Wurttemberg he did much fruitful work. A strong advocate 
of Lutheran doctrine, and author of the Syngramma Suevicum 
(October 21, ^525), which set forth Luther's doctrine of the 
Eucharist, he was free from the persecuting tendencies of the age. 
He is praised and quoted (as Joannes Witlingius) for his judg- 
ment against applying the death penalty to anabaptists or other 
heretics in the De Haereticis, an sint persequendi (1554), issued 
by Sebastian Castellio under the pseudonym of Martinus Bellius. 
An incomplete edition of his works (largely expository) appeared 
at Tubingen, 1 576-1 590. Several of his sermons were reproduced 
in contemporary English versions. A volume of Anecdota 
Brentiana was edited by Pressel in 1868. He died on the nth 
of September 1570, and was buried in his church at Stuttgart; 
his grave was subsequently violated. He was twice married, 
and his eldest son, Johann Brenz, was appointed (1562) professor 
of theology in Tubingen at the early age of twenty-two. 

See Hartmann and Jager, Johann Brenz (1840-1842); Bossert, in 
Hauck's Realencyklop. (1897). (A. Go.*) 

BREQUIGNY, LOUIS GEORGES OUDARD FEUDRIX DE 

(1714-1795), French scholar, was born at Gainneville near Havre, 
on the 22nd of February 17 14, and died at Paris on the 3rd of 
July 1795. His first publications were anonymous: an Histoire 
des revolutions de Genes jusqu'd la paix de 1748 (1750), and a 
series of Vies des orateurs grecs (1752). Elected a member of the 
Academie des Inscriptions et Belles-lettres in 1 7 59, he contribu ted 
an Histoire de Posthume empereur des Gaules (vol. xxx., 1760) to 
the collected works of that illustrious society, and also a Memoire 
sur I'etablissement de la religion et de I'empire de Mahomet (vol. 
xxxii., 1761-1763). After the close of the Seven Years' War he 
was sent to search in the archives of England for documents 
bearing upon the history of France, more particularly upon that 
of the French provinces which once belonged to England. This 
mission (1 764-1 766) was very fruitful in results; Brequigny 
brought back from it copies of about 7000 documents, which are 
now in the Bibliotheque Nationale. A useful selection of these 
documents was published (unfortunately without adequate 
critical treatment) by Jean Jacques Champollion-Figeac, under 
the title Lettres de rois, reines et autres personnages des cours de 
France et d' Angleterre, depuis Louis VII. jusqu'd, Henri IV., 
tirees des archives de Londres par Brequigny (collection of Docu- 
ments inedits relatifs a I'histoire de France, 2 vols., 1839, 1847). 
Brequigny himself drew the material for many important studies 
from the rich mine which he had thus exploited. These were 
included in the collection of the Academie des Inscriptions: 
MSmoire sur les differ ends entre la France et V Angleterre sous le 
regne de Charles le Bel (vol. xli.); Memoire sur la vie de Marie, 
reine de France, sceur de Henri VIII., roi d' Angleterre (vol. xlii.); 
four Memoires pour servir A I'histoire de Calais (vols, xliii. and 1.); 
and Mimoire sur les nigociations touchant les projets de mariage 
d'Elizabeth, reine d' Angleterre, d'abord avec le due d'Anjou, 
ensuite avec le due d' Alencon, tous deux freres de Charles IX. 
(vol. 1.). This last was read to the Academy on the 22nd of 
January 1793, the morrow of Louis XVI. 's execution. Mean- 
while, Brequigny had taken part in three great and erudite works. 
For the Recueil des ordonnances des rois de France he had prepared 



49 8 



BRESCIA— BRESLAU 



volumes x.-xiv., the preface to vol. xi. containing important 
researches into the French communes. To the Table chrono- 
logique des diplomes, diaries, lettres, et actes imprimis concernant 
I'histoire de France he contributed three volumes in collaboration 
with Mouchet (1769-1783). Charged with the supervision of 
a large collection of documents bearing on French history, 
analogous to Rymer's Foedera, he published the first volume 
{Diplomatat. Chartae, &c, 1791). The Revolution interrupted 
him in his collection of Mimoires concernant I'histoire, les sciences, 
les lettres, et les arts des Chinois, begun in 1776 at the instance of 
the minister Bertin, when fifteen volumes had appeared. 

See the note on Brequigny at the end of vol. i. of 'the Memoires 
de VAcademie des Inscriptions (1808); the Introduction to vol. iv. 
of the Table chronologique des diplomes (1836) ; Champollion-Figeac's 
preface to the Lettres des rois et reines; the Comite des travaux 
historiques, by X. Charmes, vol. i. passim; ■ N. Oursel, Nouvelle 
biographie normande (1886); and the Catalogue des manuscrits des 
collections Duchesne et Brequigny (in the Bibliotheque Nationale), 
by Rene Poupardin (1905). (C. B.*) 

BRESCIA (anc. Brixia) , a city and episcopal see of Lombardy, 
Italy, the capital of the province of Brescia, finely situated at the 
foot of the Alps, 52 m. E. of Milan and 40 m. W, of Verona by 
rail. Pop. (1901) town, 42,495; commune, 72,731. The plan of 
the city is rectangular, and the streets intersect at right angles, 
a peculiarity handed down from Roman times, though the area 
enclosed by the medieval walls is larger than that of the Roman 
town, which occupied the eastern portion of the present one. 
The Piazza del Museo marks the site of the forum, and the 
museum on its north side is ensconced in a Corinthian temple 
with three cellae, by some attributed to Hercules, but more 
probably the Capitolium of the city, erected by Vespasian in 
A.D. 73 (if the inscription really belongs to the building; cf. 
Th. Mommsen in Corp. Inscrip. Lat. v. No. 4312, Berlin, 1872), 
and excavated in 1823. It contains a famous bronze statue of 
Victory, found in 1826. Scanty remains of a building on the 
south side of the forum, called the curia, but which may be a 
basilica, and of the theatre, on the east of the temple, still exist. 

Brescia contains many interesting medieval buildings. The 
castle, at the north-east angle of the town, commands a fine 
view. It is now a military prison. The old cathedral is a round 
domed structure of the 10th (?) century erected over an early 
Christian basilica, which has forty-two ancient columns; and 
the Broletto, adjoining the new cathedral (a building of 1604) 
on the north, is a massive building of the 12th and 13th centuries 
(the original town hall, now the prefecture and law courts), 
with a lofty tower. There are also remains of the convent of S. 
Salvatore, founded by Desiderius, king of Lombardy, including 
three churches, two of which now contain the fine medieval 
museum, which possesses good ivories. The church of S. 
Francesco has a Gothic facade and cloisters. There are also 
some good Renaissance palaces and other buildings, including the 
Municipio, begun in 1492 and completed by Jacopo Sansovino 
in 1 5 54- 1 5 74. This is a magnificent structure, with fine orna- 
mentation. The church of S. Maria dei Miracoli (1488-1523) 
is also noteworthy for its general effect and for the richness of its 
details, especially of the reliefs on the facade. Many other 
churches, and the picture gallery (Galleria Martinengo), contain 
fine works of the painters of the Brescian school, Alessandro 
Bonvicino (generally known as Moretto), Girolamo Romanino 
and Moretto's pupil, Giovanni Battista Moroni. The Biblioteca 
Queriniana contains early MSS., a r'4th-century MS. of Dante, 
&c, and some rare incunabula. The city is well supplied with 
water, and has no less than seventy-two public fountains. Brescia 
has considerable factories of iron ware, particularly fire-arms 
and weapons (one of the government small arms factories being 
situated here), also of woollens, linens and silks, matches, candles, 
&c. The stone quarries of Mazzano, 8 m. east of Brescia, 
supplied material for the monument to Victor Emmanuel II. 
and other buildings in Rome. Brescia is situated on the main 
railway line between Milan and Verona, and has branch railways 
to Iseo, Parma, Cremona and (via Rovato) to Bergamo, and 
steam tramways to Mantua, Soncino, Ponte Toscolano and 
Cardone Valtrompia. 



The ancient Celtic Brixia, a town of the Cenomani, became 
Roman in 225 B.C., when the Cenomani submitted to Rome. 
Augustus founded a civil (not a military) colony here in 27 B.C., 
and he and Tiberius constructed an aqueduct to supply it. In 
452 it was plundered by Attila, but was the seat of a duchy in the 
Lombard period. From 1167 it was one of the most active 
members of the Lombard League. In 1 2 58 it fell into the hands of 
Eccelino of Verona, and belonged to the Scaligers (della Scala) 
until 1421, when it came under the Visconti of Milan, and in r426 
under Venice. Early in the 16th century it was one of the 
wealthiest cities of Lombardy, but has never recovered from its 
sack by the French under Gaston de Foix in 1512. It belonged 
to Venice until 1797, when it came under Austrian dominion; 
it revolted in 1848, and again in 1849, being the only Lombard 
town to rally to Charles Albert in the latter year, but was taken 
after ten days' obstinate street fighting by the Austrians under 
Haynau. 

See Museo Bresciano Illustrato (Brescia, 1838). (T. As.) 

BRESLAU (Polish Wraclaw), a city of Germany, capital of 
the Prussian province of Silesia, and an episcopal see, situated 
in a wide and fertile plain on both banks of the navigable Oder, 
350 m. from its mouth, at the influx of the Ohle, and 202 m. from 
Berlin on the railway to Vienna. Pop. (1867) 171,926; (1880) 
272,912; (1885) 299,640; (1890) 335, 186; (1905) 47o,75i, 
about 60% being Protestants, 35% Roman Catholics and 
nearly 5% Jews. The Oder, which here breaks into several 
arms, divides the city into two unequal halves, crossed by 
numerous bridges. The larger portion, on the left bank, includes 
the old or inner town, surrounded by beautiful promenades, 
on the site of the ramparts, dismantled after 18 13, from an 
eminence within which, the Liebichs Hohe, a fine view is obtained 
of the surrounding country. Outside, as well as across the Oder, 
lies the new town with extensive suburbs, containing, especially 
in the Schweidnitz quarter in the south, and the Oder quarter in 
the north, many handsome streets and spacious squares. . The 
inner town, in contrast to the suburbs, still retains with its 
narrow streets much of its ancient characters, and contains 
several medieval buildings, both religious and secular, of great 
beauty and interest. The cathedral, dedicated to St John the 
Baptist, was begun in 1148 and completed at the close of the 
15th century, enlarged in the 17th and 18th centuries, and 
restored between 1873 and 1875; it is rich in notable treasures, 
especially the high altar of beaten silver, and in beautiful 
paintings and sculptures. The Kreuzkirche (church of the Holy 
Cross), dating from the 13th and 14th centuries, is an interesting 
brick building, remarkable for its stained glass and its historical 
monuments, among which is the tomb of Henry IV., duke of 
Silesia. The Sandkirche, so called from its dedication to Our 
Lady on the Sand, dates from the 14th century, and was until 
1 8 10 the church of the Augustinian canons. The Dorotheen- 
or Minoritenkirche, remarkable for its high-pitched roof, was 
founded by the emperor Charles I V. in 1 3 5 1 . These are the most 
notable of the Roman Catholic churches. Of the Evangelical 
churches the most important is that of St Elizabeth, founded 
about 1250, rebuilt in the 14th and 15th centuries, and restored 
in 1857. Its lofty tower contains the largest bell in Silesia, and 
the church possesses a celebrated organ, fine stained glass, a 
magnificent stone pyx (erected in 1455) over 52 ft. high, and 
portraits of Luther and Melanchthon by Lucas Cranach. The 
church of St Mary Magdalen, built in the 14th century on the 
model of the cathedral, has two lofty Gothic towers connected 
by a bridge, and is interesting as having been the church in which, 
in 1523, the reformation in Silesia was first proclaimed. Other 
noteworthy ecclesiastical buildings are the graceful Gothic 
church of St Michael built in 1871, the bishop's palace and the 
Jewish synagogue, the finest in Germany after that in Berlin. 

The business streets of the city converge upon the Ring, the 
market square, in which is the town-hall, a fine Gothic building, 
begun in the middle of the 14th and completed in the 16th 
century. Within is the Fiirstensaal, in which the diets of Silesia 
were formerly held, while beneath is the famous Schweidnitzer 
Keller, used continuously since 1355 as a beer and wine house. 



BRESSANT— BRESSUIRE 



499 



The university, a spacious Gothic building facing the Oder, is a 
striking edifice. It was built (1728-1736) as a college by the 
Jesuits, on the site of the former imperial castle presented to 
them by the emperor Leopold I., and contains a magnificent hall 
(Aula Leopoldina) , richly ornamented with frescoes and capable 
of holding 1200 persons. Breslau possesses a large number of 
other important public buildings: the Stadthaus (civic hall), 
the royal palace, the government offices (a handsome pile erected 
in 1887), the provincial House of Assembly, the municipal 
archives, the courts of law, the Silesian museum of arts and 
crafts and antiquities, stored in the former assembly hall of the 
estates (Standehaus) , which was rebuilt for the purpose, the 
museum of fine arts, the exchange, the Stadt and Lobe theatres, 
the post office and central railway station. There are also 
numerous hospitals and schools. Breslau is exceedingly rich in 
fine monuments; the most noteworthy being the equestrian 
statues of Frederick the Great and Frederick William III., both 
by Kiss; the statue of B Richer by Rauch; a marble sta'tue of 
General Tauentzien by Langhans and Schadow; a bronze statue 
of Karl Gottlieb Svarez (1 746-1 798), the Prussian jurist, a monu- 
ment to Schleiermacher, born here in 1768, and statues of the 
emperor William I. , Bismarck and Moltke. There are also several 
handsome fountains. Foremost among the educational estab- 
lishments stands the university, founded in 1702 by the emperor 
Leopold I. as a Jesuit college, and greatly extended by the in- 
corporation of the university of Frankfort-on-Oder in 181 1. Its 
library contains 306,000 volumes and 4000 MSS., and has in the 
so-called Bibliotheca Habichtiana a valuable collection of oriental 
literature. Among its auxiliary establishments are botanical 
gardens, an observatory, and anatomical, physiological and 
kindred institutions. There are eight classical and four modern 
schools, two higher girls' schools, a Roman Catholic normal 
school, a Jewish theological seminary, a school of arts and crafts, 
and numerous literary and charitable foundations. It is, however, 
as a commercial and industrial city that Breslau is most widely 
known. Its situation, close to the extensive coal and iron fields 
of Upper Silesia, in proximity to the Austrian and Russian 
frontiers, at the centre of a network of railways directly com- 
municating both with these countries and with the chief towns 
of northern and central Germany, and on a deep waterway 
connecting with the Elbe and the Vistula, facilitates its very 
considerable transit and export trade in the products of the 
province and of the neighbouring countries. These embrace 
coal, sugar, cereals, spirits, petroleum and timber. The local 
industries comprise machinery and tools, railway and tramway 
carriages, furniture, cast-iron goods, gold and silver work, carpets, 
furs, cloth and cottons, paper, musical instruments, glass and 
china. Breslau is the headquarters of the VI. German army 
corps and contains a large garrison of troops of all arms. 

History. — Breslau (Lat. Vratislavia) is first mentioned by the 
chronicler Thietmar, bishop of Merseburg, in a.d. iooo, and was 
probably founded some years before this date. Early in the nth 
century it was made the seat of a bishop, and after having formed 
part of Poland, became the capital of an independent duchy in 
1163. Destroyed by the Mongols in 1241, it soon recovered its 
' former prosperity and received a large influx of German colonists. 
The bishop obtained the title of a prince of the Empire in 1290. 1 
When Henry VI., the last duke of Breslau, died in 1335, the city 
came by purchase to John, king of Bohemia, whose successors 
retained it until about 1460. The Bohemian kings bestowed 
various privileges on Breslau, which soon began to extend its 
commerce in all directions, while owing to increasing wealth the 
citizens took up a more independent attitude. Disliking the 
Hussites, Breslau placed itself under the protection of Pope 
Pius II. in 1463, and a few years afterwards came under the rule 
of the Hungarian king, Matthias Corvinus. After his death in 
1490 it again became subject to Bohemia, passing with the rest 

1 In 119S Jaroslaw, son of Boleslaus I. of Lower Silesia, who 
became bishop of Breslau in 1 198, inherited the duchy of Neisse, 
which at his death (1201) he bequeathed to his successors in the see. 
The Austrian part of Neisse still belongs to the bishop of Breslau, 
who also still bears the title of prince bishop. 



of Silesia to the Habsburgs when in 1526 Ferdinand, afterwards 
emperor, was chosen king of Bohemia. Having passed almost 
undisturbed through the periods of the Reformation and the 
Thirty Years' War, Breslau was compelled to own the authority of 
Frederick the Great in 1741. It was, however, recoverd by the 
Austrians in 1757, but was regained by Frederick after his victory 
at Leuthen in the same year, and has since belonged to Prussia, 
although it was held for a few days by the French in 1807 after 
the battle of Jena, and again in 1813 after the battle of Bautzen. 
The sites of the fortifications, dismantled by the French in 1807, 
were given to the civic authorities by King Frederick William III., 
and converted into promenades. In March 1813 this monarch 
issued from Breslau his stirring appeals to the Prussians, An 
mein Volk and An mein Kriegesheer, and the city was the centre 
of the Prussian preparations for the campaign which ended at 
Leipzig. After the Prussian victory at Sadowa in 1866, William I. 
made a triumphant and complimentary entry into the city, which 
since the days of Frederick the Great has been only less loyal to 
the royal house than Berlin itself. 

See Biirkner and Stein, Geschichte der Stadt Breslau (Bresl. 1851- 
!853); J- Stein, Geschichte der Stadt Breslau im igten Jahrhundert 
(1884); O Frenzel, Breslauer Stadtbuch ("Codex dipl. Silisiae," 
vol. ii. 1882); Luchs, Breslau, ein Fiihrer durch die Stadt (12th ed., 
Bresl. 1904). 

BRESSANT, JEAN BAPTISTE PROSPER (1815-1886), French 
actor, was bornat Chalon-sur-Saone on the 23rd of October 1815, 
and began his stage career at the Varietes in Paris in 1833. In 
1838 he went to the French theatre at St Petersburg, where for 
eight years he played important parts with ever-increasing 
reputation. His success was confirmed at the Gymnase when he 
returned to Paris in 1846, and he made his dibut at the Comedie 
Francaise as a full-fledged societaire in 1854. From playing the 
ardent young lover, he turned to leading roles both in modern 
plays and in the classical repertoire. His Richelieu in Mile de 
Belle-Isle, his Octave in Alfred de Musset's Les Caprices de 
Marianne, and his appearance in de Musset's II faut gu'une porte 
soit ouverle ou fermie and Un caprice were followed by Tartujfe, 
Le Misanthrope and Don Juan. Bressant retired in 1875, and 
died on the 23rd of January 1886. During his professorship at 
the Conservatoire, Mounet-Sully was one of his pupils. 

BRESSE, a district of eastern France embracing portions of 
the departments of Ain, Saone-et-Loire and Jura. The Bresse 
extends from the Dombes on the south to the river Doubs on the 
north, and from the Saone eastwards to the Jura, measuring 
some 60 m. in the former, and 20 m. in the latter direction. It 
is a plain varying from 600 to 800 ft. above the sea, with few 
eminences and a slight inclination westwards. Heaths and 
coppice alternate with pastures and arable land; pools and 
marshes are numerous, especially in the north. Its chief rivers 
are the Veyle, the Reyssouze and the Seille, all tributaries of the 
Saone. The soil is a gravelly clay but moderately fertile, and 
cattle-raising is largely carried on. The region is, however, more 
especially celebrated for its table poultry. The inhabitants pre- 
serve a distinctive but almost obsolete costume, with a curious 
head-dress. The Bresse proper, called the Bresse Bressane, 
comprises the northern portion of the department of Ain. The 
greater part of the district belonged in the middle ages to the 
lords of Bage, from whom it passed in 1272 to the house of Savoy. 
It was not till the first half of the 15th century that the province, 
with Bourg as its capital, was founded as such. In 1601 it was 
ceded to France by the treaty of Lyons, after which it formed 
(together with the province of Bugey) first a separate government 
and afterwards part of the government of Burgundy. 

BRESSUIRE, a town of western France, capital of an arron- 
dissement in the department of Deux-Sevres, 48 m. N. of Niort 
by rail. Pop. (1906) 4561. The town is situated on an eminence 
overlooking the Dolo, a tributary of the Argenton. It is the 
centre of a cattle-rearing and agricultural region, and has 
important markets; the manufacture of wooden type and 
woollen goods is carried on. Bressuire has two buildings of 
interest: the church of Notre-Dame, which, dating chiefly from 
the 12th and 15th centuries, has an imposing tower of the 
Renaissance period; and the .castle, built by the lords of 



50o 



BREST— BRETEUIL 



Beaumont, vassals of the viscount of Thouars. The latter is now 
in ruins, and a portion of the site is occupied by a modern 
chateau, but an inner and outer line of fortifications are still to 
be seen. The whole forms the finest assemblage of feudal ruins 
in Poitou. Bressuire is the seat of a sub-prefect and has a 
tribunal of first instance. Among the disasters suffered at various 
times by the town, its capture from the English and subsequent 
pillage by French troops under du Guesclin in 1370 is the most 
memorable. 

BREST, a fortified seaport of western France, capital of an 
arrondissement in the department of Finistere, 155 m. W.N.W. 
of Rennes by rail. Population (1906) town, 71,163; commune, 
85,294. It is situated to the north of a magnificent land- 
locked bay, and occupies the slopes of two hills divided by the 
river Penfeld, — the part of the town on the left bank being 
regarded as Brest proper, while the part on the right is known 
as Recouvrance. There are also extensive suburbs to the east 
of the town. The hill-sides are in some places so steep that the 
ascent from the lower to the upper town has to be effected by 
flights of steps and the second or third storey of one house is 
often on a level with the ground storey of the next. The chief 
street of Brest bears the name of rue de Siam, in honour of the 
Siamese embassy sent to Louis XIV., and terminates at the 
remarkable swing-bridge, constructed in 1861, which crosses 
the mouth of the Penfeld. Running along the shore to the south 
of the town is the Cours d'Ajot, one of the finest promenades of 
its kind in France, named after the engineer who constructed it. 
It is planted with trees and adorned with marble statues of 
Neptune and Abundance by Antoine Coysevox. The castle with 
its donjon and seven towers (12th to the 16th centuries), com- 
manding the entrance to the river, is the only interesting building 
in the town. Brest is the capital of one of the five naval arron- 
dissements of France. The naval port, which is in great part 
excavated in the rock, extends along both banks of the Penfeld; 
it comprises gun-foundries and workshops, magazines, ship- 
building yards and repairing docks, and employs about 7000 
workmen. There are also large naval barracks, training ships 
and naval schools of various kinds, and an important naval 
hospital. Brest is the seat of a sub-prefect and has tribunals of 
first instance and of commerce, a chamber of commerce, a board 
of trade-arbitrators, two naval tribunals, and a tribunal of 
maritime commerce. There are also lycees for boys and girls 
and a school of commerce and industry. The commercial port, 
which is separated from the town itself by the Cours d'Ajot, 
comprises a tidal port with docks and an outer harbour; it is 
protected by jetties to the east and west and by a breakwater 
on the south. In 1905 the number of vessels entered was 202 
with a tonnage of 67,755, and cleared 160 with a tonnage of 
61,012. The total value of the imports in 1905 was £244,000. 
The chief were wine, coal, timber, mineral tar, fertilizers and 
lobsters and crayfish. Exports, of which the chief were wheat- 
Hour, fruit and superphosphates, were valued at £40,000. Besides 
its sardine and mackerel fishing industry, the town has Hour- 
mills, breweries, foundries, forges, engineering works, and manu- 
factures of blocks, candles, chemicals (from sea- weed), boots, 
shoes and linen. Brest communicates by submarine cable with 
America and French West Africa. The roadstead consists of a 
deep indentation with a maximum length of 14 m. and an 
average width of 4 m., the mouth being barred by the peninsula 
of Quelern, leaving a passage from 1 to 2 m. broad, known as 
the Goulet. The outline of the bay is broken by numerous smaller 
bays or arms, formed by the embouchures of streams, the most 
important being the Anse de Quelern, the Anse de Poulmie, and 
the mouths of the Chateaulin and the Landerneau. Brest is a 
fortress of the first class. The fortifications of the town and the 
harbour fall into four groups: (1) the very numerous forts and 
batteries guarding the approaches to and the channel of the 
Goulet; (2) the batteries and forts directed upon the roads; (3) 
a group of works preventing access to the peninsula of Quelern 
and commanding the ground to the south of the peninsula from 
which many of the works of group (2) could be taken in reverse; 
(4) the defences of Brest itself, consisting of an old-fashioned 



enceinte possessing little military value and a chain of detached 
forts to the west of the town. 

Nothing definite is known of Brest till about 1 240, when it was 
ceded by a count of Leon to John I., duke of Brittany. In 1342 
John of Montfort gave it up to the English, and it did not finally 
leave their hands till 1397. Its medieval importance was great 
enough to give rise to the saying, " He is not duke of Brittany 
who is not lord of Brest." By the marriage of Francis I. with 
Claude, daughter of Anne of Brittany, Brest with the rest of 
the duchy definitely passed to the French crown. The advant- 
ages of the situation for a seaport town were first recognized by 
Richelieu, who in 1631 constructed a harbour with wooden 
wharves, which soon became a station of the French navy. 
Colbert changed the wooden wharves for masonry and otherwise 
improved the post, and Vauban's fortifications followed in 1680- 
1688. During the 18th century the fortifications and the naval 
importance of the town continued to develop. In 1694 an 
English squadron under John, 3rd Lord Berkeley, was miserably 
defeated in attempting a landing; but in 1794, during the 
revolutionary war, the French fleet, under Villaret de Joyeuse, 
was as thoroughly beaten in the same place by the English 
admiral Howe. 

BREST-LITOVSK (Polish Brzesc-Litevski; and in the Chron. 
Bereslie and Berestov) , a strongly fortified town of Russia, in the 
government of Grodno, 137 m. by rail S. from the city of Grodno, 
in 52° 5' N. lat. and 23° 39' E. long., at the junction of the 
navigable river Mukhovets with the Bug, and at the intersection 
of railways from Warsaw, Kiev, Moscow and East Prussia. 
Pop. (1867) 22,493; (1901) 42,812, of whom more than one-half 
were Jews. It contains a Jewish synagogue, which was regarded 
in the 16th century as the first in Europe, and is the seat of 
an Armenian and of a Greek Catholic bishop; the former has 
authority over the Armenians throughout the whole country. 
The town carries on an extensive trade in grain, flax, hemp, 
wood, tar and leather. First mentioned in the beginning of 
the nth century, Brest-Litovsk was in 1241 laid waste by the 
Mongols and was not rebuilt till 1275; its suburbs were burned 
by the Teutonic Knights in 1379; and in the end of the 15th 
century the whole town met a similar fate at the hands of the 
khan of the Crimea. In the reign of the Polish king Sigismund 
III. diets were held there; and in 1594 and 1596 it was the 
meeting-place of two remarkable councils of the bishops of 
western Russia. In 1657, and again in 1706, the town was 
captured by the Swedes; in 1794 it was the scene of Suvarov's 
victory over the Polish general Sierakowski; in 1795 it was added 
to the Russian empire. The Brest-Litovsk or King's canal 
(50 m. long), utilizing the Mukhovets-Bug rivers, forms a link 
in the waterways that connect the Dnieper with the Vistula. 

BRETEUIL, LOUIS CHARLES AUGUSTE LE TONNELIER, 
Baron de (1730-1807), French diplomatist, was born at the 
chateau of Azay-le-Feron (Indre) on the 7th of March 1730. 
He was only twenty-eight when he was appointed by Louis XV. 
ambassador to the elector of Cologne, and two years later he was 
sent to St Petersburg. He arranged to be temporarily absent 
from his post at the time of the palace revolution by which 
Catherine II. was placed on the throne. In 1769 he was sent to 
Stockholm, and subsequently represented his government at 
Vienna, Naples, and again at Vienna until 1783, when he was 
recalled to become minister of the king's household. In this 
capacity he introduced considerable reforms in prison administra- 
tion. A close friend of Marie Antoinette, he presently came 
into collision with Calonne, who demanded his dismissal in 1787. 
His influence with the king and queen, especially with the latter, 
remained unshaken, and on Necker's dismissal on the nth of 
July 1789, Breteuil succeeded him as chief minister. The fall 
of the Bastille three days later put an end to the new ministry, 
and Breteuil made his way to Switzerland with the first party of 
imigres. At Soleure, in November 1790, he received from Louis 
XVI. exclusive powers to negotiate with the European courts, 
and in his efforts to check the ill-advised diplomacy of the 
emigri princes, he soon brought himself into opposition with his 
old rival Calonne, who held a chief place in their councils. 



BRETIGNY— BRETON 



5oi 



After the failure of the flight to Varennes, in the arrangement 
of which he had a share, Breteuil received instructions from 
Louis XVI., designed to restore amicable relations with the 
princes. His distrust of the king's brothers and his defence of 
Louis XVI. 's prerogative were to some extent justified, but his 
intransigeant attitude towards these princes emphasized the 
dissensions of the royal family in the eyes of foreign sovereigns, 
who looked on the comte de Provence as the natural representa- 
tive of his brother and found a pretext for non-interference on 
Louis's behalf in the contradictory statements of the negotiators. 
Breteuil himself was the object of violent attacks from the party 
of the princes, who asserted that he persisted in exercising 
powers which had been revoked by Louis XVI. After the 
execution of Marie Antoinette he retired into private life near 
Hamburg, only returning to France in 1802. He died in Paris 
on the 2nd of November 1807. 

See the memoirs of Bertrand de Molleville (2 vols., Paris, 18 16) 
and of the marquis de Bouille (2 vols., Paris, 1884) ; and E. Daudet, 
Cobkntz, 1789-1793 (1889), forming part of his Hist, de I' emigration. 

BRETIGNY, a French town (dept. Eure-et-Loir, arrondisse- 
ment and canton of Chartres, commune of Sours), which gave 
its name to a celebrated treaty concluded there on the 8th 
of May 1360, between Edward III. of England and John II., 
surnamed the Good, of France. The exactions of the English, 
who wished to yield as few as possible of the advantages claimed 
by them in the treaty of London, made negotiations difficult, 
and the discussion of terms begun early in April lasted more 
than a month. By virtue of this treaty Edward III. obtained, 
besides Guienne and Gascony, Poitou, Saintonge and Aunis, 
Agenais, Pe.rigord, Limousin, Quercy, Bigorre, the countship 
of Gaure, Angoumois, Rouergue, Montreuil-sur-mer, Ponthieu, 
Calais, Sangatte, Ham and the countship of Guines. John II. 
had, moreover, to pay three millions of gold crowns for his 
ransom. On his side the king of England gave up the duchies 
of Normandy and Touraine, the countships of Anjou and Maine, 
and the suzerainty of Brittany and of Flanders. As a guarantee 
for the payment of his ransom, John the Good gave as hostages 
two of his sons, several princes and nobles, four inhabitants of 
Paris, and two citizens from each of the nineteen principal towns 
of France. This treaty was ratified and sworn to by the two 
kings and by their eldest sons on the 24th of October 1360, 
at Calais. At the same time were signed the special conditions 
relating to each important article of the treaty, and the renuncia- 
tory clauses in which the kings abandoned their rights over the 
territory they had yielded to one another. 

See Rymer's Foedera, vol. iii. ; Dumont, Corps diplomatique, vol. 
ii. • Froissart, ed. Luce, vol. vi. ; Les Grandes Chroniques de France, 
ed. P. Paris, vol. vi. ; E. Cosneau, Les Grands Traites de la guerre de 
cent ans (1889). 

BRETON, JULES ADOLPHE AIME LOUIS (1827- ), 
French painter, was born on the 1st of May 1827, at Courrieres, 
Pas de Calais, France. His artistic gifts being manifest at an 
early age, he was sent in 1843 to Ghent, to study under the 
historical painter de Vigne, and in 1846 to Baron Wappers at 
Antwerp. Finally he worked in Paris under Drolling. His 
first efforts were in historical subjects: " Saint Piat preaching 
in Gaul "; then, under the influence of the revolution of 1848, 
he represented " Misery and Despair." But Breton soon dis- 
covered that he was not born to be a historical painter, and he 
returned to the memories of nature and of the country which were 
impressed on him in early youth. In 1853 he exhibited the 
" Return of the Harvesters " at the Paris Salon, and the " Little 
Gleaner " at Brussels. Thenceforward he was essentially a 
painter of rustic life, especially in the province of Artois, which 
he quitted only three times for short excursions: in 1864 to 
Provence, and in 1865 and 1873 to Brittany, whence he derived 
some of his happiest studies of religious scenes. His numerous 
subjects may be divided generally into four classes: labour, 
rest, rural festivals and religious festivals. Among his more 
important works may be named " Women Gleaning," and " The 
Day after St Sebastian's Day " (1855), which gained him a 
third-class medal; " Blessing the Fields " (1857), a second-class 
medal; " Erecting a Calvary " (1859), now in the Lille gallery; 



" The Return of the Gleaners " (1859), now in the Luxembourg 
" Evening " and " Women Weeding " (1861), a first-class medal 
" Grandfather's Birthday" (1862); "The Close of Day " (1865) 
" Harvest " (1867); " Potato Gatherers " (1868); " A Pardon 
Brittany" (1869); "The Fountain" (1872), medal of honour 
" The Bonfires of St John " (1875); " Women mending Nets ' 
(1876), in the Douai museum; "A Gleaner "(1877), Luxembourg 
" Evening, Finistere " (1881) ; " The Song of the Lark " (1884) 
" The Last Sunbeam " (1885); " The Shepherd's Star " (1888) 
"The Call Home" (1889); "The Last Gleanings" (1895) 
"Gathering Poppies" (1897); "The Alarm Cry" (1899) 
" Twilight Glory " (1900). Breton was elected to the Institut in 
1886 on the death of Baudry. In 1889 he was made commander 
of the Legion of Honour, and in 1899 foreign member of the 
Royal Academy of London. He also wrote several books, among 
them Les Champs et la mer (1876), Nos peintres du siecle (1900), 
" Jeanne," a poem, Delphine Bernard (1902), and La Peinture 
(1904). 

See Jules Breton, Vie d'un artiste, art et nature (autobiographical), 
(Paris, 1890); Marius Vachon, Jules Breton (1899). 

BRETON, Britton or Brittaine, NICHOLAS (iS4S?-i626), 
English poet, belonged to an old family settled at Layer-Breton, 
Essex. His father, William Breton, who had made a considerable 
fortune by trade, died in 1559, and the widow {nee Elizabeth 
Bacon) married the poet George Gascoigne before her sons had 
attained their majority. Nicholas Breton wasprobably born at 
the " capitall mansion house " in Red Cross Street, in the parish 
of St Giles without Cripplegate, mentioned in his father's will. 
There is no official record of his residence at the university, but 
the diary of the Rev. Richard Madox tells us that he was at 
Antwerp in 1583 and was " once of Oriel College." He married 
Ann Sutton in 1593, and had a family. He is supposed to have 
died shortly after the publication of his last work, Fantastickes 
(1626). Breton found a patron in Mary, countess of Pembroke, 
and wrote much in her honour until 1601, when she seems to 
have withdrawn her favour. It is probably safe to supplement 
the meagre record of his life by accepting as autobiographical 
some of the letters signed N.B. in A Poste with a Packet of Mad 
Letters (1603, enlarged 1637); the 19th letter of the second part 
contains a general complaint of many griefs, and proceeds as 
follows: " hath another been wounded in the warres, fared hard, 
lain in a cold bed many a bitter storme, and beene at many a 
hard banquet? all these have I; another imprisoned? so have 
I; another long been sicke? so have I; another plagued with 
an unquiet life? so have I; another indebted to his hearts 
griefe, and faine would pay and cannot? so am I." Breton 
was a facile writer, popular with his contemporaries, and for- 
gotten by the next generation. His work consists of religious 
and pastoral poems, satires, and a number of miscellaneous prose 
tracts. His religious poems are sometimes wearisome by their 
excess of fluency and sweetness, but they are evidently the 
expression of a devout and earnest mind. His praise of the 
Virgin and his references to Mary Magdalene have suggested 
that he was a Catholic, but his prose writings abundantly prove 
that he was an ardent Protestant. Breton had little gift for 
satire, and his best work is to be found in his pastoral poetry. 
His Passionate Skepheard (1604) is full of sunshine and fresh air, 
and of unaffected gaiety. The third pastoral in this book — 
" Who can live in heart so glad As the merrie country lad "— 
is well known; with some other of Breton's daintiest poems, 
among them the lullaby, " Come little babe, come silly soule," 1 — 
it is incorporated in A. H. Bullen's Lyrics from Elizabethan 
Romances (1890). His keen observation of country life appears 
also in his prose idyll, Wits Trenchmour, " a conference betwixt 
a scholler and an angler," and in his Fantastickes, a series of 
short prose pictures of the months, the Christian festivals and 
the hours, which throw much light on the customs of the times. 
Most of Breton's books are very rare and have great biblio- 
graphical value. His works, with the exception of some belong- 
ing to private owners, were collected by Dr A. B. Grosart in the 

1 This poem, however, comes from The Arbor of Amorous Devises^ 
which is only in part Breton's work. 



S02 



BRETON DE LOS HERREROS— BRETTEN 



Chertsey Worthies Library in 1879, with an elaborate introduction 
quoting the documents for the poet's history. 

Breton's poetical works, the titles of which are here somewhat 
abbreviated, include The Workes of a Young Wit (1577); A Floorish 
upon Fancie (1577); The Pilgrimage to Paradise (1592); The 
Countess of Penbrook's Passion (MS.), first printed by J. O. Halliwell 
Phillipps in 1853; Pasquil's Fooles cappe, entered at Stationers' 
Hall in 1600; Pasquil's Mistresse (1600); Pasquil's Passe and 
Passeth Not (1600); Melancholike Humours (1600); Marie Mag- 
dalen's Love: a Solemne Passion of the Soules Love (1595), the first 
part of which, a prose treatise, is probably by another hand; the 
second part, a poem in six-lined stanza, is certainly by Breton; 
A Divine Poem, including " The Ravisht Soul " and " The Blessed 
Weeper " (1601); An Excellent Poem, upon the Longing of a Blessed 
Heart (1601); The Soules Heavenly Exercise (1601); The Souies 
Harmony (1602); Olde Madcappe newe Gaily mawfrey (1602); The 
Mother's Blessing (1602); A True Description of Unthankfulnesse 
(1602); The Passionate Shepheard (1604); The Soules Immortall 
Crowne (1605); The Honour of Valour (1605); An Invective against 
Treason; I would and I would not (1614) ; Bryton's Bowre of Delights 
(1591), edited by Dr Grosart in 1893, an unauthorized publication 
which contained some poems disclaimed by Breton; The Arbor of 
Amorous Devises (entered at Stationers' Hall, 1594), only in part 
Breton's; and contributions to England's Helicon and other mis- 
cellanies of verse. Of his twenty-two prose tracts may be mentioned 
Wit's Trenchmour (1597), The Wil of Wit (1599), A Poste with a 
Packet of Mad Letters (1603). Sir Philip Sidney's Ourania by N. B. 
(1606); Mary Magdalen's Lamentations (1604), and The Passion of a 
Discontented Mind (1601), are sometimes, but erroneously, ascribed 
to Breton. 

BRETON DE LOS HERREROS, MANUEL (1796-1873), 
Spanish dramatist, was born at Quel (Logrofio) on the 19II1 of 
December 1796 and was educated at Madrid. Enlisting on the 
24th of May 1812, he served against the French in Valencia and 
Catalonia, and retired with the rank of corporal on the 8th of 
March 1822. He obtained a minor post in the civil service 
under the liberal government, and on his discharge determined to 
earn his living by writing for the stage. His first piece, A la 
vcjez viruelas, was produced on the 14th of October 1824, and 
proved the writer to be the legitimate successor of the younger 
Moratfn. His industry was astonishing: between October 1824 
and November 1828, he composed thirty-nine plays, six of them 
original, the rest being translations or recasts of classic master- 
pieces. In 1831 he published a translation of Tibullus, and 
acquired by it an unmerited reputation for scholarship which 
secured for him an appointment as sub-librarian at the national 
library. But the theatre claimed him for its own, and with the 
exception of Elena and a few other pieces in the fashionable 
romantic vein, his plays were a long series of successes. His only 
serious check occurred in 1840; the former liberal had grown 
conservative with age, and in La Ponchada he ridiculed the 
National Guard. He was dismissed from the national library, 
and for a short time was so unpopular that he seriously thought 
of emigrating to America; but the storm blew over, and within 
two years Breton de los Herreros had regained his supremacy 
on the stage. He became secretary to the Spanish Academy, 
quarrelled with his fellow-members, and died at Madrid on the 
8th of November 1873. He is the author of some three hundred 
and sixty original plays, twenty-three of which are in prose. 
No Spanish dramatist of the nineteenth century approaches him 
in comic power, in festive invention, and in the humorous pre- 
sentation of character, while his metrical dexterity is unique. 
Marcela a cual de los Ires? (1831), Muerete; y verds! C1837) and 
La Escuela del matrimonio (1852) still hold the stage, and are 
likely to hold it so long as Spanish is spoken. 

See Marques de Molins, Breton de los Herreros, recuerdos de su 
vida y de sus obras (Madrid, 1883); Obras de Breton de Herreros 
(5 vols., Madrid, 1883); E. Pifieyro, El Romanticismo en Espana 
(Paris, 1904). (J. F.-K.) 

BRETSCHNEIDER, KARL GOTTLIEB (1 776-1848), German 
scholar and theologian, was born at Gersdorf in Saxony. In 1 794 
he entered the university of Leipzig, where he studied theology 
for four years. After some years of hesitation he resolved to be 
ordained, and in 1802 he passed with great distinction the 
examination for candidatus theologiae, and attracted the regard 
of F. V. Reinhard, author of the System der christlichen Moral 
^1788-1815), then court-preacher at Dresden, who became his 



warm friend and patron during the remainder of his life. In 
1804-1806 Bretschneider was Privat-docent at the university 
of Wittenberg, where he lectured on philosophy and theology. 
During this time he wrote his work on the development of dogma, 
Systematische Entwickelung alter in der Dogmatik vorkommenden 
Begriffe nach den symbolischen Schriften der evangelisch-luthe- 
rischen und reformirten Kirche (1805, 4th ed. 1841), which was 
followed by others, including an edition of Ecclesiasticus with a 
Latin commentary. On the advance of the French army under 
Napoleon into Prussia, he determined to leave Wittenberg and 
abandon his university career. Through the good offices of 
Reinhard, he became pastor of Schneeberg in Saxony (1807). 
In 1808 he was promoted to the office of superintendent of the 
