flowing a mile or two from this reservoir, the waters are aug- 
mented by two other streams, and conveyed by a channel of 
stone to the Crooked Aqueduct. From this they are conveyed 
to another" which is the Long Aqueduct; and then, with various 
accessions, into a third, termed the Aqueduct of Justinian. 
From this they enter a vaulted conduit, which skirts the hills on 
the left side of the valley, and crosses a broad valley 2 m. below 
the Aqueduct of Justinian, by means of an aqueduct, with two 
tiers of arches of a very beautiful construction. The conduit 
then proceeds onward in a circuitous route, till it reaches the 
reservoir of Egri Kapu, situated just without and on the walls 
of the city. From this the water is conducted to the various 
quarters of the city, and also to the reservoir of St Sophia, which 
supplies the seraglio of the grand signior. The Long Aqueduct 
(Usun Kemer) is more imposing by its extent than the Crooked 
one, but is far inferior in the regularity of design and disposition 
of the materials. It is evidently a work of the Turks. It con- 
sists of two tiers of arches, the lower being forty-eight in number, 
and the upper fifty. The whole length was about 2200 ft., and 
the height 80 ft. The aqueduct of Justinian (Muallak Kemer 
or " Hanging Aqueduct ") is without doubt one of the finest 
monuments which remain to us of the middle ages. It consists 
of two tiers of large pointed arches, pierced transversely. Those 
of the lower story have 55 ft. of span, the upper ones 40 ft. 
The piers are supported by strong buttresses, and at different 
heights they have little arches passing through them laterally, 
which relieve the deadness of the solid pillar. The length of this 
aqueduct is 720 ft. and the height 108 ft. This aqueduct has 
been attributed both to Constantine I. and to Justinian, the latter 
being perhaps the more probable. 

Besides the waters of Belgrad, Constantinople was supplied 
from several other principal sources, one of which took its rise 
on the heights of the same mountains, 3 or 4 m. east of Belgrad. 
This was conveyed in a similar manner by an arched channel 
elevated, when it was necessary, on aqueduct bridges, till it 
reached the northern parts of the city. It was in the course of 
this aqueduct that the contrivance of the souterasi or hydraulic 
obelisks, described by Andreossy (on his voyage to the Black Sea, 
the account of the Thracian Bosporus), was constructed, which 
excited some attention, as being an improvement on the method 
of conducting water by aqueduct bridges. " The souterasi," 



says Andreossy, " are masses of masonry, having generally the 
form of a truncated pyramid or an Egyptian obelisk. To foim 
a conduit with souterasi, we choose sources of water, the level 
of which is several feet higher than the reservoir by which it is 
to be distributed over the city. We bring the water from its 
sources in subterranean canals, slightly declining until we come 
to the borders of a valley or broken ground. We there raise on 
each side a souterasi, to which we adapt vertically leaden pipes 
of determinate diameters, placed parallel to the two opposite 
sides of the building. These pipes are disjoined at the upper 
part of the obelisk, which forms a sort of basin, with which the 
pipes are connected. The one permits the water to rise to the 
level from whence it had descended; by the other, the water 
descends from this level to the foot of the souterasi, where it 
enters another canal underground, which conducts it to a second 
and to a third souterasi, where it rises and again descends, as at 
the last station. Here a reservoir receives it and distributes it 
in different directions by orifices of which the discharge is known." 
Again he says, " it requires but little attention to perceive that 
this system of conducting tubes is nothing but a series of siphons 
open at their upper part, and communicating with each other. 
The expense of a conduit by souterasi is estimated at only one- 
fifth of that of an aqueduct with arcades." There seems to be 
really no advantage in these pyramids, further than as they serve 
the purpose of discharging tie air which collects in the pipes. 
They are in themselves an evident obstruction, and the water 
would flow more freely without any interruption of the kind. In 
regard to the leaden pipes, again, they would have required, 
with so little head pressure as is stated, to be used of very extra- 
ordinary dimensions to pass the same quantity of water as was 
discharged along the arched conduits (see also works quoted 
under Constantinople). The other principal source from 
which Constantinople is supplied, is from the high grounds 6 or 8 
m. west of the town, from which it is conducted by conduits 
and arches, in the same manner as the others. The supply 
drawn from all these sources, as detailed by Andreossy, amounted 
to 400,000 cubic ft. per day. (A. S. M.; J. M. M.) 

III. Modern Construction. — Where' towns are favourably situated 
the aqueduct may be very short and its cost bear a relatively 
small proportion to the total outlay upon a scheme of 
water supply, but where distant sources have to be ^w^t 
relied upon the cost of the aqueduct becomes one of the supp fy. 
most important features in the scheme, and the quantity 
of water obtainable must be considerable to justify the outlay. 
Hence it is that only very large towns can undertake the responsi- 
bility for this expenditure. In Great Britain it has in all large 
schemes become a condition that, when a town is permitted to 
go outside its own watershed, it shall, subject to a priority of 
a certain number of gallons per day per head of its own in- 
habitants, allow local authorities, any part of whose district is 
within a certain number of miles of the aqueduct, to take a 
supply on reasonable terms. The first case in which this principle 
was adopted on a large scale was the Thirlmere scheme sanctioned 
by parliament in 1879, for augmenting the supply of Manchester. 
The previous supply was derived from a source only about 15 m. 
distant, and the cost of the aqueduct, chiefly cast-iron pipes, 
was insignificant compared with the cost of the impounding 
reservoirs. But Thirlmere is 96 m. distant from the service 
reservoir near Manchester, and the cost of the aqueduct was 
more than 90 % of the total cost. As a supply of about 
50,000,000 gallons a day is available the outlay was justifiable, 
and the water is in fact very cheaply obtained. Liverpool 
derives a supply of about 40,000,000 gallons a day from the river 
Vyrnwy in North Wales, 68 m. distant, and Birmingham has 
constructed works for impounding water in Radnorshire, and con- 
veying it a distance of 74 m., the supply being about 75,000,000 
gallons a day. In the year 1899 an act of parliament was passed 
authorizing the towns of Derby, Leicester, Sheffield and Notting- 
ham, jointly to obtain a supply of water from the head waters of 
the river Derwent in Derbyshire. Leicester is 60 m. distant from 
this source, and its share of the supply is about 10,000,000 gallons 
a day. For more than half the distance, however, the aqueduct 



AQUEDUCT 



245 



is common to Derby and Nottingham, which together are entitled 
to about 16,000,000 gallons a day, and the expense to Leicester 
is correspondingly reduced. These are the most important cases 
of long aqueducts in England, and all are subsequent to 1879. 
It is obvious, therefore, how greatly the design and construction 
of the aqueduct have grown in importance, and what care must 
be Exercised in order that the supply upon which such large 
populations depend may not be interrupted, and that the country 
through which such large volumes of water are conveyed may not 
be flooded in consequence of the failure of any of the works. 

Practically only two types of aqueduct are used in England. 
The one is built of concrete, brickwork, &c, the other of cast-iron 
(or, in special circumstances, steel) pipes. In the 
Construe- f ormer ly p e t jj e wa t er SU rface coincides with the 
hydraulic gradient, and the conditions are those of an 
artificial river; the aqueduct must therefore be carefully graded 
throughout, so that the fall available between source and 
termination may be economically distributed. This condition 
requires that the ground in which the work is built shall be at 
the proper elevation; if at any point this is not the case, the 
aqueduct must be carried on a substructure built up to the 
required level. Such large structures are, however, extremely 
expensive, and require elaborate devices for maintaining water- 
tightness against the expansion and contraction of the masonry 
due to changes of temperature. They are now only used where 
their length is very short, as in cases where mountain streams 
have to be crossed, and even these short lengths are avoided by 
some engineers, who arrange that the aqueduct shall pass, 
wherever practicable, under the streams. Where wide valleys 
interrupt the course of the built aqueduct, or where the absence 
of high ground prevents the adoption of that type at any part 
of the route, the cast-iron pipes hereafter referred to are used. 

The built aqueduct may be either in tunnel, or cut-and-cover, 
the latter term denoting the process of cutting the trench, 
building the floor, side-walls, and roof, and covering 
amrettaets. ^ tn eart h, the surface of the ground being restored 
as before. For works conveying water for domestic 
supply, the aqueduct is in these days, in England, always 
covered. Where, as is usually the case, the water is derived 
from a tract of mountainous country, the tunnel work is some- 
times very heavy. In the case of the Thirlmere aqueduct, out 
of the first 13 m. the length of the tunnelled portions is 8 m., the 
longest tunnel being 3 m. in length. Conditions of time, and the 
character of the rock, usually require the use of machinery for 
driving, at any rate in the case of the longer tunnels. For the 
comparatively small tunnels required for aqueducts, two percus- 
sion drilling machines are usually mounted on a carriage, the 
motive power being derived from compressed air sent up the 
tunnel in pipes. The holes when driven are charged with ex- 
plosives and fired. In the Thirlmere tunnels, driven through 
very hard Lower Silurian strata, the progress was about 13 yds. 
a week at each face, work being carried on continuously day and 
night for six days a week. Where the character of the country 
through which the aqueduct passes is much the same as that 
from which the supply is derived, the tunnels need not be lined 
with concrete, &c, more than is absolutely necessary for retaining 
the water and supporting w r eak places in the rock; the floor, 
however, is nearly always so treated. The lining, whether in 
tunnel or cut-and-cover, may be either of concrete, or brickwork, 
or of concrete faced with brickwork. To ensure the imperme- 
ability of work constructed with these materials is in practice 
somewhat difficult, and no matter how much care is taken by 
those supervising the workmen, and even by the workmen them- 
selves, it is impossible to guarantee entire freedom from trouble 
in this respect. With a wall only about 1 5 in. thick, any neglect is 
certain to make the work permeable; frequently the labourers 
do not distribute the broken stone and fine material of the con- 
crete uniformly, and no matter how excellent the design, the 
quality of materials, &c, a leak is sure to occur at such places 
(unless, indeed, the pressure of the outside water is superior 
and an inflow occurs). A further cause of trouble lies in the 
water which flows from the strata on to the concrete, and 



washes away some of the cement upon which the work depends 
for its watertightness, before it has time to set. For this reason 
it is advisable to put in the floor before, and not after, the side- 
walls and arch have been built, otherwise the only outlet for the 
water in the strata is through the ground on which the floor has 
to be laid. Each length of about 20 ft. should be completely 
constructed before the next is begun, the water then having 
an easy exit at the leading end. Manholes, by which the aque- 
duct can be entered, are usually placed in the roof at convenient 
intervals; thus, in the case of the Thirlmere aqueduct, they 
occur at every quarter of a mile. 

In some parts of America aqueducts are frequently constructed 
of wood, being then termed flumes. These are probably more 
extensively used in California than in any other part 
of the world, for conveying large quantities of water aqae aucts. 
which is required for hydraulic mining, for irrigation, 
for the supply of towns and for transporting timber. The flumes 
are frequently carried along precipitous mountain slopes, and 
across valleys, supported on trestles. In Fresno county, Cali- 
fornia, there is a flume 52 m. in length for transporting timber 
from the Sierra Nevada Mountains to the plain below; it has a 
rectangular V-shaped section, 3 ft. 7 in. wide at the top, and 21 in. 
deep vertically. The boards which form the sides are i; in. 
thick, and some of the trestlework is 130 ft. high. The steepest 
grade occurs where there is a fall of 730 ft. in a length of 3000 ft. 
About 9,000,000 ft. of timber were used in the construction. 
At San Diego there is a flume 35 m. long for irrigation and 
domestic supply, the capacity being 50 ft. per second; it has 315 
trestle bridges (the longest of which is that across Los Coches 
Creek, 1794 ft. in length and 65 ft. in height) and 8 tunnels, 
and the cost was $900,000. The great bench flume of the 
Highline canal, Colorado, is 2640 ft. in length, 28 ft. wide, and 
7 ft. deep; the gradient is 5-28 ft. per mile, and the discharge 
1 184 ft. per second. 

As previously stated, the type of aqueduct built of concrete, 
&c, can only be adopted where the ground is sufficiently elevated 
to carry it, and where the quantity of water to be con- 
veyed makes it more economical than piping. Where i^Wa 
the falling contour is interrupted by valleys too wide piping. 
for a masonry structure above the surface of the 
ground, the detached portions of the built aqueduct must be 
connected by rows of pipes laid beneath, and following the main 
undulations of, the surface. In such cases the built aqueduct 
terminates in a chamber of sufficient size to enclose the mouths 
of the several pipes, which, thus charged, carry the water under 
the valley up to a corresponding chamber on the farther hillside 
from which the built aqueduct again carries on the supply. 
These connecting pipes are sometimes called siphons, although 
they have nothing whatever to do with the principle of a siphon, 
the water simply flowing into the pipe at one end and out at the 
other under the influence of gravity, and the pressure of the 
atmosphere being no element in the case. The pipes are almost 
always made of cast-iron, except in such cases as the lower part 
of some siphons, where the pressure is very great, or where they 
are for use abroad, when considerations of weight are of import- 
ance, and when they are made of rolled steel with riveted or 
welded seams. It is frequently necessary to lay them in deep 
cuttings, in which case cast-iron is much better adapted for 
sustaining a heavy weight of earth than the thinner steel, though 
the latter is more adapted to resist internal pressure. Mr 
D. Clarke (Trans. Am. Soc. C.E. vol. xxxviii. p. 93) gives some 
particulars of a riveted steel pipe 24 m. long, 33 to 42 in. diameter, 
varying in thickness from 0-22 in. to 0-375 m - After a length of 
9 m. had been laid, and the trench refilled, it was found that the 
crown of the pipe had been flattened by an amount varying 
from 5 in. to 4 in. Steel pipes suffer more from corrosion 
than those made of cast-iron, and as the metal attacked is 
much thinner the strength is more seriously reduced. These 
considerations have prevented any general change from cast-iron 
to steel. 

Mr. Clemens Herschel has made some interesting remarks (Proc. 
Inst. C.E. vol. cxv. p. 162) as to the circumstances in which steel 



246 



AQUEDUCT 



pipes have been found preferable to cast-iron. He says that it had 
been demonstrated by practice that cast-iron cannot compete with 
wrought-iron or steel pipes in the states west of the Rocky Moun- 
tains, on the Pacific slope. This is due to the absence of coal and 
iron ore in these states, and to the weight of the imported cast-iron 
pipes compared with steel pipes of equal capacity and strength. 
The works of the East Jersey Water Company for the supply of 
Newark, N.J., include a riveted steel conduit 48 in. in diameter and 
21 m. long. This conduit is designed to resist only the pressure due 
to the hydraulic gradient, in contradistinction to that which would 
be due to the hydrostatic head, this arrangement saving 40% in the 
weight and cost of the pipes. For the supply of Rochester, N.Y., 
there is a riveted steel conduit 36 in. in diameter and 20 m. long; 
and for Allegheny City, Pennsylvania, there is a steel conduit 5 it. in 
diameter and nearly 10 m. long. The works for bringing the water 
from La Vigne and Verneuil to Paris include a steel main 5 ft. in 
diameter between St Cloud and Paris. 

Cast-iron pipes rarely exceed 48 in. in diameter, and even this 
diameter is only practicable where the pressure of the water is low. 
In the Thirlmere aqueduct the greatest pressure is nearly 180 lb on 
the square inch, the pipes where this occurs being 40 in. in diameter 
and if in. thick. These large pipes, which are usually made in 
lengths of 12 ft., are generally cast with a socket at one end for 
receiving the spigot end of the next pipe, the annular space being 
run with lead, which is prevented from flowing into the interior of 
the pipe by a spring ring subsequently removed; the surface of the 
lead is then caulked all round the outside of the pipe. A wrought- 
iron ring is sometimes shrunk on the outer rim of the socket, pre- 
viously turned to receive it, in order to strengthen it against the 
wedging action of the caulking tool. Sometimes the pipes are cast 
as plain tubes and joined with double collars, which are run with 
lead as in the last case. The reason for adopting the latter type is 
that the stresses set up in the thicker metal of the socket by unequal 
cooling are thereby avoided, a very usual place for pipes to crack 
under pressure being at the back of the socket. The method of 
turning and boring a portion, slightly tapered, of spigot and socket 
so as to ensure a watertight junction by close annular metallic con- 
tact, is not suitable for large pipes, though very convenient for 
smaller diameters in even ground. Spherical joints are sometimes 
used where a line of main has to be laid under a large river or estuary, 
and where, therefore, the pipes must be jointed before being lowered 
into the previously dredged trench. This was the case at the Willam- 
ette river, Portland, Oregon, where a length of 2000 ft. was required. 
The pipes are of cast-iron 28 in. in diameter, I J in. thick, and 17 ft. 
long. The spigots were turned to a spherical surface of 20 in. 
radius outside, the inside of the sockets being of a radius f in. greater. 
After the insertion of the spigot into the socket, a ring, 3 in. deep, 
turned inside to correspond with the socket, was bolted to the latter, 
the annular space then being run with lead. These pipes were laid 
on an inclined cradle, one end of which rested on the bed of the river 
and the other on a barge where the jointing was done ; as the pipes 
were jointed the barge was carefully advanced, thus trailing the 
pipes into the trench (Trans. Am. Soc. C.E. vol. xxxiii. p. 257). As 
may be conjectured from the pressure which they have to stand, 
very great care has to be taken in the manufacture and handling of 
cast-iron pipes of large diameter, a care which must be unfailing 
from the time of casting until they are jointed in their final position 
in the ground. They are cast vertically, socket downwards, so that 
the densest metal may be at the weakest part, and it is advisable to 
allow an extra head of metal of about 12 in., which is subsequently 
cut off in a lathe. An inspector representing the purchaser watches 
every detail of the manufacture, and if, after being measured in 
every part and weighed, they are found satisfactory they are proved 
with internal fluid pressure, oil being preferable to water for this 
purpose. While under pressure, they are rapped from end to end 
with a hand hammer of about 5 lb in weight, in order to discover 
defects. The wrought-iron rings are then,- if required, shrunk on 
to the sockets, and the pipes, after being made hot in a stove, are 
dipped vertically in a composition of pitch and oil, in order to 
preserve them from corrosion. All these queries are performed
under cover. A record should be kept of the history of the pipe 
from the time it is cast to the time it is laid and jointed in the ground, 
giving the date, number, diameter, length, thickness, and propf 
pressure, with the name of the pipe-jointer whose work closes the 
record. Such a history sometimes enables the cause (which is often 
very obscure) of a burst in a pipe to be ascertained, the position of 
every pipe being recorded. 

Cast-iron pipes, even when dipped in the composition referred to, 
suffer considerably from corrosion caused by the water, especially 
soft water, flowing through them. One pipe may be found in as 
good a condition as when made, while the next may be covered with 
nodules of rust. The effect of the rust is twofold; it reduces the 
area of the pipe, and also, in consequence of the resistance offered 
by the rough surface, retards the velocity of the water. These two 
results, expecially the latter, may seriously diminish the capability 
of discharge, and they should always be allowed for in deciding the 
diameter. Automatic scrapers are sometimes used with good 
results, but it is better to be independent of them as long as possible. 
In one case the discharge of pipes, 40 in. in diameter, was found 
after a period of about twelve years to have diminished at the rate 



of about 1% per year; in another case, where the water was soft 
and where the pipes were 40 in. in diameter, the discharge was 
diminished by 7% in ten years. An account of the state of two 
cast-iron mains supplying Boston with water is given in the Trans. 
Am. Soc. C.E. vol. xxxv. p. 241. These pipes, which were laid in 
1877, are 48 in. in diameter and 1800 ft. long. When they were 
examined in 1894-1895, it was estimated that the tubercles of rust 
covered nearly one-third of the interior surfaces, the bottom ot the 
pipe being more encrusted than the sides and top. They had central 
points of attachment to the iron, at which no doubt the coating was 
defective, and from them the tubercles spread over the surface of 
the surrounding coating. In this case they were removed by hand, 
and the coating of the pipes was not injured in the process. Cast- 
iron pipes must not be laid in contact with cinders from a blast 
furnace with which roads are sometimes made, because these corrode 
the metal. Mr Russell Aitken {Proc. Inst. C.E. vol. cxv. p. 93) 
found in India that cast-iron pipes buried in the soil rapidly corroded, 
owing to the presence of nitric acid secreted by bacteria which 
attacked the iron. The large cast-iron pipes conveying the water 
from the Tansa reservoir to Bombay are laid above the surface of 
the ground. Cast-iron pipes of these large diameters have not been 
in existence sufficiently long to enable their life to be predicted. A 
main, 40 in. in diameter, conveying soft water, after being in existence 
fifty years at Manchester, was apparently as good as ever. In 1867 
Mr J. B. Francis found that no apparent deterioration had taken 
place in a cast-iron main, 8 in. diameter, which was laid in the year 
1828, a period of thirty-nine years {Trans. Soc. Am. C.E. vol. i. 
p. 26). These two instances are probably not exceptional. 

Pipes in England are usually laid with not less than 2 ft. 6 in. 
of cover, in order that the water may not be frozen in a severe 
winter. Where they are laid in deep cutting they 
should be partly surrounded with concrete, so that they O fi a yiol 
may not be fractured by the weight of earth above 
them. Angles are turned by means of special bend pipes, the 
curves being made of as large a radius as convenient. In the 
case of the Thirlmere aqueduct, double socketed castings about 
1 2 in. long (exclusive of the sockets) were used, the sockets 
being inclined to each other at the required angle. They were 
made to various angles, and for any particular curve several 
would be used connected by straight pipes 3 ft. long. As special 
castings are nearly double the price of the regular pipes, the 
cost was much diminished by making them as short as possible, 
while a curve, made up of the slight angles used, offered practi- 
cally no more impediment to the flow of water in consequence 
of its polygonal form, than would be the case had special bend 
pipes been used. In all cases of curves on a line of pipes under 
internal fluid pressure, there exists a resultant force tending 
to displace the pipes. When the curve is in a horizontal plane 
and the pipes are buried in the ground, the side of the pipe 
trench offers sufficient resistance to this force. Where, however, 
the pipes are above ground, or when the curve is in a vertical 
plane, it is necessary to anchor them in position. In the case of 
the Tansa aqueduct to Bombay, there is a curve of 500 ft. radius 
near Bassein Creek. At this point the hydrostatic head is about 
250 ft., and the engineer, Mr Clerke, mentions that a tendency 
to an outward movement of the line of pipes was observed. At 
the siphon under Kurla Creek the curves on the approaches as 
originally laid down were sharp, the hydrostatic head being there 
about 210 ft.; here the outward movement was so marked that 
it was considered advisable to realign the approaches with 
easier curves {Proc. Inst. C.E. vol. cxv. p. 34). In the case of 
the Thirlmere aqueduct the greatest hydrostatic pressure, 410 ft., 
occurs at the bridge over the river Lune, where the pipes are 
40 in. in diameter, and in descending from the bridge make reverse 
angles of 31^°. The displacing force at each of these angles 
amounts to 54 tons, and as the design includes five lines of 
pipes, it is obvious that the anchoring arrangements must be 
very efficient. The steel straps used for anchoring these and all 
other bends were curved to fit as closely as possible the castings 
to be anchored. Naturally the metal was not in perfect contact, 
but when the pipes were charged the disappearance of all the 
slight inequalities showed that the straps were fulfilling their 
intended purpose. At every summit on a line of pipes one or 
more valves must be placed in order to allow the escape of 
air, and they must also be provided on long level stretches, 
and at changes of gradient where the depth of the point of 
change below the hydraulic gradient is less than that at both 



AQUEDUCT 



247 



sides, causing what may be called a virtual summit. It is better 
to have too many than too few, as accumulations of air may 
cause an enormous diminution in the quantity of water delivered. 
In all depressions discharge valves should be placed for emptying 
the pipes when desired, and for letting off the sediment which 
accumulates at such points. Automatic valves are frequently 
placed at suitable distances for cutting off the supply in case of 
a burst. At the inlet mouth of the pipe they may depend for 
their action on the sudden lowering of the water (due to a burst 
in the pipe) in the chamber from which they draw their supply, 
causing a float to sink and set the closing arrangement in motion. 
Those on the line of main are started by the increased velocity in 
the water, caused by the burst on the pipe at a lower level. 
The water, when thus accelerated, is able to move a disk hung 
in the pipe at the end of a lever and weighted so as to resist the 
normal velocity; this lever releases a catch, and a door is then 
gradually revolved by weights until it entirely closes the pipe. 
Reflux valves on the ascending leg of a siphon prevent water 
from flowing back in case of a burst below them; they have 
doors hung on hinges, opening only in the normal direction of 
flow. Due allowance must be made, in the amount of head 
allotted to a pipe, for any head which may be absorbed by such 
mechanical arrangements as those described where they offer 
opposition to the flow of the water. These large mains require 
most careful and gradual filling with water, and constant atten- 
tion must be given to the air-valves to see that the gutta-percha 
balls do not wedge themselves in the openings. A large mass of 
water, having a considerable velocity, may cause a great many 
bursts by water-ramming, due to the admission of the water 
at too great a speed. In places where iron is absent and timber 
plentiful, as in some parts of America, pipes, even of large 
diameter and in the most important cases, are sometimes made 
of wooden staves hooped with iron. A description of two of 
these will be found below. 

The Thirlmere Aqueduct is capable of conveying 50,000,000 
gallons a day from Thirlmere, in the English lake district, to Man- 
TMrtmere. cnest er. The total length of 96 m. is made up of 14 m. 
of tunnels, 37 m. of cut-and-cover, and 45 m. of cast- 
iron pipes, five rows of the latter being required. The tunnels 
where lined, and the cut-and-cover, are formed of concrete, and are 
7 ft. in height and width, the usual thickness of the concrete being 
15 in. The inclination is 20 in. per mile. The floor is flat from side 
to side, and the side-walls are 5 ft. high to the springing of the arch, 
which has a rise of 2 ft. The water from the lake is received in a 
circular well 65 ft. deep and 40 ft. in diameter, at the bottom of 
which there is a ring of wire-gauze strainers. Wherever the con- 
crete aqueduct is intersected by valleys, cast-iron pipes are laid; 
in the first instance only two of the five rows 40 in. in diameter were 
laid, the city not requiring its supply to be augmented by more than 
20,000,000 gallons a day, but in 1907 it was decided to lay a third 
line. All the elaborate arrangements described above for stopping 
the water in case of a burst have been employed, and have perfectly 
fulfilled their duties in the few cases in which they have been called 
into action. The water is received in a service reservoir at Prestwich, 
near Manchester, from which it is supplied to the city. The supply 
from this source was begun in 1894. The total cost of the complete 
scheme may be taken at about £5,000,000, of which rather under 
£3,000,000 had been spent up to the date of the opening, at which 
time only one line of pipes had been laid. 

The Vyrnwy Aqueduct was sanctioned by parliament in 1880 for 
the supply of Liverpool from North Wales, the quantity of water 
Vyrnwy. obtainable being at least 40,000,000 gallons a day. A 
tower built in the artificial lake from which the supply is 
derived, contains the inlet and arrangements for straining the water. 
The aqueduct is 68 m. in length, and for nearly the whole distance 
will consist of three lines of cast-iron pipes, two of which, varying in 
diameter from 42 in. to 39 in., are now in use. As the total fall 
between Vyrnwy and the termination at Prescot reservoirs is about 
550 ft., arrangements had to be made to ensure that no part of the 
aqueduct be subjected to a greater pressure than is required for the 
actual discharge. Balancing reservoirs have therefore been con- 
structed at five points on the line, advantage being taken of high 
ground where available, so that the total pressure is broken up into 
sections. At one of these points, where the ground level is no ft. 
below the hydraulic gradient, a circular tower is built, making a 
most imposing architectural feature in the landscape. At the cross- 
ing of the river Weaver, 100 ft. wide and 15 ft. deep, the three pipes, 
here made of steel, were connected together laterally, floated into 
position, and sunk into a dredged trench prepared to receive them. 
Under the river Mersey the pipes are carried in a tunnel, from which, 
during construction, the water was excluded by compressed air. 



Denver Aqueduct. — The supply to Denver City, initiated by the 
Citizens Water Company in 1889, is derived from the Platte river, 
rising in the Rocky Mountains. The first aqueduct Denver. 
constructed is rather over 20 m. in length, of which a 
length of 16 J m. is made of wooden stave pipe, 30 in. in diameter. 
The maximum pressure is that due to 185 ft. of water; the average 
cost of the wooden pipe was $1-36! per foot, and the capability of 
discharge 8,400,000 gallons a day. Within a year of the completion 
of the first conduit, it became evident that another of still greater 
capacity was required. This was completed in April 1893; it is 
34 in. in diameter and will deliver 16,000,000 gallons a day. By 
increasing the head upon the first pipe, the combined discharge is 
30,000,000 gallons a day. An incident in obtaining a temporary 
supply, without waiting for the completion of the second pipe, was 
the construction of two wooden pipes, 13 in. in diameter, crossing a 
stream with a span of 104 ft., and having no support other than that 
derived from their arched form. One end of the arch is 24J ft. 
above the other end, and, when filled with water, the deflection with 
eight men on it was only f of an inch. A somewhat similar arch, 
60 ft. span, occurs on the 34-in. pipe where it crosses a canal. 
Schuyler points out (Trans. Am. Soc. C.E. vol. xxxi. p. 148) that the 
fact that the entire water supply of a city of 150,000 inhabitants 
is conveyed in wooden mains, is so radical a departure from all 
precedents, that it is deserving of more than a passing notice. He 
says that it is manifestly and unreservedly successful, and has 
achieved an enormous saving in cost. The sum saved by the use of 
wooden, in preference to cast-iron pipes, is estimated at $1,100,000. 
It is perhaps necessary to state that the pipe is buried in the ground 
in the same way as metal pipes. The edges of the staves are dressed 
to the radius with a minute tongue i\ in. high on one edge of each 
stave, but with no corresponding groove in the next stave; its 
object is to ensure a close joint when the bands are tightened up. 
Leaks seldom or never occur along the longitudinal seams, but the 
end shrinkage caused troublesome joint leaks. The shrinkage in 
California redwood, which had seasoned 60 to 90 days before milling, 
was frequently as much as 3 in. in the 20 staves that formed the 
34-in. pipe, and the space so formed had to be filled by a special 
closing stave. Metallic tongues, J in. deep, are inserted at the ends 
of abutting staves, in a straight saw cut. The bands, which are of 
mild steel, have a head at one end and a nut and washer at the 
other; the ends are brought together on a wrought-iron shoe, 
against which the nut and washer set. The staves forming the lower 
half of the pipe are placed on an outside, and the top staves on an 
inside, mould. While the bands are being adjusted the pipe is 
rounded out to bring the staves out full, and the staves are carefully 
driven home on to the abutting staves. The spacing of the bands 
depends on circumstances, but is about 150 bands per 100 ft. With 
low heads the limit of spacing was fixed at 17 in. The outer surface 
of the pipe, when charged, shows moisture oozing slightly over the 
entire surface. This condition Schuyler considers an ideal one for 
perfect preservation, and the staves were kept as thin as possible 
to ensure its occurrence. Samples taken from pipes in use from 
three to nine years are quite sound, and it is concluded that the wood 
will last as long as cast-iron if the pipe is kept constantly charged. 
The bands are the only perishable portion, and their life is taken at 
from fifteen to twenty years. Other portions of the second conduit 
for a length of nearly 3 m. were formed of concrete piping, 38 in. 
diameter, formed on a mould in the trench, the thickness being 2 i 
to 3 in. So successful an instance of the use of wooden piping on a 
large scale is sure to lead to a large development of this type of 
aqueduct in districts where timber is plentiful and iron absent. 

Pioneer Aqueduct, Utah. — The construction of the Pioneer Aque- 
duct, Utah, was begun in 1896 by the Pioneer Electric Power 
Company, near the city of Ogden, 35 m. north of Salt p/ OBeer 
Lake City. The storage reservoir, from which it draws Utah ' 
its water, will cover an area of 2000 acres, and contain 
about 15,000 million gallons of water. The aqueduct is a pipe 6 ft. 
in diameter, and of a total length of 6 m. ; for a distance of rather 
more than 5 m. it is formed of wooden staves, the remainder, where 
the head exceeds 117 ft., being of steel. It is laid in a trench and 
covered to a depth of 3 ft. The greatest pressure on the steel pipe 
is 200 ft per sq. in., and the thickness varies from § to \l in. The 
pipe was constructed according to the usual practice of marine 
boiler-work for high pressures, and each section, about 9 ft. long, 
was dipped in asphalt for an heur. These sections were supported 
on timber blocking, placed from 5 to 9 ft. apart, and consisting of 
three to six pieces of 6 x 6 in. timbers laid one on the top of the other; 
they were then riveted together in the ordinary way. The wooden 
stave-pipe is of the type successfully used in the Western States for 
many years, but its diameter is believed to be unequalled for any 
but short lengths. There were thirty-two staves in the circle, 2 in. 
in thickness, and about 20 ft. long, hooped with round steel rods f in. 
in diameter, each hoop being in two pieces. The pipe is supported 
at intervals of 8 ft. by sills 6 x 8 in. and 8 ft. long. The flow through 
it is 250 cubic ft. per second. 

The Santa Ana Canal was constructed for irrigation purposes in 
California, and is designed to carry 240 cub. ft. of water per second 
(Trans. Am. Soc. C.E. vol. xxxiii. p. 99). The cross Saata Ana _ 
section of the flumes shows an elliptical bottom and 
straight sides consisting of wooden staves held together by 



248 



AQUILA 



iron and steel ribs. The width and depth are each 5 ft. 6 in., the 
intended depth of water being 5 ft. The staves are held by T-iron 
supports resting on wooden sills spaced 8 ft. apart, and are com- 
pressed together by a framework. They were caulked with oakum, 
on the top of which, to a third of the total depth, hot asphalt was 
run. The use of nails was altogether avoided except in parts of the 
framework, it being noticed that decay usually starts at nail-holes. 
It was found possible to make the flume absolutely watertight, and 
in case of repair being necessary at any part the framework is easily 
taken to pieces so that new staves can be inserted. The water in the 
flume has a velocity of 9-6 ft. per second. The Warm Springs, Deep, 
and Morton canons on the line are crossed by wooden stave pipes 
52 in. in diameter, bound with round steel rods, and laid above the 
surface of the ground. The work is planned for two rows of pipes, 
each capable of carrying 123 cub. ft. per second; of these one so 
far has been laid. The lengths of the pipes at each of the three 
canons are 551, 964 and 756 ft. respectively, and the maximum 
head at any place is 160 ft. The pipes are not painted, and it has 
been suggested that they would suffer in their exposed position in 
case of a bush fire, a contingency to which, of course, flumes are also 
liable. 

Aqueducts of New York. — There are three aqueducts in New York 
— the Old Croton Aqueduct (1837-1843), the Bronx River Conduit 
JV Y rk. ( l88o_l88 5). an d the New Croton Aqueduct (1884-1893), 
o discharging respectively 95, 28, and 302 million U. S. 
gallons a day; their combined delivery is therefore 4255 million 
gallons a day. The Old Croton Aqueduct is about 41 m. in length, 
and was constructed as a masonry conduit, except at the Harlem 
and Manhattan valleys, where two lines of 36-in. pipe were used. 
The inclination of the former is at the rate of about 13 in. per 
mile. The area of the cross-section is 53-34 sq. ft., the height 
is 8 i ft., and the greatest width 7 ft. 5 in.; the roof is semicircular, 
the floor segmental, and the sides have a batter on the face of § in. 
per foot. The sides and invert are of concrete, faced with 4 in. of 
brickwork, the roof being entirely of brickwork. There is a bridge 
over the Harlem river 1450 ft. in length, consisting of fifteen semi- 
circular arches; its soffit is 100 ft. above high water, and its cost was 
$963,427. The construction of the New Croton Aqueduct was begun 
in 1885, and the works were sufficiently advanced by the 15th of 
July 1890 to allow the supply to be begun. The lengths of the various 
parts of the aqueduct are as follows : — 

Miles. 
Tunnel ........ 29-75 

Cut-and-cover . . . . . .1-12 

Cast-iron pipes, 48 in. diameter, 8 rows . 2-38 



Croton Inlet to Central Park 



33-25 



The length of tunnel under pressure (circular form) is 7-17 m., and 
that not under pressure (horse-shoe form) 23-70 m. The maximum 
pressure in the former is 55 lb per sq. in. The width and height of 
the horse-shoe form are each 13 ft. 7 in., and the diameter of the 
circular form (with the exception of two short lengths) is 12 ft. 3 in. 
The reason for constructing the aqueduct in tunnel for so long a 
distance was the enhanced value of the low-lying ground near the 
old aqueduct. The tunnel deviates from a straight line only for the 
purpose of intersecting a few transverse valleys at which it could be 
emptied. For 25 m. the gradient is 0-7 foot per mile; the tunnel is 
then depressed below the hydraulic gradient, the maximum depth 
being at the Harlem river, where it is 300 ft. below high water. The 
depth of the tunnel varies from 50 to 500 ft. from the surface of the 
ground. Forty-two shafts were sunk to facilitate driving, and in 
four cases where the surface of the ground is below the hydraulic 
gradient these are closed by watertight covers. The whole of the 
tunnel is lined with brickwork from I to 2 ft. in thickness, the voids 
behind the lining being filled with rubble-in-mortar. The entry to 
the old and new aqueducts is controlled by a gatehouse of elaborate 
and massive design, and the pipes which take up the supply at the 
end of the tunnel are also commanded by a gate-house. The aqueduct, 
where it passes under the Harlem river, is worthy of special notice. 
As it approaches the river it has a considerable fall, and eventually 
ends in a vertical shaft 12 ft. 3 in. in diameter (where the water has 
a fall of 174 ft.), from the bottom of which, at a depth of 300 ft. 
below high-water level, the tunnel under the river starts. The latter 
is circular in form, the diameter being 10 ft. 6 in., and the length is 
1300 ft.; it terminates at the bottom of another vertical shaft also 
12 ft. 3 in. in diameter. The depth of this shaft, measured from 
the floor of the lower tunnel to that of the upper tunnel leading 
away from it, is 321 ft.; it is continued up to the surface of the 
ground, though closed by double watertight covers a little above 
the level of the upper tunnel. Adjoining this shaft is another shaft 
of equal diameter, by means of which the water can be pumped out, 
and there is also a communication with the river above high-water 
level, so that the higher parts can be emptied by gravitation. The 
cost of the Old Croton Aqueduct was $11,500,000; that of the new 
aqueduct is not far short of $20,000,000. 

The Nadrai Aqueduct Bridge, in India, opened at the end of 1889, 
is the largest structure of its kind in existence. It was built to 
carry the water of the Lower Ganges canal over the Kali Naddi, in 
connexion with the irrigation canals of the north-west provinces. 



In the year 1888-1889 this canal had 564 m. of main line, with 
2050 m. of minor distributaries, and irrigated 519,022 acres of crops. 
The new bridge replaces one of much smaller size (five N . , 
spans of 35 ft.), which was completely destroyed by a high " aara * 
flood in July 1885. It gives the river a waterway of 21,000 sq. ft., 
and the canal a waterway of 1040 sq. ft., the latter representing a 
discharge of 4100 cub. ft. per second. Its length is 1310 ft., and it is 
carried on fifteen arches having a span of 60 ft. The width between 
the faces of the arches is 149 ft. The foundations below the river-bed 
have a depth of 52 ft., and the total height of the structure is 88 ft. 
It cost 44J lakhs of rupees, and occupied four years in building. 
The foundations consist of 268 circular brick cylinders, and the 
fifteen spans are arranged in three groups, divided by abutment 
piers; the latter are founded on a double row of 12-ft. cylinders, 
and the intermediate piers on a single row of 20-ft. cylinders, all 
the cylinders being hearted with hydraulic lime concrete filled in 
with skips. This aqueduct-bridge has a very fine appearance, owing 
to its massive proportions and design. (E. P. H.*) 

Authorities. — For ancient aqueducts in general : Curt Merckel, 
Die Ingenieurtechnik im Alterthum (Berlin, 1899) ; ch. vi. contains a 
very full account from the earliest Assyrian aqueducts onwards, 
with illustrations, measurements and an excellent bibliography. 
For Greek aqueducts see E. Curtius, " Uber stadtische Wasserbauten 
der Hellenen,," in Archaeologische Zeitung (1847); G. Weber (as 
above); papers in Athen. Mittheil. (Samos), 1877, (Enneacrunus) 
1892, 1893, 1894, 1905, and articles on Athens, Pergamcm, &c. 
For Roman aqueducts: R. Lanciani, " I Commentari di Frontino 
intorno le acque e gli acquedotti," in Memorie dei Lincei, serie iii. 
vol. iv. (Rome, 1880), 215 sqq., and separately; C. Herschel, The 
Two Books on the Water Supply of the City of Rome of Sextus Julius 
Frontinus (Boston, 1899) ; T. Ashby in Classical Review (1902), 336, 
and articles in The Builder; cf. also the maps to T. Ashby 's " Classical 
Topography of the Roman Campagna," in Papers of the British School 
at Rome, i., iii., iv. (in progress). 

For modern aqueducts, see Rickman's Life of Telford (1838); 
Schramke's New York Croton Aqueduct; Second Annual Report of 
the Department of Public Works of the City of New York in 1872; 
Report of the Aqueduct Commissioners (1887-1895), and The Water 
Supply of the City of New York (1896), by Wegmann; Memoir es sur 
Us eaux de Paris, presentes par le Prefet de la Seine au Conseil 
Municipal (1854 and 1858) ; Recherches statistiques sur les sources du 
bassin de la Seine, par M. Belgrand, Ingenieur en chef des ponts et 
chaussees (1854) : " Descriptions of Mechanical Arrangements of the 
Manchester Waterworks," by John Frederic Bateman, F.R.S., 
Engineer-in-chief, from the Minutes of Proceedings of the Institution 
of Mechanical Engineers (1866); The Glasgow Waterworks, by James 
M. Gale, Member Inst. C.E. (1863 and 1864); The Report of the 
Royal Commission on Water Supply, and the Minutes of Evidence 
(1867 and 1868). For accounts of other aqueducts, see the Transac- 
tions of the Societies of Engineers in the different countries, and the 
Engineering Journals. 

AQUILA ('AxvKas) , (1) a Jew from Rome, who with his wife 
Prisca or Priscilla had settled in Corinth, where Paul stayed 
with them (Acts xviii. 2, 3). They became Christians and fellow- 
workers with Paul, to whom they seem to have shown their 
devotion in some special way (Rom. xvi. 3, 4). (2) A native of 
Pontus, celebrated for a very literal and accurate translation of 
the Old Testament into Greek. Epiphanius (De Pond, et Mens. 
c. 1 5) preserves a tradition that he was a kinsman of the emperor 
Hadrian, who employed him in rebuilding Jerusalem (Aelia 
Capitolina, q.v.), and that he was converted to Christianity, but, 
on being reproved for practising pagan astrology, apostatized 
to Judaism. He is said also to have been a disciple of Rabbi 
'Aqiba (d. a.d. 132), and seems to be referred to in Jewish writ- 
ings as o^'py. Aquila's version is said to have been used 
in place of the Septuagint in the synagogues. • The Christians 
generally disliked it, alleging without due grounds that it rendered 
the Messianic passages incorrectly, but Jerome and Origen speak 
in its praise. Origen incorporated it in his Hexapla. 

It was thought that this was the only copy extant, but in 1897 
fragments of two codices were brought to the Cambridge University 
Library. These have been published — the fragments containing 
1 Kings xx. 7-17; 2 Kings xxiii. 12-27 by F. C. Burkitt in 1897, those 
containing parts of Psalms xc.-ciii. by C. Taylor in 1899. See F. C. 
Burkitt's article in the Jewish Encyclopaedia. 

AQUILA, CASPAR [Kaspar Adlee] (1488-1560), German 
reformer, was born at Augsburg on the 7th of August 1488, 
educated there and at Ulm (1502), in Italy (he met Erasmus in 
Rome), at Bern (1508), Leipzig (1510) and Wittenberg (1513). 
According to his son, he entered- the ministry in August 1514, 
at Bern. He was for some time a military chaplain. In 1516 
he became pastor of Jenga, near Augsburg. Openly proclaim- 
ing his adhesion to Luther's doctrine, he was imprisoned for 



AQUILA— AQUILEIA 



249 



half a year (1520 or 1522) at Dillingen, by order of the bishop 
of Augsburg; a death sentence was commuted to banishment 
through the influence of Isabella, wife of Christian II. of Den- 
mark and sister of Charles V. Returning to Wittenberg he 
met Luther, acted as tutor to the sons of Franz von Sickingen 
at Ebernburg, taught Hebrew at Wittenberg, and aided Luther 
in his version of the Old Testament. The dates and particulars 
of his career are uncertain till 1527, when he became pastor at 
Saalfeld, and in 1528, superintendent. His Vehement opposition 
to the Augsburg Interim (1548) led him to take temporary 
shelter at Rudolstadt with Catherine, countess of Schwarzburg. 
In 1550 he was appointed dean of the Collegiatstift in Schmal- 
kalden. Here he had a controversy with Andreas Osiander. 
Restored to Saalfeld, not without opposition, in 1552, he 
remained there, still engaged in controversy, till his death on 
the 1 2 th of November 1560. He was twice married, and left 
four sons. He published numerous sermons, a few Old Testa- 
ment expositions and some controversial tracts. 

See G. Kawerau, in A. Hauck's Realencyklopadie (1896) ; Allge- 
meine deutsche Biog. (1875); Lives by J. Avenarius (1718); J. G. 
Hillinger (1731); Chr. Schlegel (1737); Fr. Gensler (1816). 

AQUILA, SERAFINO DELL* (1466-1500), Italian poet and 
improvisatore, was born in 1466 at the town of Aquila, from 
which he took his name, and died in the year 1300- He spent 
several years at the courts of Cardinal Sforza and Ferdinand, 
duke of Calabria; but his principal patrons were the Borgias 
at Rome, from whom he received many favours. Aquila seems 
to have aimed at an imitation of Dante and Petrarch; and his 
poems, which were extravagantly praised during the author's 
lifetime, are occasionally of considerable merit. His reputation 
was in great measure due to his remarkable skill as an impro- 
visatore and musician. His works were printed at Venice in 
1302, and there have been several subsequent editions. 

AQUILA, a city of the Abruzzi, Italy, the capital of the 
province of Aquila, and the seat of an archbishop, 2360 ft. above 
sea-level, 50 m. directly N.E. of Rome, and 143 m. by rail. 
Pop. (1001) town, 18,494; commune, 21,261. It lies on a hill 
in the wide valley of the Aterno, surrounded by mountains on 
all sides, the Gran Sasso d'ltalia being conspicuous on the north- 
east. It is a favourite summer resort of the Italians, but is 
cold and windy in winter. In the highest part of the town is 
the massive citadel, erected by the . Spanish viceroy Don Pedro 
de Toledo in 1534. The church of S. Bernardino di Siena (1472) 
has a fine Renaissance facade by Nicold Filotesio (commonly 
called Cola dell' Amatrice), and contains the monumental tomb 
of the saint, decorated with beautiful sculptures, and executed 
by Silvestro Ariscola in 1480. The church of S. Maria di Colle- 
maggio, just outside the town, has a very fine Romanesque 
facade of simple design (1270-1280) in red and white marble, 
with three finely decorated portals and a rose-window above 
each. The two side doors are also fine. The interior contains 
the mausoleum of Pope Celestine V. (d. 1296) erected in 1317. 
Many smaller churches in the town have similar facades (S. 
Giusta, S. Silvestro, &c). The town also contains some fine 
palaces: the municipality has a museum, with a collection of 
Roman inscriptions and some illuminated service books. The 
Palazzi Dragonetti and Persichetti contain private collections 
of pictures. Outside the town is the Fontana idle novantanove 
cannelle, a fountain with ninety-nine jets distributed along three 
walls, constructed in 1272. Aquila has some trade in lace and 
saffron, and possesses other smaller industries. It was a uni- 
versity town in the middle ages, but most of its chairs have now 
been suppressed. 

Aquila was founded by Conrad, son of the emperor 
Frederick II., about 1230, as a bulwark against the power of 
the papacy. It was destroyed by Manfred in 1239, but soon 
rebuilt by Charles I. of Anjou. Its walls were completed in 1316; 
and it maintained itself as an almost independent republic until 
it was subdued in 1521 by the Spaniards, who had become 
masters of the kingdom of Naples in 1303. It was twice sacked 
by the French in 1799. 

See V. Bindi, Monumenti storici ed artistici degli Abruzzi (Naples, 
1889), pp. 771 seq. 



AQUILA, in astronomy, the " Eagle," sometimes named the 
" Vulture," a constellation of the northern hemisphere, men- 
tioned by Eudoxus (4th cent. B.C.) and Aratus (3rd cent. B.C.). 
Ptolemy catalogued nineteen stars jointly in this constellation 
and in the constellation Antinous, which was named in the reign 
of the emperor Hadrian (a.d. 1 17-138), but sometimes, and 
wrongly, attributed to Tycho Brahe, who catalogued twelve 
stars in Aquila and seven in Antinous; Hevelius determined 
twenty-three stars in the first, and nineteen in the second. 
The most brilliant star of this constellation, a-Aquilae or Altair, 
has a parallax of 0-23", and consequently is about eight times as 
bright as the sun; -q-Aquilae is a short-period variable, while 
Nova Aquilae is a " temporary " or " new " star, discovered 
by Mrs Fleming of Harvard in 1899. 

AQUILA ROMANUS, a Latin grammarian who flourished 
in the second half of the 3rd century a.d. He was the author 
of an extant treatise De Figuris Sententiarum et Elocutionis, 
written as an instalment of a complete rhetorical handbook for 
the use of a young and eager correspondent. While recom- 
mending Demosthenes and Cicero as models, he takes his own 
examples almost exclusively from Cicero. His treatise is really 
adapted from that by Alexander, son of Numenius, as is expressly 
stated by Julius Rufinianus, who brought out a supplementary 
treatise, augmented by material from other sources. Aquila's 
style is harsh and careless, and the Latin is inferior. 

Halm; Rhetores Latini minores (1863) ; Wensch, De Aquila Romano 
(1861). 

AQUILEIA, an ancient town of Italy, at the head of the 
Adriatic at the edge of the lagoons, about 6 to. from the sea, on 
the river Natiso (mod. Natisone) , the course of which has changed 
somewhat since Roman times. It was founded by the Romans 
in 181 B.C. as a frontier fortress on the north-east, not far from 
the site where, two years before, Gaulish invaders had attempted 
to settle. The colony was led by two men of consular and one 
of praetorian rank, and 3000 pedites formed the bulk of the 
settlers. It was probably connected by road with Bononia in 
175 B.C.; and subsequently with Genua in 148 B.C. by the Via 
Postumia, which ran through Cremona, Bedriacum and Altinum, 
joining the first-mentioned road at Concordia, while the con- 
struction of the Via Popilia from Ariminum to Ad Portum near 
Altinum in 132 B.C. improved the communications still further. 
In 169 B.C., 1300 more families were settled there as a rein- 
forcement to the garrison. The discovery of the goldfields near 
the modern Klagenfurt in 130 B.C. (Strabo iv. 208) brought 
it into notice, and it soon became a place of importance, not 
only owing to its strategic position, but as a centre of trade, 
especially in agricultural products. It also had, in later times 
at least, considerable brickfields. It was originally a Latin 
colony, but. became a municipium probably in 90 B.C. The 
customs boundary of Italy was close by in Cicero's day. It was 
plundered by the Iapydes under Augustus, but, in the period 
of peace which followed, was able to develop its resources. 
Augustus visited it during the Pannonian wars in 12-10 B.C. 
and it was the birthplace of Tiberius's son by Julia, in the latter 
year. It was the starting-point of several important roads lead- 
ing to the north-eastern portion of the empire — the road (Via 
Iulia Augusta) by Iulium Carnicum to Veldidena (mod. Wilten, 
near Innsbruck), from which branched off the road into Noricum, 
leading by Virunum (Klagenfurt) to Laurieum (Lorch) on the 
Danube, the road into Pannonia, leading to Emona (Laibach) 1 
and Sirmium (Mitrowitz), the road to Tarsatica (near Fiume) 
and Siscia (Sissek), and that to Tergeste (Trieste) and the 
Istrian coast. 

In the war against the Marcomanni in a.d. 167, the town 
was hard pressed; the fortifications had fallen into disrepair 
during the long peace. In a.d. 238, when the town took the 
side of the senate against the emperor Maximinus, they were 
hastily restored, and proved of sufficient strength to resist for 
several months, until Maximinus. himself was assassinated. 
The 4th century marks, however, the greatest importance of 

.. x This road is described in detail by O. Cuntz in Jahreshefte des 
Osterr. Arch. Inst. v. (1902), Beiblatt, pp. 139 scq. 



250 



AQUILLIUS— AQUINAS 



Aquileia; it became a naval station and, probably, the seat of 
the corrector Venetiarum et Histriae; a mint was established here, 
the coins of which are very numerous, and the bishop obtained 
the rank of patriarch. An imperial palace was constructed here, 
in which the emperors after the time of Diocletian frequently 
resided; and the city often played a part in the struggles 
between the rulers of the 4th century. At the end of the century, 
Ausonius enumerated it as the ninth among the great cities of 
the world, placing Rome, Mediolanum and Capua before it, and 
called it " moenibus et portu celeberrima." In a.d. 452, how- 
ever, it was destroyed by Attila, though it continued to exist 
until the .Lombard invasion of a.d. 568. After this the patri- 
archate was transferred to Grado. In 606 the diocese was 
divided into two parts, and the patriarchate of Aquileia, pro- 
tected by the Lombards, was revived, that of Grado being 
protected by the exarch of Ravenna and later by the doges of 
Venice. In 1027 and 1044 Patriarch Poppo of Aquileia entered 
and sacked Grado, and, though the pope reconfirmed the patri- 
arch of the latter in his dignities, the town never recovered, 
though it continued to be the seat of the patriarchate until its 
formal transference to Venice in 1450. The seat of the patri- 
archate of Aquileia had been transferred to Udine in 1238, but 
returned in 1420 when Venice annexed the territory of Udine. 
It was finally suppressed in 1751, and the sees of Udine and 
Gorizia (Gorz) established in its stead. Its buildings served as 
stone quarries for centuries, and no edifices of the Roman period 
remain above ground. Excavations have revealed one street 
and the north-west angle of the town walls, while the local 
museum contains over 2000 inscriptions, besides statues and 
other antiquities. The cathedral, a flat-roofed basilica, was 
erected by Patriarch Poppo in 103 1 on the site of an earlier 
church, and rebuilt about 1379 in the Gothic style by Patriarch 
Marquad. The narthex and baptistery belong to an earlier 
period. Of the palace of the patriarchs only two isolated 
columns remain standing. The modern village (pop. 2300) is 
rendered unhealthy by rice-fields. 

See T. W. Jackson, Dalmatia, Istria and the Quarnero (Oxford, 
1887), iii. 377 seq.; H. Maionica, Aquileia zur Romerzeit (Gorz, 
1881), Fundkarte von Aquileia (Gorz, 1893), " Inschriften in Grado " 
(Roman inscriptions removed thither from Aquileia) in Jahreshefte 
des Osterr. Arch. Instituts, i. (1898), Beiblatt, 83, 125. (T. As.) 

AQUILLIUS, MANIUS, Roman general, consul in 101 B.C. 
He successfully put down a revolt of the slaves under Athenion 
in Sicily. After his return, being accused of extortion, he was 
acquitted on account of his military services, although there 
was little doubt of his guilt. In 88 he acted as legate against 
Mithradates the Great, by whom he was defeated and taken 
prisoner. Mithradates treated him with great cruelty, and is 
said to have put him to death by pouring molten gold down his 
throat. 

Diodorus Siculus xxxvi. 3; Appian, Mithrid. ii. 17. 21; Veil. 
Paterculus ii. 18; Cicero, Verres, iii. 54, De Officiis, ii. 14, Tusc. 
v. 5. 

AQUINAS, THOMAS [Thomas of Aquin or Aquino], (c 1227- 
1274), scholastic philosopher, known as Doctor Angelicus, Doctor 
Universalis, was of noble descent, and nearly allied to several of 
the royal houses of Europe. He was born in 1225 or 1227, at 
Roccasecca, the castle of his father Landulf, count of Aquino, 
in the territories of Naples. Having received his elementary 
education at the monastery of Monte Cassino, he studied for six 
years at the university of Naples, leaving it in his sixteenth year. 
While there he probably came under the influence of the Domini- 
cans, who were doing their utmost to enlist within their ranks 
the ablest young scholars of the age, for in spite of the opposition 
of his family, which was overcome only by the intervention of 
Pope Innocent IV., he assumed the habit of St Dominic in his 
seventeenth year. 

His superiors, seeing his great aptitude for theological study, 
sent him to the Dominican school in Cologne, where Albertus 
Magnus was lecturing on philosophy and theology. In 1245 
Albertus was called to Paris, and there Aquinas followed him, 
and remained with him for three years, at the end of which he 
graduated as bachelor of theology. In 1248 he returned to 



Cologne with Albertus, and was appointed second lecturer and 
magister studentiutn. This year may be taken as the beginning 
of his literary activity and public life. Before he left Paris he 
had thrown himself with ardour into the controversy raging 
between the university and the Friar-Preachers respecting the 
liberty of teaching, resisting both by speeches and pamphlets the 
authorities of the university; and when the dispute was referred 
to the pope, the youthful Aquinas was chosen to defend his 
order, which he did with such success as to overcome the argu- 
ments of Guillaume de St Amour, the champion of the university, 
and one of the most celebrated men of the day. In 1257, along 
with his friend Bonaventura, he was created doctor of theology, 
and began to give courses of lectures upon this subject in Paris, 
and also in Rome and other towns in Italy. From this time 
onwards his life was one of incessant toil; he was continually 
engaged in the active service of his order, was frequently travel- 
ling upon long and tedious journeys, and was constantly consulted 
on affairs of state by the reigning pontiff. 

In 1263 we find him at the chapter of the Dominican order 
held in London. In 1268 he was lecturing now in Rome and 
now in Bologna, all the while engaged in the public business of 
the church. In 1271 he was again in Paris, lecturing to the 
students, managing the affairs of the church and consulted by 
the king, Louis VIII., his kinsman, on affairs of state. In 1272 
the commands of the chief of his order and the request of King 
Charles brought him back to the professor's chair at Naples. 
All this time he was preaching every day, writing homilies, 
disputations, lectures, and finding time to work hard at his great 
work the Summa Theologiae. Such rewards as the church could 
bestow had been offered to him. He refused the archbishopric of 
Naples and the abbacy of Monte Cassino. In January 1274 he 
was summoned by Pope Gregory X. to attend the council con- 
vened at Lyons, to investigate and if possible settle the differences 
between the Greek and Latin churches. Though suffering from 
illness, he at once set out on the journey; finding his strength 
failing on the way, he was carried to the Cistercian monastery of 
Fossa Nuova, in the diocese of Terracina, where, after a lingering 
illness of seven weeks, he died on the 7th of March 1274, Dante 
(Purg. xx. 69) asserts that he was poisoned by order of Charles 
of Anjou. Villani (ix.218) quotes the belief, and the Anonimo 
Fiorentino describes the crime and its motive. But Muratori, 
reproducing the account given by one of Thomas's friends, 
gives no hint of foul play. Aquinas was canonized in 1323 by 
Pope John XXII., and in 1567 Pius V. ranked the festival of St 
Thomas with those of the four great Latin fathers, Ambrose, 
Augustine, Jerome and Gregory. No theologian save Augustine 
has had an equal influence on the theological thought and 
language of the Western Church, a fact which was strongly 
emphasized by Leo XIII. (q.v.) in his Encyclical of August 4, 
1879, which directed the clergy to take the teachings of Aquinas 
as the basis of their theological position. In 1880 he was declared 
patron of all Roman Catholic educational establishments. In a 
monastery at Naples, near the cathedral of St Januarius, is still 
shown a cell in which he is said to have lived. 

The writings of Thomas are of great importance for philosophy 
as well as for theology, for by nature and education he is the spirit 
of scholasticism incarnate. The principles on which his system 
rested were these. He held that there were two sources of 
knowledge — the mysteries of Christian faith and the truths of 
human reason. The distinction between these two was made 
emphatic by Aquinas, who is at pains, especially in his treatise 
Contra Gentiles, to make it plain that each is a distinct fountain 
of knowledge, but that revelation is the more important of the 
two. Revelation is a source of knowledge, rather than the 
manifestation in the world of a divine life, and its chief character- 
istic is that it presents men with mysteries, which are to be 
believed even when they cannot be understood. Revelation is 
not Scripture alone, for Scripture taken by itself does not corre- 
spond exactly with his description; nor is it church tradition 
alone, for church tradition must so far rest on Scripture. Revela- 
tion is a divine source of knowledge, of which Scripture and 
church tradition arc the channels; and he who would rightly 



AQUINAS 



251 



understand theology must familiarize himself with Scripture, 
the teachings of the fathers, and the decisions of councils, in such 
a way as to be able to make part of himself, as it were, those 
channels along which this divine knowledge flowed. Aquinas's 
conception of reason is in some way parallel with his conception 
of revelation. Reason is in his idea not the individual reason, 
but the fountain of natural truth, whose chief channels are the 
various systems of heathen philosophy, and more especially the 
thoughts of Plato and the methods of Aristotle. Reason and 
revelation are separate sources of knowledge; and man can put 
himself in possession of each, because he can bring himself into 
relation to the church on the one hand, and the system of philo- 
sophy, or more strictly Aristotle, on the other. The conception 
will be made clearer when it is remembered that Aquinas, taught 
by the mysterious author of the writings of the pseudo-Dionysius, 
who so marvellously influenced medieval writers, sometimes 
spoke of a natural revelation, or of reason as a source of truths 
in themselves mysterious, and was always accustomed to say 
that reason as well as revelation contained two kinds of know- 
ledge. The first kind lay quite beyond the power of man to 
receive it, the second was within man's reach. In reason, as in 
revelation, man can only attain to the lower kind of knowledge; 
there is a higher kind which we may not hope to reach. 

But while reason and revelation are two distinct sources 
of truths, the truths are not contradictory; for in the last 
resort they rest on one absolute truth — they come from the one 
source of knowledge, God, the Absolute One. Hence arises the 
compatibility of philosophy and theology which was the funda- 
mental axiom of scholasticism, and the possibility of a Summa 
Theologiae, which is a Summa Philosophiae as well. All the 
many writings of Thomas are preparatory to his great work the 
Summa Theologiae, and show us the progress of his mind training 
for this his life work. In the Summa Catholicae Fidei contra 
Gentiles he shows how a Christian theology is the sum and crown 
of all science. This work is in its design apologetic, and is meant 
to bring within the range of Christian thought all that is of value 
in Mahommedan science. He carefully establishes the necessity 
of revelation as a source of knowledge, not merely because it 
aids us in comprehending in a somewhat better way the truths 
already furnished by reason, as some of the Arabian philosophers 
and Maimonides had acknowledged, but because it is the absolute 
source of our knowledge of the mysteries of the Christian faith ; 
and then he lays down the relations to be observed between 
reason and revelation, between philosophy and theology. This 
work, Contra Gentiles, may be taken as an elaborate exposition 
of the method of Aquinas. That method, however, implied a 
careful study and comprehension of the results which accrued 
to man from reason and revelation, and a thorough grasp of 
all that had been done by man in relation to those two sources 
of human knowledge; and so, in his preliminary writings, 
Thomas proceeds to master the two provinces. The results of 
revelation he found in the Holy Scriptures and in the writings 
of the fathers and the great theologians of the church; and 
his method was to proceed backwards. He began with 
Peter of Lombardy (who had reduced to theological order, in 
his famous book on the Sentences, the various authoritative 
statements of the church upon doctrine) in his In Quatuor 
Sententiarum P. Lombardi libros. Then came his deliverances 
upon undecided points in theology, in his XII. Quodlibeta 
Disputata, and his Quaestiones Disputatae. His Catena Aurea 
next appeared, which, under the form of a commentary on the 
Gospels, was really an exhaustive summary of the theological 
teaching of the greatest of the church fathers. This side of his 
preparation was finished by a close study of Scripture, the 
results of which are contained in his commentaries, In omnes 
Epistolas Divi Apostoli Expositio, his Super Isaiam et Jeremiam, 
and his In Psalmos. Turning now to the other side, we have 
evidence, not only from tradition but from his writings, that 
he was acquainted with Plato and the mystical Platonists; 
but he had the sagacity to perceive that Aristotle was the great 
representative of philosophy, and that his writings contained 
the best results and method which the natural reason had as yet 



attained to. Accordingly Aquinas prepared himself on this side 
by commentaries on Aristotle's De Interpretation, on his Posterior 
Analytics, on the Metaphysics, the Physics, the De Anima, and 
on Aristotle's other psychological and physical writings, each 
commentary having for its aim to lay hold of the material and 
grasp the method contained and employed in each treatise. 
Fortified by this exhaustive preparation, Aquinas began his 
Summa Theologiae, which he intended to be the sum of all known 
learning, arranged according to the best method, and subor- 
dinate to the dictates of the church. Practically it came to be 
the theological dicta of the church, explained according to the 
philosophy of Aristotle and his Arabian commentators. The 
Summa is divided into three great parts, which shortly may be 
said to treat of God, Man and the God-Man. The first and the 
second parts are wholly the work of Aquinas, but of the third 
part only the first ninety quaestiones are his; the rest of it was 
finished in accordance with his designs. The first book, after 
a short introduction upon the nature of theology as understood 
by Aquinas, proceeds in 119 questions to discuss the nature, 
attributes and relations of God; and this is not done as in a 
modern work on theology, but the questions raised in the physics 
of Aristotle find a place alongside of the statements of Scripture, 
while all subjects in any way related to the central theme are 
brought into the discourse. The second part is divided into 
two, which are quoted as Prima Secundae and Secunda Secundae. 
This second part has often been described as ethic, but this is 
scarcely true. The subject is man, treated as Aristotle does, 
according to his reXos, and so Aquinas discusses all the ethical, 
psychological and theological questions which arise; but any 
theological discussion upon man must be mainly ethical, and so 
a great proportion of the first part, and almost the whole of the 
second, has to do with ethical questions. In his ethical discus- 
sions (a full account of which is given under Ethics) Aquinas 
distinguishes theological from natural virtues and vices; the 
theological virtues are faith, hope and charity; the natural, 
justice, prudence and the like. The theological virtues are 
founded on faith, in opposition to the natural, which are founded 
on reason; and as faith with Aquinas is always belief in a pro- 
position, not trust in a personal Saviour, conformably with his 
idea that revelation is a new knowledge rather than a new life, 
the relation of unbelief to virtue is very strictly and narrowly 
laid down and enforced. The third part of the Summa is also 
divided into two parts, but by accident rather than by design. 
Aquinas died ere he had finished his great work, and what has 
been added to complete the scheme is appended as a Supple- 
mentum Tertiae Partis. In this third part Aquinas discusses 
the person, office and work of Christ, and had begun to discuss 
the sacraments, when death put an end to his labours. 

The purely philosophical theories of Aquinas are explained 
in the article Scholasticism. In connexion with the problem 
of universals, he held that the diversity of individuals depends 
on the quantitative division of matter (materia signata), and 
in this way he attracted the criticism of the Scotists, who pointed 
out that this very matter is individual and determinate, and, 
therefore, itself requires explanation. In general, Aquinas 
maintained in different senses the real existence of universals 
ante rem, in re and post rem. 

The best modern edition of the works of Aquinas is that prepared 
at the expense of Leo XIII. (Rome, 1882-1903). The Abbe Migne 
published a very useful edition of the Summa Theologiae, in four 8vo 
vols., as an appendix to his Patrologiae Cursus Completus; English 
editions, J. Rickaby (London, 1872), J. M. Ashley (London, 1888). 
See Acta Sand., vii. Martii ; A. Touron, La Vie de St Thomas d'Aquin, 
avec un expose de sa doctrine et de ses ouvrages (Paris, 1737); Karl 
Werner, Der Heilige Thomas von Aquino (1858) ; and R. B. Vaughan, 
St Thomas of Aquin, his Life and Labours (London, 1872) : other lives 
by P. Cavanagh (London, 1890); E. Desmousseaux de Giure (Paris, 
1888); M. Didot (Louvain, 1894). For the philosophy of Aquinas, 
see Albert Stockl, Geschichte der Philosophic des Mittelalters, ii. ; 
B. Haureau, De la philosophic scolastique, vol. ii. ; J. Frohschammer, 
Die Philos. d. Th. von A. (Leipzig, 1889); K. Prantl, Geschichte d. 
Logik, vol. iii. ; C. M. Schneider, Natur, Vernunft, Gotl (Regensburg, 
1883), Das Wissen Gottes nach d. Lehre des Th. v. A. (4 vols. Regens- 
burg, 1884-1886), Die socialistische Staatsidee beleuchtet durch Th. 
v. A. (Paderborn, 1894); A. Harnack, Hist, of Dogma (trans. Wm. 



252 



AQUINO— AQUITAINE 



Gilchrist, London, 1899); Ueberweg's History of Philosophy, vol. i. 
See also H. C. O'Neill, New Things and Old in St Thomas Aquinas 
(1909), with biography. (T. M. L. ; J. M. M.) 

AQUINO, a town and episcopal see of Campania, Italy, in the 
province of Caserta; it is 56 m. N.W. by rail from the town 
of Caserta, and 75 m. N.W. of Cassino. Pop. (1901) 2672. The 
modern town, close to the ancient, is unimportant, though the 
canons of the cathedral have the privilege of wearing the mitre 
and cappa magna at great festivals. It is close to the site of the 
ancient Aquinum, a municipium in the time of Cicero, and made 
a colony by the Triumviri, the birthplace of Juvenal and of the 
emperor Pescennius Niger. The Via Latina traversed it; one 
of the gates through which it passed, now called Porta S. Lorenzo, 
is still well preserved, and there are remains within the walls 
(portions of which, built of large blocks of limestone, still remain) 
of two (so called) temples, a basilica and an amphitheatre (see 
R. Delbriick in Rom. Mitteilungen, 1903, p. 143). Outside, on the 
south is a well-preserved triumphal arch with composite capitals, 
and close to it the nth-century basilica of S. Maria Libera, a 
handsome building in the Romanesque style, but now roofless. 
Several Roman inscriptions are built into it, and many others 
that have been found indicate the ancient importance of the place, 
which, though it does not appear in early history, is vouched for 
by Cicero and Strabo. 1 A colony was planted hereby the Triumviri. 
St Thomas Aquinas was born in the castle of Roccasecca, 5 m. N. 

See E. Grossi, Aquinum (Rome, 1907). (T. As.) 

AQUITAINE, the name of an ancient province in France, the 
extent of which has varied considerably from time to time. 
About the time of Julius Caesar the name Aquilania was given 
to that part of Gaul lying between the Pyrenees and the Garonne, 
and its inhabitants were a race, or races, distinct from the Celts. 
The name Aquitania is probably a form of Auscetani, which in 
its turn is a lengthened form of Ausces, and is thus cognate with 
the words Basque and Wasconia, i.e. Gascony. Although many 
of the tribes of Aquitania submitted to Julius Caesar, it was not 
until about 28 B.C. that the district was brought under the 
Roman yoke. In keeping with the Roman policy of denational- 
ization, the term Aquitania was extended, and under Augustus 
it included the whole of Gaul south and west of the Loire and 
the Allier, and thus ceased to possess ethnographical importance. 
In the 3rd century a.d. this larger Aquitania was divided into 
three parts: Aquitania Prima, the eastern part of the district 
between the Loire and the Garonne; Aquitania Secunda, the 
western part of the same district; and Aquitania Tertia, or 
N ovempopulana, the region between the Garonne and the 
Pyrenees, or the original Aquitania. The seats of government 
were respectively Bourges, Bordeaux and Eauze; the province 
contained twenty-six cities, and was in the diocese of Vienne. 
Like the rest of Gaul, Aquitania absorbed a large measure of 
Roman civilization, and this continued to distinguish the dis- 
trict down to a late period. In the 5th century the Visigoths 
established themselves in Aquitania Secunda, and also in parts 
of Aquitania Prima and Novempopulana, but after the defeat 
of their king Alaric II. by the Franks under Clovis in 507, they 
were supplanted by their conquerors. Clovis and his successors 
extended their authority nominally to the Pyrenees, but, as 
Guizot has remarked, " the conquest of Aquitania by Clovis left 
it almost as alien to the people and king of Franks as it had 
formerly been." Subsequently during the -Merovingian period 
it was contended for by the feeble rulers of the various Frankish 
kingdoms, and was frequently partitioned among them; but 
the Aquitanians had little difficulty in effectually resisting this 
authority, although they did not establish themselves as a separate 
kingdom. About 628, indeed, they gathered around Charibert, 
or Haribert, a brother of the Frankish king, Dagobert I., in the 
hope of national independence; but after his death in 630 they 
returned to their former condition. But this effort, although 
a failure, brought about a certain measure of concord between 
the two principal races inhabiting the district, and so prepared 

1 According to H. Nissen, Ital. Landeskunde (Berlin, 1902), ii. 665, 
a road ran from here to Minturnae; but no traces of it are to be 
seen. 



the way for the stubborn resistance which, subsequently, the 
Aquitanians were able to offer to the Franks. 

The first line of dukes began about 660 with one Felix, who, 
like his successor, Lupus, probably owned allegiance to the 
Frankish kings, and whose seat of government was Toulouse. 
About the end of the 7 th century an adventurer named Odo, 
or Eudes, made himself master of this region. Attacked by the 
Saracens he inflicted on them a crushing defeat, but when they 
reappeared, he was obliged to invoke the aid of Charles Martel, 
who, as the price of his support, claimed and received the homage 
of his ally. Odo was succeeded by his son Hunald, who after 
carrying on a wax against the Franks under Pippin the Short, 
retired to a convent, leaving both the kingdom and the conflict 
to Waifer, or Guaifer. For some years Waifer strenuously 
carried on an unequal struggle with the Franks, but he was 
assassinated in 768, and with him perished the national inde- 
pendence, although not the national individuality, of the 
Aquitanians. In 781 Charlemagne bestowed Aquitaine upon his 
young son, Louis, and as Louis was generally described as a 
king, Aquitaine is referred to during the Carolingian period 
as a kingdom, and not as a duchy. When Louis succeeded 
Charlemagne as emperor in 814, he granted Aquitaine to his 
son Pippin, on whose death in 838 the Aquitanians chose his 
son Pippin II. (d. 865) as their king. The emperor Louis I., 
however, opposed this arrangement and gave the kingdom to 
his youngest son Charles, afterwards the emperor Charles the 
Bald. Now followed a time of confusion and conflict which 
resulted eventually in the success of Charles, although from 
845 to 852 Pippin was in possession of the kingdom. In 852 
Pippin was imprisoned by Charles the Bald, who soon afterwards 
gave to the Aquitanians his own son Charles as their king. 
On the death of the younger Charles in 866, his brother Louis 
the Stammerer succeeded to the kingdom, and when, in 877, 
Louis became king of the Franks, Aquitaine was united to the 
Frankish crown. 

A new period now begins in the history of Aquitaine. By a 
treaty made in 845 between Charles the Bald and Pippin II. 
the kingdom had been diminished by the loss of Poitou, Sain- 
tonge and Angoumois, which had been given to Rainulf I., count 
of Poitiers. Somewhat earlier than this date the title of duke 
of the Aquitanians had been revived, and this was now borne 
by Rainulf, although it was also claimed by the counts of 
Toulouse. The new duchy of Aquitaine, comprising the three dis- 
tricts already mentioned, remained in the hands of Rainulf's 
successors, in spite of some trouble with their Frankish over- 
lords, until 893 when Count Rainulf II. was poisoned 'by order 
of King Charles III. the Simple. Charles then bestowed the 
duchy upon William the Pious, count of Auvergne, the founder 
of the abbey of Cluny, who was succeeded in 918 by his nephew, 
Count William II., who died in 926. A succession of dukes 
followed, one of whom, William IV., fought against Hugh Capet, 
king of France, and another of whom, William V., called the 
Great, was able considerably to strengthen and extend his 
authority, although he failed in his attempt to secure the Lom- 
bard crown. William's duchy almost reached the limits of 
the Roman Aquitania Prima and Secunda, but did not stretch 
south of the Garonne, a district which was in the possession 
of the Gascons. William died in 1030, and the names of 
William VI. (d. 1038), Odo or Eudes (d. 1039), who joinedGascony 
to his duchy, William VII. and William VIII. bring us down to 
William IX. (d, 1127), who succeeded in 1087, and made himself 
famous as a crusader and a troubadour. William X. (d. 113.7.) 
married his daughter Eleanor to Louis VII., king of France, 
and Aquitaine went as her dowry. When Eleanor was divorced 
from Louis and was married in 1152 to Henry II. of England 
the duchy passed to her new husband, who, having suppressed 
a revolt there, gave it to his son Richard. When Richard died 
in 1 199, it reverted to Eleanor, and on her death five years later, 
was united to the English crown and henceforward followed 
the fortunes of the English possessions in France. Aquitaine 
as it came to the English kings stretched as of old from the 
Loire to the Pyrenees, but its extent was curtailed on the 



ARABESQUE— ARABGIR 



253 



south-east by the wide lands of the counts of Toulouse. The name 
Guienne, a corruption of Aquitaine, seems to have come into 
use about the 10th century, and the subsequent history of 
Aquitaine is merged in that of Gascony (q.v.) and Guienne (q.v.). 

See E. Desjardins, Geographic hisloriquc et administrative de la 
Gaule romaine (Paris, 1876, 93); A. Luchaire, Les Origines lin- 
guistiques de V Aquitaine (Paris, 1877) ; A. Longnon, Geographic de la 
Gaule au VI' siecle (Paris, 1876); A. Perroud, Les Origines du 
premier duche d' Aquitaine (Paris, 1881) ; and E. Mabille, Le Royaume 
d' Aquitaine el ses marches sous les Carlovingiens (Paris, 1870). 

ARABESQUE, a word meaning simply " Arabian," but 
technically used for a certain form of decorative design in 
flowing lines intertwined; hence comes the more metaphorical 
use of this word, whether in nature or in morals, indicating a 
fantastic or complicated interweaving of lines against a back- 
ground. In decorative design the term is historically a 
misnomer. It is applied to the grotesque decoration derived from 
Roman remains of the early time of the empire, not to any style 
derived from Arabian or Moorish work. Arabesque and Moresque 
are really distinct; the latter is from the Arabian style of orna- 
ment, developed by the Byzantine Greeks for their new masters, 
after the conquests of the followers of Mahomet; and the former 
is a term pretty well restricted to varieties of cinquecento de- 
coration, which have nothing in common with any Arabian 
examples in their details, but are a development derived from 
Greek and Roman grotesque designs, such as we find them in 
the remains of ancient palaces at Rome, and in ancient houses 
at Pompeii. These were reproduced by Raphael and his pupils 
in the decoration of some of the corridors of the Loggie of the 
Vatican at Rome: grotesque is thus a better name for these 
decorations than Arabesque. This technical Arabesque, there- 
fore, is much more ancient than any Arabian or Moorish decora- 
tion, and has really nothing in common with it except the mere 
symmetrical principles of its arrangement. Pliny and Vitruvius 
give us no name for the extravagant decorative wall-painting 
in vogue in their time, to which the early Italian revivers of it 
seem to have given the designation of grotesque, because it, was 
first discovered in the arched or underground chambers (grotte) 
of Roman ruins — as in the golden house of Nero, or the baths of 
Titus. What really took place in the Italian revival was in some 
measure a supplanting of the Arabesque for the classical 
grotesque, still retaining the original Arabian designation, while 
the genuine Arabian art, the Saracenic, was distinguished as 
Moresque or Moorish. So it is now the original Arabesque that 
is called by its specific names of Saracenic, Moorish and Alham- 
bresque, while the term Arabesque is applied exclusively to the 
style developed from the debased classical grotesque of the 
Roman empire. 

There is still much of the genuine Saracenic element in Re- 
naissance Arabesques, especially in that selected for book-borders 
and for silver-work, the details of which consist largely of the 
conventional Saracenic foliations. But the Arabesque developed 
in the Italian cinquecento work repudiated all the original 
Arabian elements and devices, and limited itself to the mani- 
pulating of the classical elements, of which the most prominent 
feature is ever the floriated or foliated scroll; and it is in this 
cinquecento decoration, whether in sculpture or in painting, 
that Arabesque has been perfected. 

In the Saracenic, as the elder sister of the two styles, which 
was ingeniously developed by the Byzantine Greek artists for their 
Arabian masters in the early times of Mahommedan conquest, 
every natural object was proscribed; the artists were, therefore, 
reduced to making symmetrical designs from forms which should 
have no positive meaning; yet the Byzantine Greeks, who were 
Christians, managed to work even their own ecclesiastical 
symbols, in a disguised manner, into their tracery and diapers; 
as the lily, for instance. The cross was not so introduced; this, 
of course, was inadmissible; but neither was the crescent ever 
introduced into any of this early work in Damascus or Cairo. 
The crescent was itself not a Mahommedan device till after the 
conquest of Constantinople in 1453 a.d. The crescent, as the 
new moon, was the symbol of Byzantium; and it was only after 



that capital of the Eastern empire fell into the hands of the Turks 
that this symbol was adopted by them. The crescent and the 
cross became antagonist standards, therefore, first in the 15th 
century. And the crescent is not an element of original Moorish 
decoration. 

The Alhambra diapers and original Majolica (Majorca) ware 
afford admirable specimens of genuine Saracenic or Moorish 
decoration. A conventional floriage is common in these diapers; 
tracery also is a great feature in this work, in geometrical com- 
binations, whether rectilinear or curvilinear; and the designs 
are rich in colour; idolatry was in the reproduction of natural 
forms, not in the fanciful combination of natural colours. These 
curves and angles, therefore, or interfacings, chiefly in stucco, 
constitute the prominent elements of an Arabian ornamental 
design, combining also Arabic inscriptions; composed of a mass 
of foliation or floral forms conventionally disguised, as the ex- 
clusion of all natural images was the fundamental principle of 
the style in its purity. The Alhambra displays almost endless 
specimens of this peculiar work, all in relief, highly coloured, 
and profusely enriched with gold. The mosque of Tulun, in 
Cairo, a.d. 876, the known work of a Greek, affords the 
completest example of this art in its early time; and Sicily 
contains many remains of this same exquisite Saracenic 
decoration. 

Such is the genuine Arabesque of the Arabs, but a very 
different style of design is implied by the Arabesque of the 
cinquecento, a purely classical ornamentation. This owes its 
origin to tlie excavation and recovery of ancient monuments, 
and was developed chiefly by the sculptors of the north, and the 
painters of central Italy; by the Lombardi of Venice, by 
Agostino Busti of Milan, by Bramante of Urbino, by Raphael, 
by Giulio Romano, and others of nearly equal merit. Very 
beautiful examples in sculpture of this cinquecento Arabesque 
are found in the churches of Venice, Verona and Brescia; in 
painting, the most complete specimens are those of the Vatican 
Loggie, and the Villa Madama at Rome and the ducal palaces 
at Mantua. The Vatican Arabesques, chiefly executed for 
Raphael by Giulio Romano, Gian Francesco Penni, and Gio- 
vanni da Udine, though beautiful as works of painting, are often 
very extravagant in their composition, ludicrous and sometimes 
aesthetically offensive; as are also many of the decorations of 
Pompeii. The main features of these designs are balanced 
scrolls in panels; or standards variously composed, but sym-- 
metrically scrolled on either side, and on the tendrils of these 
scrolls are suspended or placed birds and animals, human figures 
and chimeras, of any or all kinds, or indeed any objects that may 
take the fancy of the artist. The most perfect specimens of 
cinquecento Arabesque are certainly found in sculpture. As 
specimens of exquisite work may be mentioned the Martinengo 
tomb, in the church of the Padri Riformati at Brescia, and the 
fagade of the church of Santa Maria dei Miracoli there, by 
the Lombardi; and many of the carvings of the Chateau de 
Gaillon, France — all of which fairly illustrate the beauties and 
capabilities of the style. 

See also Wornum, Analysis of Ornament (1874). (R. N. W.) 

ARABGIR, or Arabkir (Byz. Arabraces), a town of Turkey 
in Asia in the Mamuret el-Aziz or Kharput vilayet, situated 
near the confluence of the eastern and western Euphiates, but 
some miles from the right bank of the combined streams. Pop. 
about 20,000, of which the larger half is Mussulman. It is con- 
nected with Sivas by a chaussee, prolonged to the Euphrates. 
The inhabitants are enterprising and prosperous, many of them 
leaving their native city to push their fortunes elsewhere, while 
of those that remain the greater part is employed in the manu- 
facture of silk and cotton goods, or in the production of fruit. 
The present town was built at a comparatively recent date; 
but about 2 m. north-east is the old town, now called Eski-Shehr, 
given (c. 1021) to Senekherim of Armenia by the emperor Basil II. 
It contains the ruins of a castle and of several Seljuk mosques. 
The Armenian population suffered severely during the massacres 
of 1805. (D. G. H.) 



25 + 



ARABIA 



[GEOGRAPHY 



ARABIA, a peninsula in the south-west of Asia, lying between 
34° 30' and 12° 45' N., and 32° 30' and 6o° E., is bounded W. 
by the Red Sea, S. by the Gulf of Aden and the Indian Ocean, 
and E. by the Gulf of Oman and the Persian Gulf. Its northern 
or land boundary is more difficult to define; most authorities, 
however, agree in taking it from El Arish on the Mediterranean, 
along the southern border of Palestine, between the Dead Sea 
and the Gulf of Akaba, then bending northwards along the Syrian 
border nearly to Tadmur, thence eastwards to the edge of the 
Euphrates valley near Anah, and thence south-east to the 
mouth of the Shat el Arab at the head of the Persian Gulf, — 
the boundary so defined includes the northern desert, which 
belongs geographically to Arabia rather than to Syria; while 
on the same grounds lower Mesopotamia and Irak, although 
occupied by an Arab population, are excluded. 

In shape, the peninsula forms a rough trapezium, with its 
greatest length from north-west to south-east. The length of its 
western side from Port Said to Aden is 1500 m.; its base from 
the Straits of Bab-el-Mandeb (or Bab al Mandab) to Ras el Had 
is 1300 m., its northern side from Port Said to the Euphrates 
600 m.; its total area approximately 1,200,000 sq. m. 

Geography 

General Features. — In general terms Arabia may be described 
as a plateau sloping gently from south-west to north-east, and 
attaining its greatest elevation in the extreme south-west. 
The western escarpment of the plateau rises steeply from the 
Red Sea littoral to a height of from 4000 to 8000 ft,, leaving a 
narrow belt of lowland rarely exceeding 30 m. in width between 
the shore and the foot-hills. On the north-east and east the 
plateau shelves gradually to the Euphrates and the Persian Gulf; 
only in the extreme east is this general easterly slope arrested by 
the lofty range of Jebel Akhdar, which from Ras Musandan to 
Ras el Had borders the coast of Oman. 

Its chief characteristic is the bareness and aridity of its sur- 
face; one- third of the whole desert, and of the remainder only 
a small proportion is suited to settled life, owing to its scanty 
water-supply and uncertain rainfall. Its mountains are in- 
sufficient in elevation and extent to attract their full share of 
the monsoon rains, which fall so abundantly on the Abyssinian 
highlands on the other side of the Red Sea; for this reason Arabia 
has neither lakes nor forests to control the water-supply and 
prevent its too rapid dissipation, and the rivers are mere torrent 
beds sweeping down occasionally in heavy floods, but otherwise 
dry. 

The country falls naturally into three main divisions, a 
northern, a central and a' southern; the first includes the area 
between the Midian coast on the west and the head of the Persian 
Gulf on the east, a desert tract throughout, stony in the north, 
sandy in the south, but furnishing at certain seasons excellent 
pasturage; its population is almost entirely nomad and pastoral. 
The central zone includes Hejaz (or Hijaz), Nejd and El Hasa; 
much of it is a dry, stony or sandy steppe, with few wells or 
watering-places, and only occupied by nomad tribes; but the 
great wadis which intersect it contain many fertile stretches of 
alluvial soil, where cultivation is possible and which support a 
considerable settled population, with several large towns and 
numerous villages. 

The third or southern division contains the highland plateaus 
of Asir and Yemen in the west, and J. Akhdar in the east, 
which with a temperate climate, due to their great elevation and 
their proximity to the sea, deserve, if any part of Arabia does, 
the name of Arabia Felix — the population is settled and agri- 
cultural, and the soil, wherever the rainfall is sufficient, is pro- 
ductive. The Batina coast of Oman, irrigated by the mountain 
streams of J. Akhdar, is perhaps the most fertile district in the 
peninsula; Hadramut, too, contains many large and prosperous 
villages, and the torrents from the Yemen highlands fertilize 
several oases in the Tehama (or Tihama) or lowlands of the 
western and southern coast. These favourable conditions of soil 
and .climate, however, extend only a comparatively short distance 
into the interior, by far the larger part of which is covered by 



the great southern desert, the Dahna, or Ruba el Khali, empty 
as its name implies, and uninhabitable. 

Exploration. — Before entering on a detailed description of the 
several provinces of Arabia, our sources of information will be 
briefly indicated. Except in the neighbourhood of Aden, no 
regular surveys exist, and professional work is limited to the 
marine surveys of the Indian government and the admiralty, 
which, while laying down the coast line with fair accuracy, give 
little or no topographical information inland. For the mapping of 
the whole vast interior, except in rare cases, no data exist beyond 
the itineraries of explorers, travellingas a rule under conditions 
which precluded the use of even the simplest surveying instru- 
ments. These journeys, naturally following the most frequented 
routes, often cover the same ground, while immense tracts, owing 
to their difficulty of access, remain unvisited by any European. 

The region most thoroughly explored is Yemen, in the south- 
west corner of the peninsula, where the labours of a succession 
of travellers from Niebuhr in 1 761 to E. Glaser and R. Manzoni in 
1887 have led to a fairly complete knowledge of all that part of 
the province west of the capital Sana; while in 1 902-1904 the 
queries of the Anglo-Turkish boundary commission permitted
the execution of a systematic topographical survey of the British 
protectorate from the Red Sea to the Wadi Bana, 30 m. east of 
Aden. North of Yemen up to the Hejaz border the only 
authority is that of E. F. Jomard's map, published in 1839, 
based on the information given by the French officers employed 
with Ibrahim Pasha's army in Asir from 1824 to 1827, and of 
J. Halevy in Nejran. On the south coast expeditions have 
penetrated but a short distance, the most notable exceptions 
being those of L. Hirsch and J. T. Bent in 1887 to the Hadramut 
valley. S. B. Miles, J. R. Wellsted, and S. M. Zwemer have 
explored Oman in the extreme east; but the interior south of a 
line drawn from Taif to El Katr on the Persian Gulf is still 
virgin ground. In northern Arabia the Syrian desert and the 
great Nafud (Nefud) have been crossed by several travellers, 
though a large area remains unexplored in the north-east between 
Kasim and the gulf. In the centre, the journeys of W. Palgrave, 
C. Doughty, W. Blunt and C. Huber have done much to elucidate 
the main physical features of the country. Lastly, in the north- 
west the Sinai peninsula has been thoroughly explored, and the 
list of travellers who have visited the Holy Cities and traversed 
the main pilgrim routes through Hejaz is a fairly long one, 
though, owing to the difficulties peculiar to that region, the 
hydrography of southern Hejaz is still incompletely known. 

The story of modern exploration begins with the despatch 
of C. Niebuhr's mission by the Danish government in 1761: 
After a year spent in Egypt and the Sinai peninsula Modern 
the party reached Jidda towards the end of 1762, and Bxpiora- 
after a short stay sailed on to Lohaia in the north of 
Yemen, the exploration of which formed the principal 
object of the expedition; thence, travelling through the Tehama 
or lowlands, Niebuhr and his companions visited the towns of 
Bet el Fakih, Zubed and Mokha, then the great port for the 
coffee trade of Yemen. Continuing eastward they crossed the 
mountainous region and reached the highlands of Yemen at 
Uden, a small town and the centre of a district celebrated for its 
coffee. Thence proceeding eastwards to higher altitudes where 
coffee plantations give way to fields of wheat and barley, they 
reached the town of Jibla situated among a group of mountains 
exceeding 10,000 ft. above sea-level; and turning southwards* 
to Taiz descended again to the Tehama via Hes and Zubed to 
Mokha. The mission, reduced in numbers by the death of its 
archaeologist, von Haven, again visited Taiz in June 1763, where 
after some delay permission was obtained to visit Sana, the 
capital of the province and the residence of the ruling sovereign 
or imam. The route lay by Jibla, passing the foot of the lofty 
Jebel Sorak, where, in spite of illness, Forskal, the botanist 
of the party, was able to make a last excursion; a few days later 
he died at Yarim. The mission continued its march, passing 
Dhamar, the seat of a university of the Zedi sect, then frequented 
by 500 students. Thence four marches, generally over a stony 
plateau dominated by bare, sterile mountains, brought them to 



tioa in 
Yemen. 



GEOGRAPHY] 



ARABIA 



255 



Sana, where they received a cordial welcome from the imam, 
el Mahdi Abbas. 

The aspect of the city must have been nearly the same as 
at present; Niebuhr describes the enceinte flanked by towers, 
the citadel at the foot of J. Nukum which rises 1000 ft. above the 
valley, the fortress and palace of the imams, now replaced by the 
Turkish military hospital, the suburb of Bir el Azab with its 
scattered houses and gardens, the Jews' quarter and the village 
of Rauda, a few miles to the north in a fertile, irrigated plain 
which Niebuhr compares to that of Damascus. After a stay 
of ten days at Sana the mission set out again for Mokha, travel- 
ling by what is now the main route from the capital to Hodeda, 
through the rich coffee-bearing district of J. Haraz, and thence 
southward to Mokha, where they embarked for India. During the 
next year three other members of the party died, leaving Niebuhr 
the sole survivor. Returning to Arabia a year later, he visited 
Oman and the shores of the Persian Gulf, and travelling from 
Basra through Syria and Palestine he reached Denmark in 1764 
after four years' absence. 

The period was perhaps specially favourable for a scientific 
mission of the sort. The outburst of fanaticism which convulsed 
Arabia twenty years later had not then reached Yemen, and 
Europeans, as such, were not exposed to any special danger. 
The travellers were thus able to move freely and to pursue their 
scientific enquiries without hindrance from either people or ruler. 
The results published in 1772 gave for the first time a compre- 
hensive description not only of Yemen but of all Arabia; while 
the parts actually visited by Niebuhr were described with a 
fulness and accuracy of detail which left little or nothing for 
his successors to discover. 

C. G. Ehrenberg and W. F. Hemprich in 1825 visited the 
Tehama and the islands off the coast, and in 1836 P. E. Botta 
Asir made an important journey in southern Yemen with 

a view to botanical research, but the next advance 
in geographical knowledge in south Arabia was due to the 
French officers, M. 0. Tamisier, Chedufau and Mary, belonging 
to the Egyptian army in Asir; another Frenchman, L. Arnaud, 
formerly in the Egyptian service, was the first to visit the 
southern Jauf and to report on the rock-cut inscriptions and 
ruins of Marib, though it was not till 1869 that a competent 
archaeologist, J. Halevy, was able to carry out any 
Marib. complete exploration there. Starting from Sana, 
Halevy went north-eastward to El Madid, a town 
of 5000 inhabitants and the capital of the small district 
of Nihm; thence crossing a plateau, where he saw the 
ruins of numerous crenellated towers, he reached the village of 
Mijzar at the foot of J. Yam, on the borders of Jauf, a vast 
sandy plain, extending eastwards to El Jail and El Hazm, where 
Halevy made his most important discoveries of Sabaean in- 
scriptions: here he explored Main, the ancient capital of the 
Minaeans, Kamna on the banks of the W. Kharid, the ancient 
Caminacum, and Kharibat el Beda, the Nesca of Pliny, where 
the Sabaean army was defeated by the Romans under Aelius 
Gallus in 24 B.C. From El Jail Halevy travelled northward, 
passing the oasis of Khab, and skirting the great desert, reached 
the fertile district of Nejran, where he found a colony of Jews, 
with whom he spent several weeks in the oasis of Makhlaf. An 
hour's march to the east he discovered at the village of Medinat 
el Mahud the ruins of the Nagra metropolis of Ptolemy. In 
June 1870 he at last reached the goal of his journey, Marib; 
here he explored the ruins of Medinat an Nahas (so called from 
its numerous inscriptions engraved on brass plates), and two 
hours to the east he found the famous dam constructed by the 
Himyarites across the W. Shibwan, on which the water-supply 
of their capital depended. 

One other explorer has since visited Marib, the Austrian 
archaeologist, E. Glaser (1855-1908), who achieved more for 
science in Yemen than any traveller since Niebuhr. Under 
Turkish protection, he visited the territory of the Hashid and 
Bakil tribes north-east of Sana, and though their hostile attitude 
compelled him to return after reaching their first important 
town, Khamr, he had time to reconnoitre the plateau lying 



between the two great wadis Kharid and Hirran, formerly 
covered with Himyaritic towns and villages; and to trace the 
course of these wadis to their junction at El Ish in the Dhu 
Husen country, and thence onward to the Jauf. In 1889 he 
succeeded, again under Turkish escort, in reaching Marib, where 
he obtained, during a stay of thirty days, a large number of new 
Himyaritic inscriptions. He was unable, however, to proceed 
farther east than his predecessors, and the problem of the Jauf 
drainage and its possible connexion with the upper part of the 
Hadramut valley still remains unsolved. 

The earliest attempt to penetrate into the interior from the 
south coast was made in 1835 when Lieuts. C. Cruttenden and 
J. R. Wellsted of the " Palinurus," employed on the 
marine survey of the Arabian coast, visited the ruins J^ °™~ 
of Nakb (el Hajar) in the W. Mefat. The Himyaritic Hadramut. 
inscriptions found there and at Husn Ghurab near 
Mukalla, were the first records discovered of ancient Arabian 
civilization in Hadramut. Neither of these officers was able to 
follow up their discoveries, but in 1843 Adolph von Wrede 
landed at Mukalla and, adopting the character of a pilgrim to 
the shrine of the prophet Hud, made his way northward across 
the high plateau into the W. Duwan, one of the main southern 
tributaries of the Hadramut valley, and pushed on to the 
edge of the great southern desert; on his return to the W. 
Duwan his disguise was detected and he was obliged to return 
to Mukalla. Though he did not actually enter the main Hadra- 
mut valley, which lay to the east of his track, his journey estab- 
lished the existence of this populous and fertile district which 
had been reported to the officers of the " Palinurus " as lying 
between the coast range and the great desert to the north. This 
was at last visited in 1893 by L. Hirsch under the protection 
of the sultan of Mukalla, the head of the Kaiti family, and 
practically ruler of all Hadramut, with the exception of the towns 
of Saiyun and Tarim, which belong to the Kathiri tribe. Start- 
ing like von Wrede from Mukalla, Hirsch first visited the W. 
Duwan and found ancient ruins and inscriptions near the village 
of Hajren; thence he proceeded north-eastward to Hauta in 
the main valley, where he was hospitably received by the Kaiti 
sultan, and sent on to his deputy at Shibam. Here he procured 
a Kathiri escort and pushed on through Saiyun to Tarim, the 
former capital. After a very brief stay, however, he was com- 
pelled by the hostility of the people to return in haste to Shibam, 
from which he travelled by the W. bin Ali and W. Adim back 
to Mukalla. J. Theodore Bent and his wife followed in the same 
track a few months later with a well-equipped party including 
a surveyor, Imam Sharif, lent by the Indian government, who 
made a very valuable survey of the country passed through. Both 
parties visited many sites where Himyaritic remains and inscrip- 
tions were found, but the hostile attitude of the natives, more 
particularly of the Seyyids, the religious hierarchy of Hadramut, 
prevented any adequate examination, and much of archaeological 
interest undoubtedly remains for future travellers to discover. 

In Oman, where the conditions are more favourable, explorers 
have penetrated only a short distance from the coast. Niebuhr 
did not go inland from Muscat; the queries by a
British Indian force on the Pirate coast in 1810 gave tianin' 
no opportunities for visiting the interior, and it was Oman. 
not till 1835 that J. R. Wellsted, who had already 
tried to penetrate into Hadramut from the south, landed at 
Muscat with the idea of reaching it from the north-east. Sailing 
thence to Sur near Ras el Had, he travelled southward through 
the country of the Bani bu Ali to the borders of the desert, then 
turning north-west up the Wadi Betha through a fertile, well- 
watered country, running up to the southern slopes of J. Akhdar, 
inhabited by a friendly people who seem to have welcomed him 
everywhere, he visited Ibra, Semed and Nizwa at the southern 
foot of the mountains. Owing to the disturbed state of the 
country, due to the presence of raiding parties from Nejd, 
Wellsted was unable to carry out his original intention of ex- 
ploring the country to the west, and after an excursion along 
the Batina coast to Sohar he returned to India. 

In 1876 Colonel S. B. Miles, who had already done much to 



250 



ARABIA 



[GEOGRAPHY 



advance geographical interests in south Arabia, continued 
Wellsted's work in Oman; starting from Sohar on the Batina 
coast he crossed the dividing range into the Dhahira, and reached 
Birema, one of its principal oases. His investigations show that 
the Dhahira contains many settlements, with an industrious 
agricultural population, and that the unexplored tract extending 
250 m. west to the peninsula of El Katr is a desolate gravelly 
steppe, shelving gradually down to the salt marshes which border 
the shores of the gulf. 

Leaving southern Arabia, we now come to the centre and 
north. The first explorer to enter the sacred Hejaz with a 

definite scientific object was the Spaniard, Badia y 
Expiora- Leblich, who, under the name of Ali Bey and claiming 
Hejaz. t0 De tne l ast representative of the Abbasid Caliphs, 

arrived at Jidda in 1807, and performed the pilgrimage 
to Mecca. Besides giving to the world the first accurate descript 
tion of the holy city and the Haj ceremonies, he was the first to 
fix the position of Mecca by astronomical observations, and to 
describe the physical character of its surroundings. But the 
true pioneer of exploration in Hejaz was J. L. Burckhardt, who 
had already won a reputation as the discoverer of Petra, and 
whose experience of travel in Arab lands and knowledge of Arab 
life qualified him to pass as a Moslem, even in the headquarters 
of Islam. Burckhardt landed in Jidda in July 1814, when 
Mehemet Ali had already driven the Wahhabi invaders out of 
Hejaz, and was preparing for his farther advance against their 
stronghold in Nejd. He first visited Taif at the invitation of the 
pasha, thence he proceeded to Mecca, where he spent three 
months studying every detail of the topography of the holy 
places, and going through all the ceremonies incumbent on a 
Moslem pilgrim. In January 1815 he travelled to Medina by 
the western or coast route, and arrived there safely but broken 
in health by the hardships of the journey. His illness did not, 
however, prevent his seeing and recording everything of interest 
in Medina with the same care as at Mecca, though it compelled 
him to cut short the further journey he had proposed to himself, 
and to return by Yambu and the sea to Cairo, where he died 
only two years later. 

His striking successor, Sir Richard Burton, covered nearly 
the same ground thirty-eight years afterwards. He, too, travelling 
as a Moslem pilgrim, noted the whole ritual of the pilgrimage 
with the same keen observation as Burckhardt, and while 
amplifying somewhat the latter's description of Medina, confirms 
the accuracy of his work there and at Mecca in almost every 
detail. Burton's topographical descriptions are fuller, and his 
march to Mecca from Medina by the eastern route led him over 
ground not traversed by any other explorer in Hejaz: this route 
leads at first south-east from Medina, and then south across the 
lava beds of the Harra, keeping throughout its length on the high 
plateau which forms the borderland between Hejaz and Nejd. 
His original intention had been after visiting Mecca to find his 
way across the peninsula to Oman, but the time at his disposal 
(as an Indian officer on leave) was insufficient for so extended a 
journey; and his further contributions to Arabian geography 
were not made until twenty-five years later, when he was deputed 
by the Egyptian government to examine the reported gold 
deposits of Midian. Traces of ancient workings were found in 
several places, but the ores did not contain gold in paying 
quantities. Interesting archaeological discoveries were made, 
and a valuable topographical survey was carried out, covering 
the whole Midian coast from the head of the Gulf of Akaba to 
the mouth of the Wadi Hamd, and including both the Tehama 
range and the Hisma valley behind it; while the importance 
of the W. Hamd and the extent of the area drained by its 
tributaries was for the first time brought to light. 

Burckhardt had hoped in 1815 that the advance of the 
Egyptian expedition would have given him the opportunity 

to see something of Nejd, but he had already left 
Expiora- Arabia before the overthrow of the Wahhabi power 
We/tf. by Ibrahim Pasha had opened Nejd to travellers from 

Hejaz, and though several European officers accom- 
panied the expedition, none of them left any record of his 



experience. It is, however, to the Egyptian conquest that the 
first visit of a British traveller tc Nejd is due. The Indian 
government, wishing to enter into relations with Ibrahim Pasha, 
as de facto ruler of Nejd and El Hasa, with a view to putting down 
piracy in the Persian Gulf, which was seriously affecting Indian 
trade, sent a small mission under Captain G. F. Sadlier to 
congratulate the pasha on the success of the Egyptian arms, 
and no doubt with the ulterior object of obtaining a first-hand 
report on the real situation. On his arrival at Hofuf, Sadlier 
found that Ibrahim had already left Deraiya, but still hoping 
to intercept him before quitting Nejd, he followed up the retreat- 
ing Egyptians through Yemama, and Wushm to Ras in Kasim, 
where he caught up the main body of Ibrahim's army, though 
the pasha himself had gone on to Medina. Sadlier hesitated 
about going farther, but he was unable to obtain a safe conduct 
to Basra, or to return by the way he had come, and was com- 
pelled reluctantly to accompany the army to Medina. Here he 
at last met Ibrahim, but though courteously received, the 
interview had no results, and Sadlier soon after left for Yambu, 
whence he embarked for Jidda, and after another fruitless attempt 
to treat with Ibrahim, sailed for India. If the political results 
of the mission were nil, the value to geographical science was 
immense; for though no geographer himself, Sadlier's route 
across Arabia made it possible for the first time to locate the 
principal places in something like their proper relative positions; 
incidentally, too, it showed the practicability of a considerable 
body of regular troops crossing the deserts of Nejd even in the 
months of July and August. 

Sadlier's route had left Jebel Shammar to one side; his 
successor, G. A. Wallin, was to make that the objective of his 
journey. Commissioned by Mehemet Ali to inform him about the 
situation in Nejd brought about by the rising power of Abdallah 
Ibn Rashid, Wallin left Cairo in April 1845, and- crossing the 
pilgrim road at Ma'an, pushed on across the Syrian desert to 
the Wadi Sirhan and the Jauf oasis, where he halted during the 
hot summer months. From the wells of Shakik he crossed the 
waterless Nafud in four days to Jubba, and after a halt there in 
the nomad camps, he moved on to Hail, already a thriving town, 
and the capital of the Shammar state whose limits included all 
northern Arabia from Kasim to the Syrian border. After a stay 
in Hail, where he had every opportunity of observing the char- 
acter of the country and its inhabitants, and the hospitality and 
patriarchal, if sometimes stern, justice of its chief, he travelled 
on to Medina and Mecca, and returned thence to Cairo to report 
to his patron. Early in 1848 he again returned to Arabia, 
avoiding the long desert journey by landing at Muwela, thence 
striking inland to Tebuk on the pilgrim road, and re-enteririg 
Shammar territory at the oasis of Tema, he again visited Hail; 
and after spending a month there travelled northwards to 
Kerbela and Bagdad. 

The effects of the Egyptian invasion had passed away, and 
central Arabia had settled down again under its native rulers 
when W. G. Palgrave made his adventurous journey 
through Nejd, and published the remarkable narrative Palgrave- a 
which has taken its place as the classic of Arabian t" r ^eu. 
exploration. " Like Burton he was once an officer in the 
Indian army, but for some time before his journey he had been 
connected with the Jesuit mission in Syria. By training and 
temperament he was better qualified to appreciate and describe 
the social life of the people than their physical surroundings, 
and if the results of his great journey are disappointing to the 
geographer, his account of the society of the oasis towns, and of 
the remarkable men who were then ruling in Hail and Riad, 
must always possess an absorbing interest as a portrait of Arab 
life in its freest development. 

Following Wallin's route across the desert by Ma'an and Jauf, 
Palgrave and his companion, a Syrian Christian, reached Hail 
in July 1862; here they were hospitably entertained by the 
amir Talal, nephew of the founder of the Ibn Rashid dynasty, 
and after some stay passed on with his countenance through 
Kasim to southern Nejd. Palgrave says little of the desert part 
of the journey or of its Bedouin inhabitants, but much of the 



GEOGRAPHY] 



ARABIA 



257 



Doughty. 



fertility of the oases and of the civility of the townsmen; and 
like other travellers in Nejd he speaks with enthusiasm of its 
bright, exhilarating climate. At Riad, Fesal, who had been in 
power since the Egyptian retirement, was still reigning; and 
the religious tyranny of Wahhabism prevailed, in marked con- 
trast to the liberal regime of Talal in Jebel Shammar. Still, 
Palgrave and his companions, though known as Christians, 
spent nearly two months in the capital without molestation, 
making short excursions in the neighbourhood, the most im- 
portant of which was to El Kharfa in Aflaj, the most southerly 
district of Nejd. Leaving Riad, they passed through Yemama, 
and across a strip of sandy desert to El Hasa where Palgrave 
found himself in more congenial surroundings. Finally, a voyage 
to the Oman coast and a brief stay there brought his adventures 
in Arabia to a successful ending. 

Charles Doughty, the next Englishman to visit northern 
Arabia, though he covered little new ground, saw more of the 
desert life, and has described it more minutely and 
faithfully than any other explorer. Travelling down 
from Damascus in 1875 with the Haj caravan, he stopped at El 
Hajr, one of the pilgrim stations, with the intention of awaiting 
the return of the caravan arid in the meantime of exploring the 
rock-cut tombs of Medain Salih and El Ala. Having successfully 
completed his investigations and sent copies of inscriptions and 
drawings of the tombs to Renan in Paris, he determined to push 
on farther into the desert. Under the protection of a sheikh of 
the Fukara Bedouin he wandered over the whole of the border- 
land between Hejaz and Nejd. Visiting Tema, where among 
other ancient remains he discovered the famous inscribed stone, 
afterwards acquired by Huber for the Louvre. Next summer he 
went on to Hail and thence back to Khaibar, where the negro 
governor and townsmen, less tolerant than his former Bedouin 
hosts, ill-treated him and even threatened his life. Returning 
to Hail in the absence of the amir, he was expelled by the 
governor; he succeeded, however, in finding protection at 
Aneza, where he spent several months, and eventually after 
many hardships and perils found his way to the coast at Jidda. 

Three years later Mr Wilfrid and Lady Anne Blunt made their 
expedition to J. Shammar. In their previous travels in Syria 
they had gained the confidence and friendship of a young sheikh 
whose family, though long settled at Tadmur, came originally 
from Nejd, and who was anxious to renew the connexion with his 
kinsmen by seeking a bride among them. In his company the 
Blunts set out from Damascus, and travelled across the Syrian 
desert by the Wadi Sirhan to Jauf. Here the sheikh found some 
of his relations and the matrimonial' alliance was soon arranged; 
but though the object of the journey had been attained, the 
Blunts were anxious to visit Hail and make the acquaintance of 
the amir Ibn Rashid, of whose might and generosity they daily 
heard from their hosts in Jauf. The long stretch of waterless 
desert between Jauf and J. Shammar was crossed without 
difficulty, and the party was welcomed by the amir and hospit- 
ably entertained for a month, after which they travelled north- 
wards in company with the Persian pilgrim caravan returning to 
Kerbela and Bagdad. 

In 1883 the French traveller, C. Huber, accompanied by the 
archaeologist, J. Euting, followed the same route from Damascus 
to H£l. The narrative of the last named forms a 
valuable supplement to that published by the Blunts, 
and together with Doughty's, furnishes as complete a picture 
as could be wished for of the social and political life of J. Shammar, 
and of the general nature of the country. Huber's journal, 
published after his death from his original notes, contains a mass 
of topographical and archaeological detail of the greatest scien- 
tific value: his routes and observations form, in fact, the first 
and only scientific data for the construction of the map of 
northern Arabia. To archaeology also his services were of equal 
importance, for, besides copying numerous inscriptions in the dis- 
trict between Hail and Tema, he succeeded in gaining possession 
of the since famous Tema stone, which ranks with the Moabite 
stone among the most valuable of Semitic inscriptions. From 
Hail Huber followed nearly in Doughty's track to Aneza and 

h. 9 



Huber. 



thence across central Nejd to Mecca and Jidda, where he 
despatched his notes and copies of inscriptions. A month later, 
in July 1884, he was murdered by his guides a few marches 
north of Jidda, on his way back to Hail. 

One other traveller visited Hail during the lifetime of the 
amir Mahommed — Baron E. Nolde — who arrived there in 1893, 
not long after the amir had by his victory over the combined 
forces of Riad and Kasim brought the whole of Nejd under his 
dominion. Nolde crossed the Nafud to Haiyania by a more 
direct track than that from Shakik to Jubba. The amir was away 
from his capital settling the affairs of his newly acquired territory; 
Nolde therefore, after a short halt at Hail, journeyed on to Ibn 
Rashid's camp somewhere in the neighbourhood of Shakra. 
Here he was on new ground, but unfortunately he gives little or 
no description of his route thither, or of his journey northwards 
by the Persian pilgrim road, already traversed by Huber in 1881. 
His narrative thus, while containing much of general interest on 
the climate and on the animal life of northern Arabia, its horses 
and camels in particular, adds little to those of his predecessors 
as regards topographical detail. 

If the journeys detailed above be traced on the map they 
will be found to cover the northern half of the peninsula above 
the line Mecca-Hofuf, with a network of routes, aenerai 
which, though sometimes separated by wide intervals, results 
are still close enough to ensure that no important ofex- 
geographical feature can have been overlooked, P toTatif >n. 
especially in a country whose general character varies so little 
over wide areas. In the southern half, on the other hand, except 
in Nejran and Jauf, no European traveller has penetrated 100 m. 
in a direct line from the coast. The vast extent of the Dahna, or 
great southern desert, covering perhaps 250,000 sq. m., accounts 
for about a third of this area, but some of the most favoured 
districts in Arabia — Asir and northern Yemen — remain un- 
explored, and the hydrography of the Dawasir basin offers some 
interesting problems, while a great field remains for the archaeo- 
logist in the seat of the old Sabaean kingdom from Jauf to the 
Hadramut valley. 

Topographical Details. — Beginning from the north-west, the Sinai 
peninsula belongs to Egypt, though geographically part of Arabia, 
it is bounded on the E. by a line drawn from Ar Rata, [a 
few miles E. of El Arish on the Mediterranean, to the head 
of the Gulf of Akaba; and on the W. by the Suez Canal; 
its length from El Arish to its most southern point is 
240 m., and its breadth from Suez to Akaba is nearly 160 m. The 
greater part drains to the Mediterranean, from which the land rises 
gradually to the summit of the Tih plateau. The deep depression of 
Wadi Feran separates the Tih from the higher mass of Sinai (q.v.), 
in which J. Katherine attains a height of 8500 ft.; except in W. 
Feran there is little cultivable land, the greater part consisting of 
bare, rocky hills and sandy valleys, sparsely covered with tamarisk 
and acacia bushes. The Egyptian pilgrim road crosses the peninsula 
from Suez to Akaba, passing the post of An Nakhl, with a reservoir 
and a little cultivation, about half way; a steep descent leads down 
from the edge of the Tih plateau to Akaba. 

The rest of the northern borderland is covered by the Syrian 
desert, extending from the borders of Palestine to the edge of the 
Euphrates valley. This tract, known as the Hamad, is a „ . 
gravelly plain unbroken by any considerable range of hills . y a "*. 

or any continuous watercourse except the Wadi Hauran, aesert. 
which in rainy seasons forms a succession of pools from J. Hauran 
to the Euphrates. Its general slope is to the north-east from the 
volcanic plateau of the Harra south of J. Hauran to the edge of the 
Euphrates valley. The Wadi Sirhan, a broad depression some 500 ft. 
below the average level of the Hamad, crosses it from north-east to 
south-west between Hauran and Jauf; it has a nearly uniform 
height above sea-level of 1850 ft., and appears to be the bed of an 
inland sea rather than a true watercourse. Water is found in it a 
few feet below the surface, and a little cultivation is carried on at 
the small oases of Kaf and Ithri, whence salt produced in the neigh- 
bouring salt lakes is exported. The W. Sirhan is continuous with the 
depression known as the Jauf, situated on the northern edge of the 
Nefud or Nafud, and the halfway station between Damascus and 
Hail; and it is possible that this depression continues eastward 
towards the Euphrates along a line a little north of the thirtieth 
parallel, where wells and pasturages are known to exist. Jauf is a 
small town consisting, at the time of the Blunts' visit in 1879, 
of not more than 500 houses. The town with its gardens, surrounded 
by a mud wall, covers a space of 2 m. in length by half a mile in 
width ; the basin in which it lies is barely 3 m. across, and except 
for the palm gardens and a few patches of corn, it is a dead flat of 

II 



Slnal 
Penin- 
sula. 



q8 



ARABIA 



[GEOGRAPHY 



white sand, closed in by high sandstone cliffs, beyond which lies the 
open desert. The oases of Sakaka and Kara are situated in a similar 
basin 15 m. to the east; the former a town of 10,000 inhabitants 
and somewhat larger than Jauf according to Huber. 

A short distance south of Jauf the character of the desert changes 
abruptly from a level black expanse of gravel to the red sands of the 
Tbe Nafud. The northern edge of this great desert follows 

Nafud ver y near 'y tne nne °f 'he thirtieth parallel, along which 

it extends east and west for a length of some 400 m. ; 
its breadth from north to south is 200 m. Though almost waterless, 
it is in fact better wooded and richer in pasture than any part of 
the Hamad; the sand-hills are dotted with ghada, a species of 
tamarisk, and other bushes, and several grasses and succulent plants 
— among them the adar, on which sheep are said to feed for a month 
without requiring water — are found in abundance in good seasons. 
In the spring months, when their camels are in milk, the Bedouins 
care nothing for water, and wander far into the Nafud with their 
flocks in search of the green pasture which springs up everywhere 
after the winter rains. A few wells exist actually in the Nafud in the 
district called El Hajra, near its north-eastern border, and along 
its southern border, between J. Shammar and Tema, there are 
numerous wells and artificial as well as natural reservoirs resorted to 
by the nomad tribes. 

Owing to the great extent of the Nafud desert, the formation of 
sand-dunes is exemplified on a proportionate scale. In many places 
longitudinal dunes are found exceeding a day's journey in length, 
the valleys between which take three or four hours to cross; but 
the most striking feature of the Nafud are the high crescent-shaped 
sand-hills, known locally as falk or falj, described by Blunt and 
Huber, who devoted some time to their investigation. The falks 
enclose a deep hollow (known as ka'r), the floor of which is often hard 
soil bare of sand, and from which the inner slopes of the falk rise as 
steeply as the sand will lie (about 50 ). On the summit of the falk 
there is generally a mound known as tas or barkhus composed of 
white sand which stands out conspicuously against the deep red of 
the surrounding deserts; the exterior slopes are comparatively 
gentle. The falks are singularly uniform in shape, but vary greatly 
in size; the largest were estimated by Huber and Euting at ijm. 
across and 330 ft. deep. They run in strings irregularly from east 
to west, corresponding in this with their individual direction, the 
convex face of the falk being towards the west, i.e. the direction of 
the prevailing wind, and the cusps to leeward. In the south of the 
Nafud, where Huber found the prevailing wind to be from the south, 
the falks are turned in that direction. Though perhaps subject to 
slight changes in the course of years, there is no doubt that these 
dunes are practically permanent features ; the more prominent ones 
serve as landmarks and have well-known distinctive names. The 
character of the vegetation which clothes their slopes shows that 
even superficial changes must be slight. The general level of the 
Nafud was found by Ruber's observations to be about 3000 ft. above 
sea-level; the highest point on the Jauf-Hail route is at Falk Alam, 
the rocky peaks of which rise 200 or 300 ft. above the surface of the 
sand. Other peaks cropping out of the Nafud are Jebel Tawil, near 
the wells of Shakik, and J. Abrak Rada, a long black ridge in the 
middle of the desert. 

The high plateau which from J. Hauran southward forms the main 
watershed of the peninsula is covered in places by deep beds of lava, 
which from their hardness have preserved the underlying 
sandstones from degradation, and now stand up consider- 
ably above the general level. These tracts are known as 
harm; the most remarkable is the Harrat El Awerid, west of the 
Haj route from Tebuk to El Ala, a mountain mass 100 m. in length 
with an average height of over 5000 ft., and the highest summit of 
which, J. Anaz, exceeds 7000 ft. The harra east of Khaibar is also 
of considerable extent, and the same formation is found all along 
the Hejaz border from Medina to the Jebel el Kura, east of Mecca. 
The surface of the harra is extremely broken, forming a labyrinth of 
lava crags and blocks of every size; the whole region is sterile and 
almost waterless, and compared with the Nafud it produces little 
vegetation; but it is resorted to by the Bedouin in the spring and 
summer months when the air is always fresh and cool. In winter it 
is cold and snow often lies for some time. 

Hejaz, if we except the Taif district in the south, which is properly 
a part of the Yemen plateau, forms a well-marked physical division, 
„ . lying on the western slope of the peninsula, where that 

1 ' slope is at its widest, between the Harra and the Red Sea. 

A high range of granite hills, known as the Tehama range, the highest 
point of which, J. Shar, in Midian, exceeds 6500 ft., divides it 
longitudinally into a narrow littoral and a broader upland zone 
2000 or 3000 ft. above the sea. Both are generally bare and un- 

Broductive, the uplands, however, contain the fertile valleys of 
lhaibar and Medina, draining to the Wadi Hamd, the principal 
river system of western Arabia ; and the Wadi Jadid or Es Safra, 
rising in the Harra between Medina and Es Safina, which contain 
several settlements, of which the principal produce is dates. The 
quartz reefs which crop out in the granite ranges of the Tehama 
contain traces of gold. These and the ancient copper workings were 
investigated by Burton in 1877. The richer veins had evidently 
been long ago worked out, and nothing of sufficient value to justify 
further outlay was discovered. The coast-line is fringed with small 



The 
Hairs. 



islets and shoals and reefs, which make navigation dangerous. The 
only ports of importance are Yambu and Jidda, which serve respec- 
tively Medina and Mecca; they depend entirely on the pilgrim 
traffic to the holy cities, without which they could not exist. 

The great central province of Nejd occupies all inner Arabia 
between the Nafud and the southern desert. Its northern part 
forms the basin of the Wadi Rumma, which, rising in the N .. 

Khaibar harra, runs north-eastward across the whole ' 

width of Nejd, till it is lost in the sands of the eastern Nafud, north 
of Aneza. The greater portion of this region is an open steppe, 
sandy in places and in others dotted with low volcanic hills, but with 
occasional ground water and in favourable seasons furnishing support 
for a considerable pastoral population. Its elevation varies from 
about 5000 ft. in the west to 2500 ft. in the east. In Jebel Shammar, 
Kasim and Wushm, where the water in the wadi beds rises nearly 
to the ground level, numerous fertile oases are found with thriving 
villages and towns. 

Jebel Shammar, from which the northern district of Nejd takes 
its name, is a double range of mountains some 20 m. apart, rising 
sharply out of the desert in bare, granite cliffs. J. Aja, the western 
and higher of the two ranges, has a length of about 100 m. from 
north-east to south-west, where it merges into the high plateau 
extending from and continuous with the Khaibar harra. The highest 
point, J. Fara, near its north-eastern extremity, is about 4600 ft. 
above sea-level, or 1600 ft. above the town of Hail, which, like most 
of the larger villages, lies along the wadi bed at the foot of J. Aja. 
The town, which has risen with the fortunes of the Ibn Rashid 
family to be the capital of Upper Nejd, is at the mouth of the valley 
between the twin ranges, about 2 m. from the foot of J. Aja, 
and contained at the time of Nolde's visit in 1893 about 12,000 
inhabitants. 

The principal tributaries of the W. Rumma converge in lower 
Kasim, and at Aneza Doughty says its bed is 3 m. wide from bank 
to bank. Forty years before his visit a flood is said to have occurred, 
which passed down the river till it was blocked by sand-drifts at 
Thuwerat, 50 m. lower down, and for two years a lake stood nearly 
100 m. long, crowded by waterfowl not known before in that desert 
country. Below this its course has not been followed by any Euro- 
pean traveller, but it may be inferred from the line of watering-places 
on the road to Kuwet, that it runs out to the Persian Gulf in tha t 
neighbourhood. 

East of Kasim the land rises gradually to the high plateau culminat- 
ing in the ranges of Jebel Tuwek and J. Arid. The general direction 
of these hills is from north-west to south-east. On the west they rise 
somewhat steeply, exposing high cliffs of white limestone, which 
perhaps gave Palgrave the impression that the range is of greater 
absolute height than is actually the case. J. Tuwek in any case 
forms an important geographical feature in eastern Nejd, interrupting 
by a transverse barrier 200 m. in length the general north-easterly 
slope of the peninusla, and separating the basin of the W. Rumma 
from that of the other great river system of central Arabia, the Wadi 
Dawasir. The districts of Suderand Wushm lie on its northern side, 
Arid in the centre, and Aflaj, Harik and Yemama on its south, in the 
basin of the W. Dawasir; the whole of this hilly region of eastern 
Nejd is, perhaps, rather a rolling down country than truly moun- 
tainous, in which high pastures alternate with deep fertile valleys, 
supporting numerous villages with a large agricultural population. 
The W. Hanifa is its principal watercourse; its course is marked by 
an almost continuous series of palm groves and settlements, among 
which Deraiya the former, and Riad the present, capital of the Ibn 
Saud kingdom are the most extensive. Its lower course is uncertain, 
but it probably continues in a south-east direction to the districts 
of El Harik and Yemama when, joined by the drainage from Aflaj 
and the W. Dawasir, it runs eastward till it disappears in the belt of 
sandy desert 100 m. in width that forms the eastern boundary of 
Nejd, to reappear in the copious springs that fertilize El Hasa and 
the Bahrein littoral. 

As regards the unexplored southern region, Palgrave's informants 
in Aflaj, the most southerly district visited by him, stated that a 
day's march south of that place the Yemen road enters „ 
the W. Dawasir, up which it runs for ten days, perhaps B i ore j 
200 m., to El Kura, a thinly peopled district on the borders „_/„„ ol 
of Asir; this accords with the information of the French s NeM. 
officers of the Egyptian army in that district, and with that ' 
of Halevy, who makes all the drainage from Nejran northward run 
to the same great wadi. Whether there be any second line of drainage 
in southern Nejd skirting the edge of the great desert and following 
the depression of the W. Yabrin must remain a matter of conjecture. 
Colonel Miles concluded, from his enquiries, that the low salt swamp, 
extending inland for some distance from Khor ed Duwan, in the bay 
east of E! Katr, was the outlet of an extensive drainage system 
which may well be continuous with the W. Yabrin and extend far 
into the interior, if not to Nejran itself. 

East of Nejd a strip of sandy desert 50 m. in width extends almost 
continuously from the great Nafud to the Dahna. East of this again 
a succession of stony ridges running parallel to the coast ElHasa 
has to be crossed before El Hasa is reached. This 
province, which skirts the Persian Gulf from the mouth of the 
Euphrates to the frontiers of Oman, is low and hot ; its shores are 
flat, and with the exception of Kuwet at the north-west corner of 



GEOGRAPHY] 



ARABIA 



259 



the gulf, it possesses no deep water port. North of Katif it is desert 
and only inhabited by nomads; at Katif, however, and throughout 
the district to the south bordering on the Gulf of Bahrein there are 
ample supplies of underground water, welling up in abundant springs 
often at a high temperature, and bringing fertility to an extensive 
district of which El Hofuf, a town of 15,000 to 20,000 inhabitants, 
is the most important centre. 

South-western Arabia, from the twenty-first parallel down to the 
Gulf of Aden, including the Taif district of Hejaz, Asir and Yemen, 
South- forms one province geographically. Throughout its length 
western '' consists of three zones, a narrow coastal strip, rarely 
Arabia. exceeding 20 m. in width, a central mountainous tract, 
embracing the great chain which runs parallel to the coast 
from near Taif to within 50 m. of Aden, and an inner plateau falling 
gradually to the north-east till it merges in the Nejd steppes or the 
sands of the great desert. 

The lowland strip or Tehama consists partly of a gravelly plain, 
the Khabt, covered sparsely with acacia and other desert shrubs and 
trees, and furnishing pasturage for large flocks of goats and camels ; 
and partly of sterile wastes of sand like the Ratnla, which extends 
on either side of Aden almost from the seashore to the foot of the 
hills. The Tehama is, however, by no means all desert, the mountain 
torrents where they debouch into the plain have formed considerable 
tracts of alluvial soil of the highest degree of fertility producing in 
that warm equable climate two and even three crops in the year. 
The flood-water is controlled by a system of dams and channels 
constructed so as to utilize every drop, and the extent of cultivation 
is limited more by the supply of water available than by the amount 
of suitable soil. These districts support a large settled population 
and several considerable towns, of which Bet el Fakih and Zubed in 
the western and Lahej in the southern Tehama, with 4000 to 6000 
inhabitants, are the most important. There are signs that this 
coastal strip was until a geologically recent period below sea-level; 
and that the coast-line is still receding is evidenced by the history 
of the town of Muza, once a flourishing port, now 20 m. inland; 
while Bet el Fakih and Zubed, once important centres of the coffee 
trade, have lost their position through the silting up of the ports 
which formerly served them. 

The jebel or mountain-land is, however, the typical Yemen, the 
Arabia Felix of the ancients. Deep valleys winding through the 
barren foothills lead gradually up to the higher mountains, and as the 
track ascends the scenery and vegetation change their character; 
the trees which line the banks of the wadi are overgrown with 
creepers, and the running stream is dammed at frequent intervals, 
and led off in artificial channels to irrigate the fields on either side ; 
the steeper parts of the road are paved with large stones, substanti- 
ally built villages, with their masonry towers or dars, crowning every 
height, replace the collection of mud walls and brushwood huts of 
the low country ; while tier above tier, terraced fields cover the hill 
slopes and attest the industry of the inhabitants and the fertility 
of their mountains. On the main route from Hodeda to Sana the 
first coffee plantations are reached at Usil, at an altitude of 4300 ft., 
and throughout the western slopes of the range up to an altitude of 
7000 ft. it is the most important crop. Jebel Haraz, of which 
Manakha, a small town of 3000 inhabitants is the chief place, is 
described by Glaser as one vast coffee garden. Here the traveller 
ascending from the coast sees the first example of the jebel or high- 
land towns, with their high three-storeyed houses, built of quarried 
stone, their narrow facades pierced with small windows with white- 
washed borders and ornamented with varied arabesque patterns; 
each dar has the appearance of a small castle complete in itself, and 
the general effect is rather that of a cluster of separate forts than of a 
town occupied by a united community. 

The scenery in this mountain region is of the most varied descrip- 
tion; bare precipitous hill-sides seamed with dry, rocky water- 
courses give place with almost startling rapidity to fertile slopes, 
terraced literally for thousands of feet. General Haig in describing 
them says: " One can hardly realize the enormous labour, toil and 
perseverance that these represent; the terrace walls are usually 
5 to 8 ft. in height, but towards the top of the mountains they are 
sometimes as much as 15 or 18 ft. ; they are built entirely of rough 
stone without mortar, and I reckon that on an average each wall 
retains not more than twice its own height in breadth, and I do not 
think I saw a single break in them unrepaired." 

The highest summits as determined by actual survey are between 
10,000 and 11,000 ft. above sea-level. J. Sabur, a conspicuous mass 
in the extreme south, is 9900 ft., with a fall to the Taiz valley of 
5000 ft. ; farther north several points in the mountains above Ibb 
and Yarim attain a height of 10,500 ft., and J. Hadur, near the 
Sana-Hodeda road, exceeds 10,000 ft. From the crest of the range 
there is a short drop of 2000 or 3000 ft. to the broad open valleys 
which form the principal feature of the inner plateau. The town of 
Yarim lies near its southern extremity at an altitude of about 
8000 ft. ; within a short distance are the sources of the W. Yakla, 
W. Bana and W. Zubed, running respectively east and south and 
west. The first named is a dry watercourse ultimately joining the 
basin of the W. Hadramut; the two others run for a long distance 
through fertile valleys and, like many of the wadis on the seaward 
side of the range, have perennial streams down to within a few miles 
of the sea. Sana, the capital of Yemen, lies in a broad valley 7300 ft. 



above sea-level, sloping northwards to the W. Kharid which, with 
the Ghail Hirran, the sources of which are on the eastern slopes of 
J. Hadur, run north-eastward to the Jauf depression. The Arhab 
district, through which these two great wadis run, was formerly the 
centre of the Himyar kingdom ; cultivation is now only to be found 
in the lower parts on the borders of the watercourses, all above 
being naked rock from which every particle of soil has been denuded. 
In the higher parts there are fine plains where Glaser found numerous 
Himyaritic remains, and which he considers were undoubtedly 
cultivated formerly, but they have long fallen out of cultivation 
owing to denudation and desiccation — the impoverishment of the 
country from these causes is increasing. Eastward the plateau 
becomes still more sterile, and its elevation probably falls more 
rapidly till it reaches the level of the Jauf and Nejran valleys on the 
borders of the desert. The water-parting between central and 
southern Arabia seems to be somewhere to the south of Nejran, 
which, according to Halevy, drains northward to the W. Dawasir, 
while the Jauf is either an isolated depression, or perhaps forms part 
of the Hadramut basin. 

Farther north, in Asir, the plateau is more mountainous and 
contains many fertile valleys. Of these may be mentioned Khamis 
Mishet and the Wadi Shahran rising among the high Asir. 

summits of the maritime chain, and the principal affluents 
of the Wadi Besha; the latter is a broad well- watered valley, with 
numerous scattered hamlets, four days' journey (perhaps 80 m.) 
from the crest of the range. Still farther north is the Wadi Taraba 
and its branches running down from the highland district of Zahran. 
The lower valleys produce dates in abundance, and at higher eleva- 
tions wheat, barley, millets and excellent fruit are grown, while 
juniper forests are said to cover the mountain slopes. In Yemen this 
tree was probably more common formerly; the place-name Arar, 
signifying juniper, is still often found where the tree no longer exists. 

The western coast of Yemen, like that of Hejaz, is studded with 
shoals and islands, of which Perim in the Straits of Bab-el-Mandeb, 
Kamaran, the Turkish quarantine post, 40 m. north of coast of 
Hodeda, and the Farsan group, off the Abu Arish coast, Yemen. 
are the principal. Hodeda is the only port of any import- 
ance since the days of steamships began; the other ports, Mokha, 
Lohaia and Kanfuda merely share in the coasting trade. The south 
coast is free from the shoals that imperil the navigation of the Red 
Sea, and in Aden it possesses the only safe natural harbour on the 
route between Suez and India. Several isolated volcanic hills crop 
out on the shore line between Aden and the straits ; the most remark- 
able are J. Kharaz, 2500 ft., and J. Shamshan, 1700 ft., at the base 
of which Aden itself is built. In both of these the crater form is 
very clearly marked. A low maritime plain, similar to the Tehama 
of the western coast, extends for some 200 m. east of the Straits of 
Bab-el-Mandeb, backed by mountains rising to 7000 ft. or more; 
farther east the elevation of the highland decreases steadily, and in 
the Hadramut, north of Mukalla, does not much exceed ft a a ramu t 
4000 ft. The mountain chain, too, is less distinctly 
marked, and becomes little more than the seaward escarpment of 
the plateau which intervenes between the coast and the Hadramut 
valley. This valley runs nearly east and west for a distance of 
500 m. from the eastern slopes of the Yemen highlands to its mouth 
on the Mahra coast near Sihut. The greater part of it is desert, but 
a short stretch lying between the 48th and 50th meridians is well 
watered and exceptionally fertile. This begins a little to the east of 
Shabwa, the ancient capital, now half buried in the advancing sand, 
and for a distance of over 70 m. a succession of villages and towns 
surrounded by fields and date groves extends along the main valley 
and into the tributaries which join it from the south. Shibam, 
Saiyun and Tarim are towns of 6000 or more inhabitants, and Hajren 
and Haura in the W. Duwan are among the larger villages. Him- 
yaritic remains have been found here and in the W. Mefat which 
enters the Gulf of Aden near Balhaf. A few small fishing villages 
or ports are scattered along the coast, but except Mukalla and Shihr 
none is of any importance. 

The Gara coast was visited by the Bents, who went inland from 
Dhafar, one of the centres of the old frankincense trade, to the crest 
of the plateau. The narrow coastal strip seems to be moderately 
fertile, and the hills which in places come down to the seashore are 
covered with trees, among which the frankincense and other gum- 
bearing trees are found. On the plateau, which has an altitude of 
4000 ft., there is good pasturage; inland the country slopes gently 
to a broad valley beyond which the view was bounded by the level 
horizon of the desert. 

Oman (§.».) includes all the south-eastern corner of the peninsula. 
Its chief feature is the lofty range of J. Akhdar, 10,000 ft. above 
sea-level. Like the great range of western Arabia, it runs Oman 
parallel to the coast ; it differs, however, from the western 
range in that its fall on the landward side is as abrupt and nearly 
as great as on its seaward side. Its northern extremity, Ras 
Musandan, rises precipitously from the straits of Hormuz; farther 
south the range curves inland somewhat, leaving a narrow but fertile 
strip, known as the Batina coast, between it and the sea, and con- 
taining several populous towns and villages of which Sohar, Barka 
and Sib are the chief. Muscat, the capital of the province and the 
principal port on the coast, is surrounded on three sides by bare, 
rocky hills, and has the reputation of being the hottest place in 



260 



ARABIA 



[GEOLOGY: CLIMATE: FAUNA 



Arabia. Zwemer says the fertility of the highland region of J. 
Akhdar is wonderful and is in striking contrast to the barrenness of 
so much of the coast; water issues in perennial springs from many 
rocky clefts, and is carefully husbanded by the ingenuity of the 
people; underground channels, known here asfaluj, precisely similar 
to the kanat or karez of Persia and Afghanistan, are also largely used. 
The principal villages on the eastern slopes are Rustak, Nakhl and 
Semail in the well-watered valley of the same name ; on the western 
slopes are Tanuf and Nizwa, lying immediately below the highest 
summit of the range; Semed, Ibra and Bidiya in the W. Betha 
are all well-built villages with palm-groves and irrigated fields. In 
the north-west the Dhahira district sloping towards the Jewasimi 
coast is more steppe-like in character; but there two oases of great 
fertility are found, of which Birema, visited by both Miles and 
Zwemer, supports a population of 15,000. West of Abu Dhabi a low 
flat steppe with no settled inhabitants extends up to the Katr 
peninsula, merging on the north into the saline marshes which border 
the Persian Gulf, and on the south into the desert. 

The great desert known as the Dahna or the Rub'a el Khali (" the 
empty quarter ") is believed to cover all the interior of southern 
The Arabia from the borders of Yemen in the west to those 

southern °f O man ln the east. Halevy in Nejran, Von Wrede in 
desert. Hadramut, and Wellsted in Oman reached its edge, 
though none of them actually entered it, and the guides 
accompanying them all concurred in describing it as uninhabitable 
and uncrossed by any track. Its northern fringe is no doubt fre- 
quented by the Bedouin tribes of southern Nejd after the rains, 
when its sands, like those of the northern desert, produce herbage; 
but towards the east, according to Burckhardt's information, it is 
quite without vegetation even in the winter and spring. The 
farthest habitable spot to the south of Nejd is the Wadi Yabrin, 
which L. Pelly heard of from the Ahl Murra Bedouins as once a 
fertile district, and which still produces dates, though, owing to 
malaria, it is now deserted; thence southward to the Hadramut 
valley no communication is known to exist. 

[Geology. — The geological structure of Arabia is very similar to 
that of Egypt. The oldest rocks consist of granite and schist, 
penetrated by intrusive dykes, and upon this foundation rest the 
flat-lying sedimentary deposits, beginning with a sandstone like the 
Nubian sandstone of Egypt. In the northern part of Arabia the 
crystalline rocks form a broad area extending from the peninsula 
of Sinai eastwards to Hail and southwards at least as far as Mecca. 
Towards the north the crystalline floor is overlaid by the great 
sandstone series which covers nearly the whole of the country north 
of Hail. Upon the sandstone rest a few scattered outliers of lime- 
stone, probably of Cretaceous age, the largest of which occur near 
Jauf and east of Bureda. Over both sandstone and granite great 
sheets of lava have been poured, and these, protecting the softer 
beds beneath from further denudation, now stand up as the high 
plateaus and hills called harra. Volcanic cones still exist in large 
numbers, and the sheets of lava appear as fresh as any recent flows 
of Etna or Vesuvius. Arabian manuscripts describe an eruption on 
the harra near Medina in A.D. 1256. In the south of Arabia the 
crystalline floor appears at intervals along the southern coast and 
on the shores of the Gulf of Oman. At Marbat the granite is overlaid 
by sandstone, presumably the Nubian sandstone: this is followed 
by marls containing Cenomanian fossils; and these are overlaid 
by Upper Cretaceous limestones, upon which rest isolated patches 
of Alveolina limestone. Generally, however, the Cretaceous beds 
do not appear, and the greater part of southern Arabia seems to be 
formed of Alveolina and nummulite limestones of Tertiary age. 
An extinct volcano occurs at Aden, and volcanic rocks are found at 
other places near the Straits of Bab-el-Mandeb. Throughout the 
whole of Arabia, so far as is known, the sedimentary beds show no 
signs of any but the most gentle folding. Faulting, however, is by 
no means absent, and some of the faults are of considerable magni- 
tude. The Gulf of Akaba is a strip of country which has been let 
down between two parallel faults, and several similar faulted troughs 
occur in the Sinai peninsula. The Red Sea itself is a great trough 
bounded by faults along each side.] 

Climate. — Owing to its low latitude and generally arid surface, 
Arabia is on the whole one of the hottest regions of the earth; this 
is especially the case along the coasts of the Persian Gulf and the 
southern half of the Red Sea, where the moist heat throughout the 
year is almost intolerable to Europeans. In the interior of northern 
and central Arabia, however, where the average level of the country 
exceeds 3000 ft., the fiery heat of the summer days is followed by 
cool nights, and the winter climate is fresh and invigorating; while 
in the highlands of Asir and Yemen in the south-west, and of Oman 
in the east, the summer heat is never excessive, and the winters are, 
comparatively speaking, cold. 

In the northern desert the temperature is subject to extreme 
variations. Nolde states that on the 1st of February 1893 in the 
desert north of Hail the thermometer fell from 78° a little before 
sunset to 18 a quarter of an hour after. The midday temperatures 
recorded by Huber at Hail during January and the first half of 
February average about 65 F., and water froze on several nights; 
at Medina the winters are cold and night frosts of frequent occur- 
rence, and these conditions prevail over all the western part of the 
Nejd plateau. In the east where the elevation is lower the climate is 



warmer. In the elevated highland district which extends from 
Taif to within 50 m. of Aden, the summer heat is tempered by the 
monsoon winds, and the seasonal variation of temperature is less 
marked. From observations made at Sana by Manzoni, Deflers ar.d 
Glaser, the mean temperature for the year of that city at an altitude 
of 7300 ft. and in 15° 22' N. appears to be 60° F. ; for July the 
mean maximum was 77 , mean minimum 54°; for January the 
figures were 62°and40° respectively, the lowest recorded temperature 
in 1878 was 26-6° on the 26th of January. At Aden at the sea-level 
the mean temperature for the year is 83°; the highest observed 
temperature in 1904 was 97-3°, the lowest 67-4°. 

The rainfall throughout northern and central Arabia is chiefly in 
the winter months between October and April, and is scanty and 
irregular. Doughty states that in 1876 rain to wet the ground had 
not fallen for three years at Medain Salih ; in that year showers fell 
on the 29th of December and on two days in January and again in 
March. After a very hot summer the bright weather changed to 
clouded skies on the 2nd of October, rain fell tempestuously the 
same evening, and there were showery days and nights till the 14th. 
The autumn rains fell that year abundantly in the Nafud towards 
Jauf, but very little in the basin of the W. Hamd (on the western 
slope). Doughty adds that the Nejd highlands between Kasim and 
Mecca are watered yearly by seasonable rains, which at Taif are 
expected about the end of August and last commonly from four to 
six weeks. This appears to be about the northern limit reached by 
the south-west monsoon, which from. June to September brings a 
fairly abundant rainfall to the Yemen highlands, though the Tehama 
remains almost entirely rainless. The rainfall is heaviest along the 
western fringe of the plateau, and penetrates inland in decreasing 
quantity over a zone which perhaps extends to 100 m. in width. In 
good seasons it is sufficient for the cultivation of the summer crop 
of millet, and for the supply of the perennial streams and springs, 
on which the irrigation of the winter crops of wheat and barley 
depend. The amount measured at Dhala at the extreme south of 
the plateau at an elevation of 4800 ft. was in 1902 as follows: — ■ 
June, 4-0 in.; July, 5-5; August, 5-8; September, 19. Only 
slight showers were recorded in the other months of the year. At 
higher elevations the rainfall is no doubt heavier ; Manzoni mentions 
that at Sana there was constant rain throughout August and Sep- 
tember 1878, and that the thermometer during August did not reach 
65°. In the Tehama occasional showers fall during the winter 
months; at Aden the average rainfall for the year is 2-97 in., but 
during 1904 only 0-5 in. was recorded. Snow falls on the Harra and 
on the Tehama range in northern Arabia, and Nolde records a fall of 
snow which lay on the Nafud on the 1st of February 1893. It also 
falls on J. Akhdar in Oman, but is very rarely known on the Yemen 
mountains, probably because the precipitation during the winter 
months is so slight. 

The prevailing winds in northern Arabia as far as is known are 
from the west; along the southern coast they are from the east; 
at Sana there is generally a light breeze from the north-north-west 
from 9 to 11 A.M., from noon till 4 P.M. a steady and often strong 
wind blows from the south-south-east, which dies away later. The 
climate is extremely dry, but this is compensated for by the heavy 
mists which sweep up from the plains during the rainless months 
and exercise a most beneficial effect in the coffee-growing districts. 
This phenomenon is known as the sukhemani or amama. In the 
morning the Tehama, as seen from the mountain tops, appears 
buried in a sea of white cloud; towards noon the clouds drift up 
the mountain slopes and cover the summits with wreaths of light 
mist charged with moisture which condenses on the trees and 
vegetation; in the afternoon they disappear, and the evenings are 
generally clear and still. 

Fauna. — The wild animals of Arabia are all of the desert-loving 
type : antelopes and gazelles are found in small numbers throughout 
the peninsula ; the latter are similar to the chikara or ravine deer of 
India. The larger antelopes, so common on the African side of the 
Gulf of Aden, are not found, except one variety, the Oryx beatrix 
(called by the Arabs, wild cow) , which is an inhabitant of the Nafud 
between Tema and Hail; it is about the size of a donkey, white, 
and with long straight horns. Hares are numerous both in the desert 
and in cultivated tracts. In the Yemen mountains the wal, a wild 
goat with massive horns, similar to the Kashmir ibex, is found; 
monkeys also abound. Among smaller animals the jerboa and other 
descriptions of rat, and the wabar or cony are common; lizards 
and snakes are numerous, most of the latter being venomous. 
Hyenas, wolves and panthers are found in most parts of the country, 
and in the mountains the leopard and wild cat. Of birds the ostrich 
is found in the Nafud and in the W. Dawasir. Among game birds 
the bustard, guinea fowl, sand grouse (kata), blue rock, green pigeon, 
partridge, including a large chikor (akb) and a small species similar 
to the Punjab sisi ; quail and several kinds of duck and snipe are 
met with. In the cultivated parts of Yemen and Tehama small 
birds are very numerous, so also are birds of prey, vultures, kites and 
hawks. 

Insectsof all sorts abound; scorpions, centipedes, spiders, and an 
ugly but harmless millipede known in Yemen as hablub are very 
common in summer. Ants and beetles too are very numerous, 
and anthills are prominent features in many places. Locusts appear 
in great swarms and do much damage ; fires are lighted at night 



FLORA: POPULATION] 



ARABIA 



261 



to attract them, an1 large quantities are caught and eaten by the 
poorer people. Bees are kept, and in Yemen and Hadramut the 
honey is exceptionally good. 

Of domesticated animals the camel is far the most useful to the 
Arab. Owing to its endurance of thirst the long desert journeys 
which separate the populous centres are made practicable, 
Camel. anc j j n t [j e S p r j n g months, when green forage is plentiful 
in the desert, the Bedouins pitch their camps for long periods far from 
any water, and not only men but horses subsist on camel's milk. 
The Arabian camel belongs to the one-humped species, though there 
are many varieties differing in appearance as much as the thorough- 
bred race-horse from the English cart-horse. The ordinary load for 
a pack camel is about 400 lb, and in hot weather good camels will 
march 20 to 25 m. daily and only require water every third or fourth 
day: in cool weather, with ample green fodder they can go twenty- 
five days or more without drinking. A good dalul or riding camel 
will carry his rider 100 m. a day for a week on end. Nolde gives an 
instance from his own experience of a camel rider covering 62 m. in 
seven hours. The pure-bred riding camel is only found in perfection 
in inner Arabia; for some unexplained reason when taken out 
of their own country or north of the 30th degree they rapidly 
degenerate. 

The horse does not occupy the important position in the Bedouin 
economy that is popularly supposed. In Nejd the number of horses 
is, comparatively speaking, very small; the want of 
Horse. water in the Nafud where alone forage is obtainable, 

and the absence of forage in the neighbourhood of the towns makes 
horse-breeding on a large scale impracticable there. Horses are in 
fact only kept by the principal sheiks, and by far the larger propor- 
tion of those now in Nejd are the property of the amir and his family. 
These are kept most of the year in the Nafud, five or ten days' 
march from Hail, where they find their own food on the desert 
herbage. When a raid is in contemplation, they are brought in and 
given a little barley for a few weeks. Reared in this way they are 
capable of marvellous endurance, marching during a raid twenty 
hours a day for eight or ten days together. As a rule, they are only 
mounted at the moment of attack, or in pursuit. Water and forage 
have to be carried for them on camels. 

The great majority of the horses that come into the market as 
Arabs, are bred in the northern desert and in Mesopotamia, by the 
various sections of the Aneza and Shammar tribes, who emigrated 
from Nejd generations ago, taking with them the original Nejd 
stock. In size and appearance, and in everything but endurance, 
these northern horses are admittedly superior to the true Nejdi. A 
few of the latter are collected by dealers in the nomad camps and 
exported chiefly from Kuwet. The amir Mahommed Ibn Rashid 
used to send down about one hundred young horses yearly. 

Asses of excellent quality are bred all over the country; they 
are much used as mounts by the richer townsmen. Except in the 
settled districts horned cattle are not numerous; they are similar 
to the Indian humped cattle, but are greatly superior in milking 
qualities. The great wealth of the Arabs is in their flocks of sheep 
and goats; they are led out to pasture soon after sunrise, and in the 
hotter months drink every second day. In the spring when the 
succulent ashub and adar grow plentifully in the desert, they go for 
weeks without drinking. They are milked once a day about sunset 
by the women (the men milk the camels), and a large proportion of 
the milk is made into samn, clarified butter, or marisi, dried curd. 
The wool is not of much value, and is spun by the women and woven 
into rugs, and made up into saddlebags or into the black Bedouin 
tents. 

Flora. — The flora of Arabia has been investigated by P. Forskal, 
the botanist of Niebuhr's mission, P. E. Botta, G. Schweinfurth and 
A. Deflers, to whose publications the technical reader is referred. 
Its general type approaches more closely to the African than to 
that of southern Asia. In the higher regions the principal trees are 
various species of fig, tamarind, carob and numerous kinds of 
cactiform Euphorbia, of which one, the Euphorbia arborea, grows to 
a height of 20 ft. Of Coniferae the juniper is found on the higher 
slopes of J. Sabur near Taiz, where Botta describes it as forming an 
extensive forest and growing to a large size; it is also found in the 
range overlooking the W. Madin, 50 m. W. of Aden. Considerable 
forests are said to exist in Asir, and Burton found a few fine speci- 
mens which he regarded as the remains of an old forest, on the 
Tehama range in Midian. On the rocky hill-sides in Yemen the 
Adenium Obesum is worthy of notice, with its enormous bulb-like 
stems and brilliant red flowers. Some fine aloes or agaves are also 
found. In the cultivated upland valleys all over Arabia the Zizyphus 
jujuba, called by some travellers lotus, grows to a large tree; its 
thorny branches are clipped yearly and used to fence the cornfields 
among which it grows. In the broad sandy wadi beds the tamarisk 
(athl) is everywhere found; its wood is used for making domestic 
implements of all sorts. Among fruit trees the vine, apricot, peach, 
apple, quince, fig and banana are cultivated in the highlands, and in 
the lower country the date palm flourishes, particularly throughout 
the central zone of Arabia, in Hejaz, Nejd and El Hasa, where it is 
the prime article of food. A hundred kinds of date are said to grow 
at Medina, of which the birni is considered the most wholesome; 
the halwa and the jalebi are the most delicately flavoured and sell at 
v«ry high rates; the khulas of El Hasa is also much esteemed. 



Of cereals the common millets, dhura and dukhn, are grown in all 
parts of the country as the summer crop, and in the hot irrigated 
Tehama districts three crops are reaped in the year ; in the highlands 
maize, wheat and barley are grown to a limited extent as the winter 
crop, ripening at the end of March or in April. Among vegetables 
the common kinds grown include radishes, pumpkins, cucumbers, 
melons, potatoes, onions and leeks. Roses are grown in some places 
for the manufacture of atr, or attar of roses; mignonette, jasmine, 
thyme, lavender and other aromatic plants are favourites in Yemen, 
when the Arabs often stick a bunch in their head-dress. 

Of the products special to Arabia coffee comes first ; it is nowhere 
found wild, and is believed to have been introduced from Abyssinia 
in the 6th century A. D. It thrives on the seaward slopes 
of the western range in the zone of the tropical rains, at Coffee. 
altitudes between 4000 and 7000 ft. The principal centres of pro- 
duction are the upper valleys of the W. Surdad, between Kaukaban 
and Manakha, and particularly on J. Haraz; in the Wadi Zubed 
west of Uden; in Hajaria on the slopes of J. Sabur, and in the Yafa 
district north-east of Aden. It is planted in terraces on the mountain 
slopes; shady trees, such as tamarind and fig, are planted in the 
border as a protection from the sun, and the terraces are irrigated 
by channels led from a neighbouring rivulet or spring. The plants 
are raised from seedlings, and when six or seven weeks old they are 
transplanted in rows 4 to 6 ft. apart; they require watering twice 
a month, and bear in two to four years. The berries are dried in the 
sun and sent down to Hodeda or Aden, where they are subjected 
to a process for separating the husk from the bean; the result is 
about 50% of cleaned berries, bun soft, which is exported, and a 
residue of huskcr kishr, from which the Yemenis make their favourite 
beverage. 

Another plant universally used as a stimulant in Southern Arabia 
is khat (Catha edulis). The best is grown on J. Sabur and the moun- 
tainous country round Taiz. It is a small bush propagated from 
cuttings which are left to grow for three years ; the leaves are then 
stripped, except a few buds which develop next year into young 
shoots, these being cut and sold in bunches under the name of khat 
mubarak; next year on the branches cut back new shoots grow; 
these are sold as khat malhani, or second-year kat, which commands 
the highest price. The bush is then left for three years, when the 
process is repeated. The leaves and young shoots are chewed; 
they have stimulating properties, comparable with those of the coca 
of Peru. 

The aromatic gums for which Arabia was famed in ancient times 
are still produced, though the trade is a very small one. The tree 
from which myrrh is extracted grows in many places, but the 
industry is chiefly carried on at Suda, 60 m. north-north-east of Sana. 
Longitudinal slits are made in the bark, and the gum is caught in 
cups fixed beneath. The balsam of Mecca is produced in the same 
way, chiefly in the mountains near the W. Safra between Yambu 
and Medina. 

The stony plains which cover so large a part of the country are 
often covered with acacia jungle, and in the dry water-courses a kind 
of wild palm, the dom, abounds, from the leaves of which baskets 
and mats are woven. Brushwood and rough pasturage of some sort 
is found almost everywhere, except in the neighbourhood of the 
larger settlements, where forage and firewood have to be brought 
in from long distances. The Nafud sands, too, are tufted in many 
places with bushes or small trees, and after the winter rains they 
produce excellent pasture. 

Population. — The people, according to their own traditions, 
are derived from two stocks, the pure Arabs, descended from 
Kahtan or Joktan, fourth in descent from Shem; and the 
Mustarab or naturalized Arabs, from Ishmael. The former are 
represented at the present day by the inhabitants of Yemen, 
Hadramut and Oman, in general a settled agricultural popula- 
tion; the latter by those of Hejaz, Nejd, El Hasa, the Syrian 
desert and Mesopotamia, consisting of the Bedouin or pastoral 
tribes (see Arabs and Bedouins). This distinction between the 
characteristics of the two races is only true in a general sense, 
for a considerable population of true Bedouin origin has settled 
down to agricultural life in the oases of Hejaz and Nejd, while in 
southern Arabia the tribes dwelling on the fringe of the great 
desert have to a certain extent adopted the nomad life. 

Both among the nomad and settled Arabs the organization 
is essentially tribal. The affairs of the tribe are administered by 
the sheiks, or heads of clans and families; the position of sheik 
in itself gives no real governing power, his word and counsel 
carry weight, but his influence depends on his own personal 
qualities. All matters affecting the community are discussed in 
the majlis or assembly, to which any tribesman has access; 
here, too, are brought the tribesmen's causes; both sides plead 
and judgment is given impartially, the loser is fined so many- 
head of small cattle or camels, which he must pay or go into 



262 



ARABIA 



[TRADE 



exile. Murder can be expiated by the payment of diya or blood- 
money, if the kinsmen of the murdered man consent; they 
may, however, claim the life of the murderer, and long and 
troublesome blood feuds often ensue, involving the relatives of 
both sides for generations. 

Apart from the tribesmen there is in Hejaz and south Arabia 
a privileged, religious class, the Sharifs or Seyyids, who claim 
descent from Mahomet through his daughter Fatima. Until the 
Egyptian invasion in 1814 the Sharifs of Mecca were the recog- 
nized rulers of Hejaz, and though the Turks have attempted to 
suppress their importance, the Sharif still executes justice accord- 
ing to the Mahommedan law in the holy cities, though, nominally, 
as a Turkish official. In Yemen and Hadramut many villages 
are occupied exclusively by this religious hierarchy, who are 
known as Ashraf , Sada or Kudha (i.e. Sharifs, Seyyids or Kadhis) ; 
the religious affairs of the tribes are left in their hands; they do 
not, however, interfere in tribal matters generally, or join in 
fighting. 

Below these two classes, which may be looked on as the priestly 
and the military castes, there is, especially in the settled districts, 
a large population of artisans and labourers, besides negro slaves 
and their descendants, slave or free. The population of Khaibar 
consists almost entirely of the latter, and in Hail Huber estimates 
the pure Arab inhabitants at only one-third of the whole. In the 
desert, too, there is a widely scattered tribe, the Salubi, which 
from its name (Salib, cross) is conjectured to be of early Christian 
origin; they are great hunters, killing ostriches and gazelles; 
the Arabs despise them as an inferior race, but do not harm 
them; they pay a small tax to the tribe under whose protection 
they live, and render service as labourers, for which they receive 
in the spring milk and cheese; at the date harvest they get 
wages in kind; with this, and the produce of the chase, 
they manage to exist in the desert without agriculture or 
flocks. 

In southern Arabia the Jews form a large element in the town 
population. According to one authority their presence in Yemen 
dates from the time of Solomon, others say from the 
Ja Arabia, capture of Jerusalem by Nebuchadrezzar. Manzoni 
estimated their number in Sana in 1878 at 1700 out 
of a total population of 20,000; at Aden they are a numerous 
and wealthy community, with agents in most of the towns of 
Yemen. Even in remote Nejran, Halevy, himself a Jew, found a 
considerable colony of his co-religionists. They wear a distinctive 
garb and are not allowed to carry arms or live in the same quarter 
as Moslems. Another foreign element of considerable strength 
in the coast towns of Muscat, Aden and Jidda, is the British 
Indian trading class; many families of Indian origin also have 
settled at Mecca, having originally come as pilgrims. 

Estimates of the population of Arabia vary enormously, and 
the figures given in the following table can only be regarded as a 
very rough approximation: — 

Hejaz 300,000 

Yemen and Asir 1,800,000 

Nejd . . 1,000,000 

Hadramut 150,000 

Oman 1,000,000 

El Hasa 300,000 

Syrian desert and border .... 275,000 

4,825,000 

Communications. — The principal land routes in Arabia are 
those leading to the holy cities. In the present day the Syrian 
pilgrim route, or Darb el Haj, from Damascus to Medina and 
Mecca is the most used. The annual pilgrim caravan or haj, 
numbering some 6000 people with 10,000 pack animals, is 
escorted by a few Turkish irregulars known as agel; small 
fortified posts have been established at the regular halting-places 
some 30 m. apart, each furnished with a well and reservoir, and 
for the further protection of the haj, payments are made to the 
Bedouin tribes through whose territories the route passes. The 
road is a mere camel track across the desert, the chief places 
passed are Ma'an on the Syrian border, a station on the old 
Sabaean trade route to Petra, and Medain Salih, the site of the 



rock-cut tombs and inscriptions first brought to notice by 
Doughty. From Medina the route usually followed descends 
the W. Safra to Badr Hunen, whence it keeps near the coast 
passing Rabigh and Khulesa to Mecca. The total distance, 
1300 m., is covered in forty days. 

The Egyptian pilgrim route from Cairo, across the Sinai 
peninsula and down the Midian coast to El Wijh, joins the 
Syrian route at Badr Hunen. It also was formerly provided 
with stations and reservoirs, but owing to the greater facilities 
of the sea journey from Suez to Jidda it is now little used. 
Another important route is that taken by the Persian or Shia 
pilgrims from Bagdad and Kerbela across the desert, by the 
wells of Lina, to Bureda in Kasim; thence across the steppes of 
western Nejd till it crosses the Hejaz border at the Ria Mecca, 
50 m. north-east of the city. It lies almost entirely in the 
territory of the amir Ibn Rashid of J. Shammar, who derives a 
considerable revenue from the pilgrimage. The old reservoirs 
on this route attributed to Zubeda, wife of Harun al Rashid, 
were destroyed during the Wahhabi raids early in the 19th 
century, and have not been repaired. The Yemen pilgrim route, 
known as the Haj el Kabsi, led from Sada through Asir to Tail 
and Mecca, but it is no longer used. 

The principal trade routes are those leading from Damascus to 
Jauf and across the Nafud to Hail. Other important routes 
leading to Nejd are those from Kuwet to Hail, and from El Hasa 
to Riad respectively. In the west and south the principal routes, 
other than those already mentioned, are from Yambu to Medina, 
from Jidda to Mecca, Hodeda to Sana, Aden to Sana, and from 
Mukalla to the Hadramut valley. Railway construction has 
begun in Arabia, and in 1908 the Hejaz line, intended to connect 
Damascus with Mecca, had reached Medina, 500 m. south of 
Ma'an. This line is of great strategical importance, as strengthen- 
ing the Turkish hold on the Red Sea provinces. But the principal 
means of commercial communication for a country like Arabia 
must always be by sea. Bahrein, Kuwet and Muscat are in steam 
communication with India, and the Persian Gulf ports; all the 
great lines of steamships call at Aden on their way between Suez 
and the East, and regular services are maintained between Suez, 
Jidda, Hodeda and Aden, as well as to the ports on the African 
coast, while native coasting craft trade to the smaller ports on 
the Red Sea and Indian Ocean. 

Commerce. — The total value of the trade of Aden for 1904 
amounted to over £6,000,000. The imports to Jidda in the same 
year were £1,405,000, largely consisting of rice, wheat and other food 
stuffs from India; the exports, whioh have dwindled away in late 
years, amounted in 1904 to only £25,000. To balance the exports 
and imports specie was exported in the three years 1902-1904 
amounting to £2,319,000; a large proportion of this was perhaps 
provided by cash brought into the country by pilgrims. 

The pilgrim traffic increased largely in 1904 as compared with 
previous years; 74,600 persons landed at Jidda, 18,000 of whom 
were from British India, 13,000 from Java and the Straits Settle- 
ments, and the remainder from Turkish territory, Egypt and other 
countries: 235 out of a total of 334 steamships engaged in this 
traffic were British. 

The trade of Hodeda, which contributes by far the largest share 
to that of Turkish Yemen, fell off considerably during the period 
from 1901-1905, chiefly owing to the disturbed state of the country. 
In the latter year the imports amounted to £467,000, and the exports 
to £451,000; coffee, the mainstay of Yemen trade, shows a serious 
decline from £302,000 in 1902 to £229,000 in 1904; this is attribut- 
able partly to the great increase of production in other countries, but 
mainly to the insecurity of the trade routes and the exorbitant 
transit dues levied by the Turkish administration. 

Oman, through its chief port Muscat, had a total trade of about 
£550,000, two-thirds of which is due to imports and one-third to 
exports. The chief items of imports are arms and ammunition, rice, 
coffee and piece goods; the staple export is dates, which in a good 
year accounts for nearly half the total; much of the trade is in the 
hands of British Indians, and of the shipping 92% is British. 

The principal trade centre of the Arabian side of the Persian Gulf 
is Bahrein; the total volume of trade of which amounted in 1904 
to £1,900,000, nearly equally divided between imports and exports; 
rice, piece goods, &c, form the bulk of the former, while pearls are 
the most valuable part of the latter. (R. A. W.) 

Antiquities 
Arabia cannot be said to be " destitute of antiquities," but 
the material for the "study of these is still very incomplete. 



ANTIQUITIES] 



ARABIA 



263 



The difficulties in the way of travelling in Arabia with a view 
to scientific investigation are such that little or nothing is being 
done, and the systematic work which has given such good results 
in Egypt, Palestine and Babylonia- Assyria is unknown in Arabia. 
Yet the passing notes of travellers from the time of Carsten 
Niebuhr show that antiquities are to be found. 

Prehistoric Remains. — Since prehistoric remains must be 
studied where they are found, the difficulty in the way of ex- 
ploration makes itself severely felt. That such remains exist 
seems clear from the casual remarks of travellers. Thus Palgrave 
{Central and Eastern Arabia, vol. i. ch. 6) speaks of part of a circle 
of roughly shaped stones taken from the adjacent limestone 
mountains in the Nejd. Eight or nine of these stones still 
exist, some of them 15 ft. high. Two of them, 10 to 12 ft. apart, 
still bear their horizontal lintel. They are all without ornament. 
Palgrave compares them with the remains at Stonehenge and 
Karnak. Doughty {Arabia Deserta, vol. ii.), travelling in north- 
west Arabia, saw stones of granite in a row and " flagstones set 
edgewise " (though he does not regard these as religious), also 
" round heaps, perhaps barrows," and " dry-built round 
chambers," which may be ancient tombs. J. T. Bent {Southern 
Arabia, pp. 24 ff.) explored one of several mounds in Bahrein. 
It proved to be a tomb, and the remains in it are said to be 
Phoenician. 

Castles and Walls. — In the south of Arabia, where an advanced 
civilization existed for centuries before the Christian era, the 
ruins of castles and city-walls are still in existence, and have been 
mentioned, though not examined carefully, by several travellers. 
In Yemen and Hadramut especially these ruins abound, and in 
some cases inscriptions seem to be still in situ. Great, castles 
are often mentioned in early Arabian literature. One in the 
neighbourhood of San'a was described as one of the wonders of 
the world by Qazwinl {Athdr ul-Bildd, p. 33, ed. Wiistenfeld, 
Gottingen, 1S47, cf. Journal of the German Oriental Society, 
vol. 7, pp. 472, 476, and for other castles vol. 10, pp. 20 ff.). 
The ruins of the city of Ma'rib, the old Sabaean capital, have 
been visited by Arnaud, Halevy and Glaser, but call for further 
description, as Arnaud confined himself to a description of the 
dike (see below), while Halevy and Glaser were interested chiefly 
in the inscriptions. 

Wells and Dikes. — From the earliest times the conservation 
of water has been one of the serious cares of the Arabs. All over 
the country wells are to be found, and the masonry of some of 
them is undoubtedly ancient. Inscriptions are still found in 
some of these in the south. The famous well Zemzem at Mecca 
is said to belong to the early times, when the eastern traffic 
passed from the south to the north-west of Arabia through the 
Hejaz, and to have been rediscovered shortly before the time of 
Mahomet. Among the most famous remains of Ma'rib are those 
of a great dike reminding one of the restored tanks familiar to 
visitors at Aden. These remains were first described by Arnaud 
{Journal asiatique, January 1874, with plan). Their importance 
was afterwards emphasized by Glaser's publication of two long 
inscriptions concerning their restoration in the 5th and 6th 
centuries a.d. (" Zwei Inschriften iiber den Dammbruch von 
Marib," in the Mitteilungen der V order asiatischen Gesellschaft, 
Berlin, 1897). Another dike about 150 yds. long was seen by 
W. B. Harris at Hirran in Yemen. Above it was a series of three 
tanks {A Journey through the Yemen, p. 279, London, 1893). 

Stones and Bronzes. — The 19th century has brought to the 
museums of Europe (especially to London, Paris, Berlin and 
Vienna) a number of inscriptions in the languages of Minea and 
Saba, and a few in those of Hadramut and Katabania (Qatta- 
bania). These inscriptions are generally on limestone or marble 
or on tablets of bronze, and vary from a few inches to some 
feet in length and height. In some cases the originals have been 
brought to Europe, in other cases only squeezes of the inscrip- 
tions. The characters employed are apparently derived from 
the Phoenician (cf. Lidzbarski's Ephemeris, vol. i. pp. 109 ff.). 
The languages employed have been the subject of much study 
(cf. F. Hommel's Siid-arabische Chrestomathie, Munich, 1893), 
but the archaeological value of these remains has not been so 



fully treated. Very many of them are votive inscriptions and 
contain little more than the names of gods and princes or private 
men. A few are historical, but being (with few and late excep- 
tions) undated, have given rise to much controversy among 
scholars. Their range seems to be from about 800 B.C. (or 1500 
B.C. according to E. Glaser) to the 6th century a.d. Few are 
still in situ, the majority having been taken from their original 
positions and built into houses, mosques or wells of more recent 
date. Among these remains are altars, and bases for statues 
of gods or for golden images of animals dedicated to gods. The 
earlier stones are devoid of ornamentation, but the later stones 
and bronzes are sometimes ornamented with designs of leaves, 
flowers, ox-heads, men and women. Some bear figures of the 
conventionalized sacred tree with worshippers, similar to 
Babylonian designs. Besides these there are gravestones, stelae 
with human heads, fragments of limestone, architectural designs 
as well as bronze castings of camels, horses, mice, serpents, &c. 
(cf. D. H. M tiller's Sildarabische Alterthilmer im Kunsthistorischen 
Museum, Vienna, 1899, with plates). 

Seals, Weights and Coins. — The Vienna Museum possesses a 
small number of seals and gems. The seals are inscribed with 
Sabaean writing and are of bronze, copper, silver and stone. 
The gems of onyx, carnelian and agate are later and bear various 
figures, and in some cases Arabic inscriptions. One or two 
weights are also in existence. A number of coins have been 
brought to the British Museum from Aden, San'a and Ma'rib. 
Others were purchased by G. Schlumberger in Constantinople; 
others have been brought to Europe by Glaser, and are now in 
the Vienna Museum. These are imitations of Greek models, 
while the inscriptions are in Sabaean characters (cf. B. V. Head, 
in the Numismatic Chronicle, 1878, pp. 273-284; G. Schlum- 
berger, Le Tresor de Sana, Paris, 1880; D. H. Miiller, op. cit. 
pp. 65 ff. and plates). 

For the problem of Arabic antiquities in Rhodesia see Rhodesia 
and Zimbabwe. (G. W. T.) 

History 

Introduction. — Arabia is a land of Semites, and is supposed by 
some scholars to have been the original home of the Semitic 
peoples. Although this cannot be said to be proved, th« studies, 
linguistic and archaeological, of Semitic scholars have shown 
it to be probable. The dispersion from Arabia is easy to imagine. 
The migration into Babylonia was simple, as there are no natural 
boundaries to separate it from north-east Arabia, and similar 
migrations have taken place in historic times. That of the 
Aramaeans at an early period is likewise free from any natural 
hindrance. The connexion with Palestine has always been close; 
and the Abyssinian settlement is probably as late as the beginning 
of the Christian era. Of these migrations, however, history knows 
nothing, nor are they expressed in literature. Arabian literature 
has its own version of prehistoric times, but it is entirely 
legendary and apocryphal. It was, and still is, the custom of 
Arabian historians to begin with the creation of the world and 
tell the history from then to the time of which they are writing. 
Consequently even the more sober histories contain a mass of 
fables about early days. Many of these, taken in part from 
Jewish and Christian sources, find a place in the Koran. Of all 
these stories current at the time of Mahomet, the only ones of 
any value are the accounts of the " days of the Arabs," i.e. 
accounts of some famous inter-tribal battles in Arabia. 

Authorities. — Until recently the Arab traditions were practi- 
cally the only source for the pre-Islamic history of Arabia. The 
Old Testament references to Arabs were obscure. The classical 
accounts of the invasion of Aelius Gallus in 26 B.C. threw little 
light on the state of Arabia at the time, still less on its past 
history. The Greek writers from Theophrastus in the 4th 
century.B.c to Ptolemy in the 2nd century a.d. mention many 
names of Arabian peoples and describe the situation of their 
cities, but contribute little to their history, and that little could 
not be controlled. The same applies to the information of Pliny 
in his Natural History. In the 19th century the discovery 
and decipherment of the Assyrian inscriptions gave a slight 
glance into the relations between Arabs and Assyrians from the 



264 



ARABIA 



[HISTORY 



8th century B.C. But the great contribution of the century to 
the early history of Arabia was the collecting and translating 
of numerous early Arabian inscriptions (cf. section Antiquities 
above), which have done service both by their own indication of 
a great civilization in Arabia for nearly (or more than) a thousand 
years before the Christian era, and by the new stimulus which 
they gave to the study and appreciation of the materials in the 
Assyrian inscriptions, the Old Testament, and the Greek and 
Roman writers. At the same time the facts that the inscriptions 
are undated until a late period, that few are historical in their 
contents, and for the most part yield only names of gods and 
rulers and domestic and religious details, and that our collection 
is still very incomplete, have led to much serious disagreement 
among scholars as to the reconstruction of the history of Arabia 
in the pre-Christian centuries. 

All scholars, however, are agreed that the inscriptions reach as 
far back as the gth century B.C. (some say to the 16th) and prove 
the existence of at least four civilized kingdoms during these 
centuries. These are the kingdoms of Ma'In (Minaean), of 
Saba (Sabaean), of Hadramaut (Hadramut) and of Katabania 
(Katabanu) . Of the two latter little is known. That of Hadramut 
had kings from the time of the Minaeans to about a.d. 300, when 
it was conquered by Ethiopia. The limits of the kingdom of 
Katabania are not known, but it has its own inscriptions. 

As to the Sabaean kingdom there is fair agreement among 
scholars. The inscriptions go back to 800 B.C. or earlier, and 
the same applies to the kingdom. A queen of this people (the 
" Queen of Sheba ") is said (1 Kings x.) to have visited Solomon 
about 950 B.C. There is, however, no mention of such a queen 
in the inscriptions. An Assyrian inscription mentions Ith'amara 
the Sabaean who paid tribute to Sargon in 715 B.C. At this time 
the Sabaeans must have been in north Arabia unless the in- 
scription refers to a northern colony of the southern Sabaeans. 
The former opinion is held by E. Glaser, who thinks that in the 
oth and 8th centuries they moved down along the west coast to 
the south, where they conquered the Minaeans (see below). 
The Sabaean rule is generally divided into periods indicated by 
the titles given to their rulers. In the first of these ruled the 
Makarib, who seem to have been priest-kings. Their first capital 
was at Sirwah. Ten such rulers are mentioned in the inscriptions. 
Their rule extended from the 9th to the 6th century. The second 
period begins about 550 B.C. The rulers are known as " kings of 
Saba." Their capital was Ma'rib. The names of seventeen of 
these kings are known from the inscriptions. Their sway lasted 
until about 115 B.C., when they were succeeded by the Him- 
yarites. During this period they were engaged in constant strife 
with the neighbouring kingdoms of Hadramut and Katabania. 
The great prosperity of south-west Arabia at this time was due 
in large measure to the fact that the trade from India with Egypt 
came there by sea and then went by land up the west coast. 
This trade, however, was lost during this period, as the Ptolemies 
established an overland route from India to Alexandria. The 
connexion of Saba with the north, where the Nabataeans (q.v.) 
had existed from about 200 B.C., was now broken. The decay 
that followed caused a number of Sabaeans to migrate to other 
parts of Arabia. 

The Minaean kingdom extended over the south Arabian 
Jauf, its chief cities being Karnau, Ma'In and Yathil. Some 
twenty-five kings are known from the inscriptions; of these 
twenty are known to be related to one another. Their history 
must thus cover several centuries. As inscriptions in the Minaean 
language are found in al-'Ula in north Arabia, it is probable that 
they had colonies in that district. With regard to their date 
opinion is very much divided; some, with E. Glaser and 
F. Hommel, maintaining that their kingdom existed prior to 
that of Saba, probably from about 1500 B.C. or earlier until the 
Sabaeans came from their home in the north and conquered 
them in the 9th century. Other scholars think, with D. H. 
Miiller, partly on palaeographical grounds (cf. M. Lidzbarski's 
Ephemeris, vol. i. pp. 109 seq., Giessen, 1902), that none of the 
inscriptions are earlier than about 800 B.C. and that the Minaean 
kingdom existed side by side with the Sabaean. It is curious that 



the Sabaean inscriptions contain no mention of the Minaeans, 
though this may be due to the fact that very few of the inscrip- 
tions are historical in content. 

About 115 B.C. the power over south Arabia passed from the 
Sabaeans to the Himyarites, a people from the extreme south- 
west of Arabia; and about this time the kingdom of Katabania 
came to an end. The title taken by the new rulers was " king of 
Saba and Raidan." Twenty-six kings of this period are known 
from the inscriptions, some of which are dated. In this period 
the Romans made their one attempt at direct interference in the 
affairs of Arabia. The invasion under Aelius Gallus was an 
absolute failure, the expedition being betrayed by the guides 
and lost in the sands of the desert. During the latter part of 
this time the Abyssinians, who had earlier migrated from Arabia 
to the opposite coast of Africa, began to flow back to the south 
of Arabia, where they seem to have settled gradually and 
increased in importance until about a.d. 300, when they became 
strong enough to overturn the Himyarite kings and establish a 
dynasty of their own. The title assumed by them was " king of 
Saba, Raidan, Hadramut and Yemen." The Himyarites were, 
however, still active, and after a struggle succeeded in establish- 
ing a Jewish Sabaean kingdom, having previously accepted 
Judaism as their religion. Their best-known king was Dhu 
Nuwas. The struggle between them and the Abyssinians now 
became one of Judaism against Christianity. The persecution 
of the Christians was very severe (see E. Glaser's Die Abyssinier 
in Arabien und Afrika, Munich, 1895, and F. M. E. Pereira's 
Historia dos Martyr es de Nagran, Lisbon, 1899). Apparently for 
this reason Christian Abyssinia was supported from Byzantium 
in its attempts to regain power. These attempts were crowned 
with success in 525. Of the Christian Abyssinian kings in Arabia 
tradition tells of four, one only of whom is mentioned in inscrip- 
tions. The famous expedition of Abraha, the Abyssinian viceroy, 
against Mecca, took place in 570. Five years later the Persians, 
who had been called in by the opponents of Christianity, suc- 
ceeded in taking over the rule and in appointing governors over 
Yemen. (See further Ethiopia: The Axumite Kingdom.) 

Hlra, Ghassan and Kinda. — Before passing to the time of 
Mahomet it is necessary to take account of three other Arabian 
powers, those of Hira, Ghassan and Kinda. 

The kingdom of Hira (Hlra) was established in the boundary 
land between the Euphrates and the Arabian desert, a district 
renowned for its good air and extraordinary fertility. 
The chief town was Hira, a few miles south of the site 
of the later town of Kufa. The inhabitants of this land are said 
in Tabari's history to have been of three classes: — (1) The 
Tanukh (Tnuhs), who lived in tents and were made up of Arabs 
from the Tehama and Nejd, who had united in Bahrein to form 
a new tribe, and who migrated from there to Hira, probably at 
the beginning or middle of the 3rd century a.d., when the 
Arsacid power was growing weak. The Arabian historians relate 
their conflict with Zenobia. (2) The Tbad or Tbadites, who 
dwelt in the town of Hira in houses and so led a settled life. 
These were Christians, whose ecclesiastical language was Syriac, 
though the language of intercourse was Arabic. A Christian 
bishop of Hira is known to have attended a synod in 410. In 
the 5th century they became Nestorians. (3) Refugees of various 
tribes, who came into the land but did not belong to the Tanukh 
or the Tbad. There is no trustworthy information as to the 
earlier chiefs of this people. The dynasty of the Lakhmids, 
famed in Arabian history and literature, arose towards the end 
of the 3rd century and lasted until about 602. The names of 
twenty kings are given by Hisham al-Kalbl in Tabari's history. 
Although so many of their subjects were Christian, the Lakhmids 
remained heathen until Nu'man, the last of the dynasty. The 
kingdom of Hira was never really independent, but always stood 
in a relation of dependence on Persia, probably receiving pay 
from it and employing Persian soldiers. At the height of its 
power it was able to render valuable aid to its suzerain. Much 
of its time was spent in wars with Rome and Ghassan. Its 
revenues were derived from the Bedouins of the surrounding 
lands as well as from its own subjects at home. About 602 the 



Hira. 



HISTORY] 



ARABIA 



265 



Lakhmid dynasty fell, and the Persian Chosroes (Khosrau) II. 
appointed as governor an Arab of the tribe of Tai. Shortly after 
it came into relation with Islam. 

See G. Rothstein's Die Dynastic der Lakhmiden in al-Hira (Berlin, 
1899) ; Th. Noldeke's Geschichte der Perser und Araber zur Zeit der 
Sassaniden (Leiden, 1879). 

In the beginning of the 6th century a.d. a dynasty known as 
the Jafnids, enter into the history alike of the Roman and 
Ohassaa Persian empires. They ruled over the tribe of Ghassan 
in the extreme north-west of Arabia, east of the 
Jordan, from near Petra in the south to the neighbourhood of 
Rosafa in the north-east. Of their origin little is known except 
that they came from the south. A part of the same tribe in- 
habited Yathrib (Medina) at the time of Mahomet. The first 
certain prince of the Jafnid house was Harith ibn Jabala, who, 
according to the chronicle of John Malalas, conquered Mondhir 
(Mundhir) of Hlra in 528. In the following year, according to 
Procopius, Justinian perceived the value of the Ghassanids as an 
outpost of the Roman empire, and as opponents of the Persian 
dependants of Hlra, and recognized Harith as king of the Arabs 
and patrician of the Roman empire. He was thus constantly 
engaged in battles against Hlra. In 541 he fought under Beli- 
sarius in Mesopotamia. After his death about 569 -or 570 the 
friendly relations with the West continued, but about 583 there 
was a breach. The Ghassanid kingdom split into sections each 
with its own prince. Some .passed under the sway of Persia, 
others preserved their freedom at the expense of their neighbours. 
At this point their history ceases to be mentioned in the Western 
chronicles. There are references to the Ghassanid Nu'man in the 
poems of Nabigha. Arabian tradition tells of their prince 
Jabala ibn Aiham who accepted Islam, after fighting against 
it, but finding it too democratic, returned to Christianity and 
exile in the Roman empire. As Islam advanced, some of the 
Ghassanids retreated to Cappadocia, others accepted the new 
faith. 

See Th. Noldeke, Die ghassanischen Fiirsten aus dem Hause 
Gafna's (Berlin, 1887). 

In the last decade of the 5th century a new power arose in 
central Arabia. This was the tribe of Kinda under the sway of 
Kind a tne family of Aqil ul Murar, who came from the south. 

They seem to have stood in much the same relation to 
the rulers of Yemen, as the people of Hlra to the Persians and 
the Ghassanids to Rome. Abraha in his invasion of the Hejaz 
was accompanied by chiefs of Kinda. Details of their history 
are not known, but they seem to have gained power at one time 
even over the Lakhmids of Hlra; and to have ruled over 
Bahrein as well as Yemama until the battle of Shi'b ul Jabala, 
when they lost this province to Hlra. The poet Amru'ul Qais 
was a member of the princely family of Kinda. 

Outside the territory of the powers mentioned above, Arabia 
in the 6th century was in a state of political chaos. Bahrein, 

inhabited chiefly by the Bani'Abd Qais and the Bani 
parts ot Bakr, was largely subject to Persian influence near 
Arabia. its coast, and a Persian governor, Sebocht, resided 

in Hajar, its chief town. In Oman the Arabs, who 
were chiefly engaged in fishing and seafaring, were Azdites 
mixed with Persians. The ruling dynasty of Julanda in their 
capital Suhar lasted on till the Abbasid period. No Persian 
officials are mentioned in this country; whether Persians exer- 
cised authority over it is doubtful. On the west coast of Arabia 
the influence of the kingdom of Yemen was felt in varying degree 
according to the strength of the rulers of that land. Apart from 
this influence the Hejaz was simply a collection of cities each 
with its own government, while outside the cities the various 
tribes governed themselves and fought continual battles with 
one another. 

Time of Mahomet. — Thus at the time of Mahomet's advent 
the country was peopled by various tribes, some more or less 
settled under the governments of south Arabia, Kinda, Hlra and 
Ghassan, these in turn depending on Abyssinia, Persia and 
Rome {i.e. Byzantium) ; others as in the Hejaz were ruled in 
smaller communities by members of leading families, while 



in various parts of the peninsula were wandering Arabs still 
maintaining the traditions of old family and tribal rule, forming 
no state, sometimes passing, as suited them, under the influence 
and protection of one or another of the greater powers. To these 
may be added a certain number of Jewish tribes and families 
deriving their origin partly from migrations from Palestine, 
partly from converts among the Arabs themselves. Mahomet 
appealed at once to religion and patriotism, or rather created a 
feeling for both. For Mahomet as a religious teacher and for the 
details of his career see Mahomet. It is enough here to outline 
his actions in so far as he attempted to create a united, and then 
a conquering, Arabia. Though the external conquests of the 
Arabs belong more properly to the period of the caliphate, yet 
they were the natural outcome of the prophet's ideas. His idea 
of Arabia for the Arabians could only be realized by summoning 
the great kings of the surrounding nations to recognize Islam; 
otherwise Abyssinia, Persia and Rome (Byzantium) would 
continue their former endeavours to influence and control the 
affairs of the peninsula. Tradition tells that a few years before 
his death he did actually send letters to the emperor Heraclius, 
to the negus of Abyssinia, the king of Persia, and Cyrus, patriarch 
of Alexandria, the " Mukaukis " of Egypt, summoning them to 
accept Islam and threatening them with punishment in case of 
refusal. But the task of carrying out these threats fell to the lot 
of his successors; the work of the prophet was to be the subjugat- 
ing and uniting of Arabia. This work, scarcely begun in Mecca, 
was really started after the migration to Medina by the forma- 
tion of a party of men — the Muhajirun (Refugees or Emigrants) 
and the Ansar (Helpers or Defenders) — who accepted Mahomet 
as their religious leader. As the necessity of overcoming his 
enemies became urgent, this party became military. A few 
successes in battle attracted to him men who were interested in 
fighting and who were willing to accept his religion as a condition 
of membership of his party, which soon began to assume a 
national form. Mahomet early found an excuse for attacking 
the Jews, who were naturally in the way of his schemes. The 
Bani Nadir were expelled, the Bani Quraiza slaughtered. By the 
time he had successfully stormed the rich Jewish town of Khaibar, 
he had found that it was better to allow industrious Jews to 
remain in Arabia as payers of tribute than to expel or kill them: 
this policy he followed afterwards. The capture of Mecca (630) 
was not only an evidence of his growing power, which induced 
Arabs throughout the peninsula to join him, but gave him a valu- 
able centre of pilgrimage, in which he was able by a politic adoption 
of some of the heathen Arabian ceremonies into his own rites to 
win men over the more easily to his own cause. At his death in 
623 Mahomet left Arabia practically unified. It is true that rival 
prophets were leading rebellions in various parts of Arabia, 
that the tax-collectors were not always paid, and that the 
warriors of the land were much distressed for want of work 
owing to the brotherhood of Arabs proclaimed by Mahomet. 
The tribes were a seething mass of restlessness, their old feuds 
ready to break out again. But they had realized that they had 
common interests. The power of the foreigner in Arabia was 
broken. Islam promised rich booty for those who fought and 
won, paradise for those who fell. 

Early Caliphs. 1 1. Conquest. — One task of the early caliphs 
was to find an outlet for the restless fighting spirit. Abu Bekr 
(632-634), the first of these caliphs, was a man of simple life and 
profound faith. He understood the intention of Mahomet as to 
foreign nations, and set himself resolutely to carry it out in the 
face of much difficulty. Hence as soon as he assumed office he 
sent out the army already chosen to advance against the Romans 
in the north. The successful reduction of the rebels in Arabia 
enabled him in his first year to send his great general Khalid 
with his Arab warriors first against Persians, then against 
Romans. His early death prevented him from seeing the fruits 
of his policy. Under the second caliph Omar (634-644) the 
Persians were defeated at Kadesiya (Kadessia), and Irak was 
completely subdued and the new cities of Kufa and Basra were 

1 For the general history of the succeeding period see Caliphate; 
Egypt: History, § "Mahommedan." 



266 



ARABIA 



[HISTORY 



Institution 
otaavy. 



founded (635). In the same year Damascus fell into the hands 
of the Arabs under Abu 'Ubaida. In 636 Jerusalem fell and 
received a visit from the caliph. Three years later the fateful 
step was taken of appointing Moawiya (Mu'awiyya) governor of 
Syria. In 640 'Amr-ibn-el-Ass (Amr ibn al-'As) invaded Egypt 
and the following year took Alexandria and founded Fostat 
(which later became Cairo). The victory at Nehavend in 641 
over the Persians, the flight of the last Sassanid king and the 
capture of Rei or Rai (class. Rhagae) in 643 meant the entire 
subjugation of Persia and crowned the conquests of Omar's 
caliphate. The reign of the third caliph Othman (644-656) was 
marked by the beginning of that internal strife which was to 
ruin Arabia; but the foreign conquests continued. In the north 
the Moslem arms reached Armenia and Asia Minor; on the west 
they were successful as far as Carthage on the north coast of 
Africa. After the murder of Othman, 'Ali (656-661) became 
caliph, but Moawiya, governor of Syria, soon rebelled on the 
pretext of avenging the death of Othman. After the battle of 
Siffin (657) arbitration was resorted to for the settlement of the 
rival claims. By a trick 'Ali was deposed (658), and the Omayyad 
dynasty was established with its capital at Damascus. 

During these early years the Arabs had not only made con- 
quests by land, but had found an outlet for their energy at sea. 
In 640 Omar sent a fleet of boats across the Red Sea 
to protect the Moslems on the Abyssinian coast. 
The boats were wrecked. Omar was so terrified by 
this that when Moawiya applied to him for permission to use 
ships for an attack on the islands of the Levant, he resolutely 
refused. Othman was less careful, and allowed a fleet from 
Africa to help in the conquests of the Levant and Asia Minor. 
In 649 he sanctioned the establishment of a maritime service, 
on condition that it should be voluntary. Abu Qais, appointed 
admiral, showed its usefulness by the capture of Cyprus. In 652 
Abu Sarh with a fleet from Egypt won a naval battle over the 
Byzantine fleet near Alexandria. 

2. Internal A fairs. — In the meantime what had become of 
Arabia and its unification? The first task of Abu Bekr had 
been to reduce those rebels who threatened to destroy that unity 
even before it was fully established. This he did by the aid of 
the great general Khalid. First he swept down on the Bani 
Hanifa in Yemama, who with their rival prophet Mosailama 
(Mosailima) and 40,000 men were in arms. The battle of 
Yemama (633) was fierce and decisive. Mosailama was slain. 
The Bani Hanlfa returned to Islam. Bahrein was influenced by 
this battle, and the rebellion there, which was threatening, was 
crushed. Oman was reconquered by Huddhaifa, who became its 
governor. Ikrima settled Mahra. Muhajir, with the help of 
Ikrima, succeeded with difficulty, but thoroughly, in defeating 
Amr ibn Ma'dikarib and Qais ibn 'Abd Yaghuth in Yemen and 
Ashath ibn Qais in Hadramut. The Hejaz and Tehama were 
cleared of the plundering nomads by 'Attab and Tahir. At the 
end of the first year of his caliphate Abu Bekr saw Arabia united 
under Islam. The new national feeling demanded that all 
Arabs should be free men, so the caliph ordained that all Arab 
slaves should be freed on easy terms. The solidarity of Arabia 
survived the first foreign conquests. It was not intended that 
Arabs should settle in the conquered lands except as armies of 
occupation. Thus it was at first forbidden that Arabs should 
buy or possess land in these 'countries. Kufa was to be only a 
military camp, as was Fostat in Egypt. The taxes with the booty 
from conquests were to be sent to Arabia for distribution among 
the Moslems. Omar tried to prevent the advance of conquests 
lest Arabia should suffer. " I would rather the safety of my 
people than thousands of spoil and further conquest." But 
men could not be prevented from pouring out from their homes 
in search of new conquests and more booty. Many of those who 
went forth did not return. They acquired property and rank in 
the new lands. Kufa attracted chiefly men of south Arabia, 
Basra those of the north. Both became great cities, each with 
a population of 1 50,000 to 200,000 Arabians. Yet so long as the 
caliphs lived in Medina, the capital of Arabia was the capital 
of the expanding Arabian empire. To it was brought a large 



share of the booty. The caliphs were chosen there, and there the 
rules for the administration were framed. Thence went out the 
governors to their provinces. Omar was the great organizer 
of Arabian affairs. He compiled the Koran, instituted the civil 
list, regulated the military organization. He, too, desired that 
Mahomet's wish should be carried out and that Arabia should be 
purely Moslem. To this end he expelled the Christians from 
Nejran and gave them lands in Syria and Irak, where they were 
allowed to live in peace on payment of tribute. The Jews, too, 
were shortly after expelled from Khaibar. The secondary posi- 
tion that Arabia was beginning to assume in the Arabian empire 
is clearly marked in the progress of events during the caliphate 
of Othman. In his appointments to governorships and other 
offices, as well as in his distribution of spoil, Othman showed a 
marked preference for the members of his own tribe the Koreish 
(Quraish) and the members of his own family the Bani Omayya 
(Umayya). The other Arab tribes became increasingly jealous 
of the Koreish, while among the Koreish themselves the Hashi- 
mi-te family came to hate the Omayyad, which now had much 
power, although it had been among the last to accept Islam and 
never was very strict in its religious duties. But the quarrels 
which led to the murder of Othman were fomented not so much 
in Arabia as in Ktifa and Basra and Fostat. In these cities the 
rival parties were composed of the most energetic fighting men, 
who were brought into the most intimate contact with one 
another, and who kept up their quarrels from the home land. 
In Kufa a number of the Koreish had settled, and their arrogance 
became insupportable. The governors of all these towns were of 
Othman's own family. After some years of growing dissatisfac- 
tion deputies from these places came to Medina, and the result 
was the murder of the caliph. Syria alone remained loyal to the 
house of Omayya, and Othman had been advised to take refuge 
there, but had refused. Arabia itself counted for little in the 
strife. Yet its prestige was not altogether lost. After the 
murder the rebels \vere unwilling to return home until a new 
caliph had been chosen in the capital. The Egyptian rebels 
managed to gain most influence, and, in accordance with their 
desire, "All was appointed caliph by the citizens of Medina. 
But Medina itself was being corrupted by the constant influx of 
captives, who, employed at first as servants, soon became 
powerful enough to dictate to their masters. In the struggle that 
ensued upon the election of 'Ali, Arabia was involved. Ayesha, 
Talha and Zobair, who were strong in Mecca, succeeded in 
obtaining possession of Basra, but were defeated in 656 at the 
battle of the Camel (see Ali). In the south of Arabia 'Ali suc- 
ceeded in establishing his own governor in Yemen, though the 
government treasure was carried off to Mecca. But the centre 
of strife was not to be Arabia. When 'All left Medina to secure 
Basra, he abandoned it as the capital of the Arabian empire. 
With the success of Moawiya Damascus became the capital of 
the caliphate (658) and Arabia became a mere grovince, though 
always of importance because of its possession, of the two sacred 
cities Mecca and Medina. Both these cities were secured by 
Moawiya in 660, and at the same time Yemen was punished for 
its adherence to 'All. The final blow to any political pretensions 
of Medina was dealt by the caliph when he had his son Yazld 
declared as his successor, thus taking away any claim on the 
part of the citizens of Medina to elect to the caliphate. 

The Omayyads. — The early years of the Omayyads were years 
of constant strife in Arabia. The Kharijites who had opposed 
'All on the ground that he had no right to allow the appeal to 
arbitration, were defeated at Nahrawan or Nahrwan (658), but 
those who escaped became fierce propagandists against the 
Koreish, some claiming that the caliph should be chosen by the 
Faithful from any tribe of the Arabs, some that there should 
be no caliph at all, that God alone was their ruler and that the 
government should be carried on by a council. They broke up 
into many sects, and were long a disturbing political force in 
Arabia as elsewhere. On the death of 'All his house was repre- 
sented by his two sons Hasan and H° sa in (Husain). Hasan 
soon made peace with Moawiya. On the accession of Yazid; 
Hosain refused homage and raised an army, but was slain at 



HISTORY] 



ARABIA 



267 



Kerbela (680). 'Abdallah ibn Zobair (of the house of Hashim) 
immediately stepped forward in Mecca as the avenger of 'All's 
family and the champion of religion. The two sacred cities 
supported him. Medina was besieged and sacked by the troops 
of Yazid (682) and Mecca was besieged the following year. The 
siege was raised in the third month on the news of the death of 
Yazid, but not before the Ka'ba had been destroyed. "Abdallah 
remained in Mecca recognized as caliph in Arabia, and soon 
after in Egypt and even a part of Syria. He defeated the troops 
of Merwan I., but could not win the support of the Kharijites. 
In 691 Abdalmalik ('Abdul-Malik) determined to crush his 
rival and sent his general Hajjaj against Mecca. The siege was 
begun in March 692, and in October the city was taken and 
'Abdallah slain. Abdalmalik was now supreme in Arabia and 
throughout the Moslem world. During the remaining years 
of the Omayyad dynasty (i.e. until 750) little is heard of Arabia 
in history. The conquests of Islam in Spain on the one side 
and India on the other had little or no effect on it. It was merely 
a province. 

The 'Abbasids. — The accession of Abul 'Abbas (of the house 
of Hashim) and the transference of the capital of the caliphate 
from Damascus to Kufa, then Anbar and soon after (in 760) 
to Bagdad meant still further degradation to Arabia and Arabs. 
From the beginning the 'Abbasids depended for help on Persians 
and Turks, and the chief offices of state were frequently filled 
with foreigners. In one thing only the Arabs conquered to the 
end; that was in their language. The study of Arabic was taken 
up by lexicographers, grammarians and poets (mostly of foreign 
origin) with a zeal rarely shown elsewhere. The old Arabian 
war spirit was dying. Although the Arabians, as a rule, were in 
favour of the Omayyad family, they could not affect the succes- 
sion of the 'Abbasids. They returned more and more to their 
old inter-tribal disputes. They formed now not only a mere 
branch of the empire of the caliphate, but a branch deriving 
little life from and giving less to the main stock. In 762 there 
was a rebellion in favour of a descendant of 'All, but it was put 
down with great severity by the army of the caliph Mansur. 
A more local 'Alyite revolt in Mecca and Medina was crushed 
in 785. In the contest between the two sons of Harun al Rashld 
all Arabia sided with Mamun (812). In 845-846 the lawless 
raids of Bedouin tribes compelled the caliph Wathiq to send 
his Turkish general Bogha, who was more successful in the north 
than in the centre and south of Arabia in restoring peace. 

The Carmathians. — Towards the close of the 9th century 
Arabia was disturbed by the rise of a new movement which during 
the next hundred years dominated the peninsula, and at its 
close left it shattered never to be united again. In the year 
880 Yemen was listening to the propaganda of the new sect of 
the Carmathians (q.v.) or followers of Hamdan Qarmat. Four 
years later these had become a public force. In 900 'Abu Sa'id 
al-Jannabi, who had been sent to Bahrein by Hamdan, had secured 
a large part of this province and had won the city of Katif (Ketif ) 
which contained many Jews and Persians. The Arabs who 
lived more inland were mostly Bedouin who found the obligations 
of Islam irksome, and dtfTiot seem to have made a very vigorous 
opposition to the Carmathians who took Hajar the capital of 
Bahrein in 903. From this they made successful attacks on 
Yemama (Yamama), and attempts only partially successful 
at first at Oman. In 906 the court at Bagdad learned that 
these sectaries had gained almost all Yemen and were threatening 
Mecca and Medina. Abu Sa'id was assassinated (913) in his 
palace at Lahsa (which in 926 was fortified and became the 
Carmathian capital of Bahrein). His son Sa'id succeeded him, 
but proved too weak and was deposed and succeeded by his 
brother Abu Tahir. His success was constant and the caliphate 
was brought very low by him. In Arabia he subjugated Oman, 
and swooping down on the west in 929 he horrified the Moslem 
world by capturing Mecca and carrying off the sacred black 
stone to Bahrein. The Fatimite caliph 'Obaidallah (see Fati- 
Icites), to whom Abu Tahir professed allegiance, publicly wrote 
to him to restore the stone, but there is some reason to believe 
that he secretly encouraged him to retain it. In 939, however, 



the stone was restored and pilgrimages to the holy cities were 
allowed to pass unmolested on payment of a tax. So long as 
Abu Tahir lived the Carmathians controlled Arabia. After 
his death, however, they quarrelled with the Fatimite rulers 
of Egypt (969) and began to lose their influence. In 985 they 
were completely defeated in Irak, and soon after lost control 
of the pilgrimages. man recovered its independence. Three 
years later Katif, at that time their chief city, was besieged 
and taken by a Bedouin sheik, and subsequently their political 
power in Arabia came to an end. It was significant that their 
power fell into the hands of Bedouins. Arabia was now com- 
pletely disorganized, and was only nominally subject to the 
caliphate. The attempt of Mahomet to unify Arabia had 
failed. The country was once more split up into small govern- 
ments, more or less independent, and groups of wandering tribes 
carrying on their petty feuds. Of the history of these during 
the next few centuries little is known, except in the case of the 
Hejaz. Here the presence of the sacred cities led writers to 
record their annals (cf. F. Wiistenfeld's Die Chroniken der 
Stadt Mekka, 4 vols., Leipzig, 1857-1861). The two cities were 
governed by Arabian nobles (sherlfs), often at feud with one 
another, recognizing formally the overlordship of the caliph 
at Bagdad or the caliph of Egypt. Thus in 966 the name of the 
caliph Moti was banished from the prayers at Mecca, and an 
'Alyite took possession of the government of the city and recog- 
nized the Egyptian caliph as his master. About a century later 
(1075-1094) the 'Abbasid caliph was again recognized as spiritual 
head owing to the success in arms of his protector, the Seljuk 
Malik-Shah. With the fall of the Bagdad caliphate all attempts 
at control from that quarter came to an end. After the visit of 
the Sultan Bibars (1269) Mecca was governed by an amir de- 
pendent on Egypt. Outside the two cities anarchy prevailed, 
and the pilgrimage was frequently unsafe owing to marauding 
Bedouins. In 1517 the Osmanli Turkish sultan Sellm conquered 
Egypt, and having received the right of succession to the caliphate 
was solemnly presented by the sherif of Mecca with the keys of 
the city, and recognized as the spiritual head of Islam and ruler 
of the Hejaz. At the same time Yemen, which since the 9th 
century had been in the power of a number of small dynasties 
ruling in Zubed, San'a, Sa'da and Aden, passed into the hands 
of the Turk. 

For the history of Yemen during this period cf. H. C. Kay, 
Omarah's History of Yaman (London, 1892), and S. Lane-Poole, 
The Mahommedan Dynasties, pp. 87-103 (Westminster, 1894). 
Little more than a century later (1630), a Yemen noble Khasim 
succeeded in expelling the Turk and establishing a native imamate, 
which lasted until 1871. For descriptions of it in the 1 8th century 
cf. C. Niebuhr's accounts of his travels in Arabia in 1761. 

Oman. — Since the separation from the caliphate (before 
1000 a.d.) Oman had remained independent. For more than 
a century it was governed by five elected imams, who were 
chosen from the tribe of al-Azd and generally lived at Nizwa. 
After them the Bani Nebhan gained the upper hand and estab- 
lished a succession of kings (maliks) who governed from 11 54 
to 1406. During this time the country was twice invaded by 
Persians. The " kings of Hormtiz " claimed authority over the 
coast land until the beginning of the 16th century. In 1435 
the people rose against the tyranny of the Bani Nebhan and 
restored the imamate of the tribe al-Azd. In 1508 the Portu- 
guese under Albuquerque seized most of the east coast of Oman. 
In 1624 a new dynasty arose in the interior, when Nasir ibn 
Murshid of the Yariba (Ya'aruba) tribe (originally from Yemen) 
was elected imam and established his capital at Rustak. He 
was able to subdue the petty princes of the country, and the 
Portuguese were compelled to give up several towns and pay 
tribute for their residence at Muscat. About 1651 the Portuguese 
were finally expelled from this city, and about 1698 from the 
Omanite settlements on the east coast of Africa. 

For the history of Oman from 661 to 1856 cf. G. P. Badger, 
History of the Imams and Seyyids of Oman by Salil-ibn-Razik (London, 
Hakluyt Society, 1871). (G. W. T.) 

Wahhabi Movement. — Modern Arabian history begins with 
that of the Wahhabi movement in the middle of the 18th century. 
Its originator, Mahommed Ibn Abdul Wahhab, was born (1691) 



268 



ARABIA 



[HISTORY 



at Ayana in Nejd, and after studying in Basra and Damascus, 
and making the pilgrimage to Mecca returned to his native 
country and settled down at Huremala near Deraiya. The abuses 
and corruptions which had overgrown the practice of orthodox 
Islam had deeply impressed him, and he set to work to combat 
them, and to inculcate on all good Moslems a return to the 
pure simplicity of their original faith. In 1742 Mahommed 
Ibn Saud, sheik of Deraiya, accepted his doctrines, and enforced 
them by his sword with such effect that before his death in 1765 
the whole of eastern Nejd and El Hasa was converted to the 
faith of Abdul Wahhab, and accepted the political supremacy 
of Ibn Saud. His son and successor, Abdul Aziz, in a rapid 
series of successful campaigns, extended his dominion and that 
of the reformed faith far beyond the limits of Nejd. His attacks 
on the pilgrim caravans, begun in 1783 and constantly repeated, 
startled the Mahommedan world, 1 and compelled the attention 
of the sultan, as the nominal protector of the faithful. In 1798 
a Turkish force was sent from Bagdad into El Hasa, but was 
compelled to retreat without accomplishing anything, and its 
discomfiture added much to the renown of the Wahhabi power. 
In 1801 Saud, son of the amir Abdul Aziz, led an expedition to 
the Euphrates, and on the festival of Bairam, the 20th of April, 
stormed Kerbela, put the defenders to the sword, destroyed the 
sacred tomb, scattered the sacred relics and returned laden with 
the treasures, accumulated during centuries in the sanctuary 
of the Shia faith. Mecca itself was taken; plundering was for- 
bidden, but the tombs of the saints and all objects of veneration, 
were ruthlessly destroyed, and all ceremonies which seemed in 
the eye of the stern puritan conqueror to suggest the taint of 
idolatry were forbidden. 

On the 14th of October 1802 the amir Abdul Aziz, at the age of 
eighty-two years, was murdered by a Shia fanatic when at prayers 
in the mosque of Deraiya, and Saud, who had for many years 
led the Wahhabi armies, became the reigning amir. In 1804 
Medina was taken and with its fall all resistance ceased. The 
Wahhabi empire had now attained its zenith, a settled govern- 
ment was established able to enforce law and order in the desert 
and in the towns, and a spirit of Arabian nationality had grown 
up which bade fair to extend the Wahhabi dominion over all 
the Arab race. It already, however, bore within it the germ of 
decay, the accumulation of treasure in the capital had led to a 
corruption of the simple manners of the earlier times; the 
exhaustion of the tribes through the heavy blood tax had roused 
discontent among them; the plundering of the holy places, 
the attacks on the pilgrim caravans under the escort of Turkish 
soldiers, and finally, in 18 10, the desecration of the tomb of 
Mahomet and the removal of its costly treasures, raised a cry 
of dismay throughout the Mahommedan world, and made it 
clear even to the Turkish sultan that unless the Wahhabi 
power were crushed his claims to the caliphate were at an 
end. 

But Turkey was herself fully occupied by affairs in Europe, 
and to Mehemet Ali, then pasha of Egypt, was deputed the task 
of bringing the Wahhabis into subjection. In October 1811 an 
expedition consisting of 10,000 men under Tusun Pasha, the 
pasha's son, a youth of sixteen, landed in Hejaz without opposi- 
tion. Saud with his main forces had started northwards to 
attack Bagdad, but returning at once he met and defeated 
Tusun with great loss and compelled him to retire. Medina 
and subsequently Mecca were eventually taken by the Egyptians, 
but in spite of continual reinforcements they could do little 
more than hold their own in Hejaz. In 1813 Mehemet Ali was 
compelled to take the field himself with fresh troops, but was 
unable to achieve any decisive success, and in 1814 Tusun was 
again defeated beyond Taif. In May 1814 Saud died, and his 
son, Abdallah, attempted to negotiate, but Mehemet Ali refused all 
overtures, and in January 1815 advanced into Nejd, defeated the 
Wahhabi army and occupied Ras, then the chief town in Kasim. 
Terms of peace were made, but on the retirement of the Egyptians 
Abdallah refused to carry out the conditions agreed on, which 

1 For further details of this period, see Egypt : History, " Mahom- 
medan Period," § 8. 



included the return of the jewels plundered by his father, and 
another campaign had to be fought before his submission was 
obtained. Ibrahim Pasha replaced Tusun in command, and on 
reaching Arabia in September 1816 his first aim was to gain 
over the great Bedouin tribes holding the roads between Hejaz 
and his objective in Nejd; having thus secured his line of advance 
he pushed on boldly and defeated Abdallah at Wiya, where he 
put to death all prisoners taken; thence rapidly advancing, 
with contingents of the friendly Harb and Muter tribes in 
support of his regular troops, he laid siege to Ras; this place, 
however, held out and after a four months' siege he was com- 
pelled to give up the attack. Leaving it on one side he pushed 
on eastwards, took Aneza after six days' bombardment and 
occupied Bureda. Here he waited two months for reinforce- 
ments, and with his Bedouin contingent, strengthened by the 
adhesion of the Ateba and Bani Khalid tribes, advanced on 
Shakra in Wushm, which fell in January 1818 after a regular 
siege. After destroying Huremala and massacring its inhabit- 
ants, he arrived before Deraiya on the 14th of April 1818. 
For six months the siege went on with varying fortune, but at 
last the courage and determination of Ibrahim triumphed, 
and on the 9th of September, after a heroic resistance, Abdallah, 
with a remnant of four hundred men, was compelled to surrender. 
The Wahhabi leader was soon after sent to Constantinople, 
where, in spite of Mehemet Ali's intercession, he and the com- 
panions who had followed him in his captivity were condemned 
to death, and after being paraded through the city with ignominy 
for three days were finally beheaded. 

Deraiya was razed to the ground and the principal towns of 
Nejd were compelled to admit Egyptian garrisons; but though 
the Arabs saw themselves powerless to stand before disciplined 
troops, the Egyptians, on the other hand, had to confess that 
without useless sacrifices they could not retain their hold on the 
interior. 

In 1824 Turki, son of the unfortunate Abdallah, headed a 
rising which resulted in the re-establishment of the Wahhabi 
state with Riad as its new capital; and during the next ten years 
he consolidated his power, paying tribute to and under the 
nominal suzerainty of Egypt till his murder in 1834. His son, 
Fesal, succeeded him, but in 1836 on his refusal to pay tribute 
an Egyptian force was sent to depose him and he was taken 
prisoner and sent to Cairo, while a rival claimant, Khalid, was 
established as amir in Riad. Mehemet Ali and his son Ibrahim 
Pasha were, however, now committed to their conflict with 
Turkey for Syria and Asia Minor, and had no troops to spare 
for the thankless task of holding the Arabian deserts; the 
garrisons were gradually withdrawn, and in 1842 Fesal, who 
had escaped from his prison at Cairo reappeared and was every- 
where recognized as amir. The few remaining Egyptian troops 
were ejected from Riad, and with them all semblance of Egyptian 
or Turkish rule disappeared from central Arabia. 

For a time it looked as if the supremacy of the Wahhabi 
empire was to be renewed; El Hasa, Harik, Kasim and Asir 
returned to their allegiance, but over Oman and Yemen Fesal 
never re-established his dominion, and the Bahrein sheiks 
with British support kept their independence. 

A rival state had, however, arisen, under Abdallah Ibn Rashid 
in Jebel Shammar. Driven into exile owing to a feud between 
his family and the Ibn Ali, the leading family of the 
Shammar, Abdallah came to Riad in 1830, and was 
favourably received by the amir Turki. In 1834 he 
was with Fesal on an expedition against El Hasa when news came 
of the amir's murder by his cousin Masharah. By Abdallah's 
advice the expedition was abandoned; Fesal hastened back 
with all his forces to Riad, and invested the citadel where 
Masharah had taken refuge, but failed to gain possession of it, 
until Abdallah with two companions found his way into the 
palace, killed Masharah, and placed Fesal on the throne of his 
father. As a reward for his services Abdallah was appointed 
governor of Jebel Shammar, and had already established himself 
in Hail when the Egyptian expedition of 1836 removed Fesal 
temporarily from Nejd. During the exile of the latter he steadily 



Iba 
Rashid. 



HISTORY] 



ARABIA 



269 



consolidated his power, extending his influence more especially 
over the desert tribes, till on Fesal's return in 1842 he had 
created a state subject only in name to that of which Riad was 
the capital. 

On the death of Abdallah in 1843, his son Talal succeeded. 
He set himself to work to establish law and order throughout 
the state, to arrange its finances, and to encourage the settlement 
in Hail of artificers and merchants from abroad; the building 
of the citadel and palace commenced by Mehemet Ali, and 
continued by Abdallah Ibn Rashid, was completed by Talal. The 
town walls were strengthened, new wells dug, gardens planted, 
mosques and schools built. His uncle Obed, to whom equally 
with Abdallah is due the foundation of the Ibn Rashid dynasty, 
. laboured to extend the Shammar boundaries. Khaibar, Tema 
and Jauf became tributary to Hail. 

Though tolerant in religion Talal was careful to avoid the 
suspicion of lukewarmness towards the Wahhabi formulas. 
Luxury in clothing and the use of tobacco were prohibited; 
attendance at the mosque was enforced: any doubt as to his 
orthodoxy was silenced by the amount and regularity of the 
tribute sent by him to Riad. Equally guarded was his attitude 
to the Turkish authorities; it is not improbable that Talal had 
also entered into relations with the viceroy of Egypt to ensure 
his position in case of a collision with the Porte. During his 
twenty years' reign Jebel Shammar became a model state, where 
justice and security ruled in a manner before unheard of. Fesal 
may well have watched with jealous anxiety the growing strength 
of his neighbour's state as compared with his own, where all 
progress was arrested by the deadening tyranny of religious 
fanaticism. 

On the nth of March 1868 Talal, smitten with an incurable 
malady, fell by his own hand and was succeeded by his brother 
Matab; after a brief reign he was murdered by his 
Utahom? ne Ph ews > tne e lder of whom, Bandar, became amir. 
medt Mahommed, the third son of the amir Abdallah, was at 

the time absent-; with a view of getting his uncle into 
his power, Bandar invited him to return to Hail, and on his arrival 
went out to meet him accompanied by Hamud, son of Obed, and 
a small following. Warned by a hurried sign by Hamud that his 
life was in danger, Mahommed at once attacked Bandar, stabbed 
him and took possession of the citadel; a general massacre of 
all members of the house of Ibn Rashid followed, and next day 
Mahommed appeared with his cousin Hamud in the market-place 
of Hail, and announced his assumption of the amirship. A 
strong and capable ruler, he soon established his authority over 
all northern and western Nejd, and in 1872 the opportunity 
arrived for his intervention in the east. In that year Abdallah, 
who had succeeded Fesal in Riad in 1867, was deposed, but with 
the assistance of Mahommed was reinstated; two years later, 
however, he was again deposed and forced to seek refuge at Hail, 
from which place he appealed for assistance to the Turkish 
authorities at Bagdad. Midhat Pasha, then governor-general, 
seized the occasion of asserting Turkish dominion on the Persian 
Gulf coast, and in 1875, in spite of British protests, occupied 
El Hasa and established a new province under the title of Nejd, 
with its headquarters at Hofuf , of which Abdallah was appointed 
governor. This was an event of some importance, as it con- 
situted the first Turkish claim to the sovereignty over Nejd 
abandoned by Egypt thirty-three years earlier. The Turks did 
not support their client by advancing into Nejd itself, and he 
and his rivals were left to fight out their battles among 
themselves. Turkey was indeed too much occupied by the war 
with Russia to pay much attention to Arab affairs, though 
a few years later she attempted to occupy Bahrein by a 
coup de- main, which was only frustrated by the action of a 
British gunboat. 

Owing to the dissensions among the ruling family of Riad, 
che towns of eastern Nejd gradually reverted to their former 
condition of independence, but menaced in turn by the growing 
power of Hail, they formed a coalition under the leadership of 
Zamil, sheik of Aneza, and in the spring of 1801, Aneza, Bureda, 
Shakra, Ras and Riad assembled their contingents to contest 



with Ibn Rashid the supremacy in Nejd. The latter had besides 
20, 000 of his own south Shammar tribesmen, the whole strength 
of the Harb Bedouins, some 10,000 men, and an additional 
support of 1000 mounted men from his kinsmen, the northern 
Shammar from the Euphrates, while the Muter and Ateba tribes 
took part with the allies. The total strength of each side 
amounted to about 30,000 men. Zamil's forces held a strong 
position between Aneza and Bureda, and for over a month 
desultory fighting went on; finally an attack was made against 
the defenders' centre, covered by 20,000 camel riders; the men 
of Aneza broke and the whole allied forces fled in disorder; Zamil 
and his eldest son were killed, as were also two of the Ibn Saud 
family, while the remainder were taken prisoners. Aneza and 
Bureda surrendered the same day, and shortly after Ras, Shakra 
and Riad tendered their submission. 

This victory placed the whole of northern and central Arabia 
under the supremacy of Mahommed Ibn Rashid, which he held 
undisputed during the rest of his life. 

On his death in 1897 his nephew Abdul-Aziz, son of the 
murdered amir Matab, succeeded; during his reign a new 
element has been introduced into Nejd politics by the 
rising importance of Kuwet (Koweit) and the attempts hbtoty. 
of Turkey to obtain possession of its important harbour. 
In 1901 a quarrel arose between Sheik Mubarak of Kuwet and 
the amir of Hail whose cause was supported by Turkey. A force 
was equipped at Basra under Ahmad Feizi Pasha with the 
intention of occupying Kuwet; Mubarak thereupon appealed to 
Great Britain and action was taken which prevented the Turkish 
designs from being carried out. Kuwet was not formally placed 
under British protection, but it was officially announced by the 
government on the 5th of May 1903 " that the establishment of a 
naval base or fortified port in the Persian Gulf by any other 
power would be regarded as a very grave menace to British 
interests which would certainly be resisted with all the means at 
its disposal." 

In the meantime Sheik Mubarak had found useful allies in 
the Muntafik Arabs from the lower Euphrates, and the Wahhabis 
of Riad; the latter under the amir Ibn Saud marched against 
Ibn Rashid, who at the instigation of the Porte had again 
threatened Kuwet (Koweit) , compelled him to retire to his own 
territory and took possession of the towns of Bureda and Aneza. 
Sheik Mubarak and his allies continued their advance, defeated 
Ibn Rashid in two engagements on the 22nd of July and the 26th 
of September 1904, and drove him back on his capital, Hail. 
The Porte now made another effort to assist its protege; two 
columns were despatched from Medina and Basra respectively, 
to relieve Hail, and drive out the Wahhabis. Ahmad Feizi Pasha, 
in command of the Basra column, 4200 strong, crossed the 
desert and reached the wells of Lina, 200 m. from Hail, on the 
5th of March 1905; here, however, he received orders to halt and 
negotiate before proceeding farther. The Turkish government 
realized by this time the strength of the hostile combination, 
and in view of the serious state of affairs in Yemen, hesitated to 
undertake another campaign in the deserts of Nejd. Arrange- 
ments were accordingly made with the Wahhabis, and on the 
10th of April Ahmad Feizi Pasha left Lina, ostensibly with the 
object of protecting the pilgrim road, and joined the Medina 
column by the end of the month. Bureda and Aneza were 
occupied without opposition, the rebellious sheiks amnestied by 
the sultan and loaded with gifts, and formal peace was made 
between the rival factions. 

European influence was not felt in Arabia until the arrival 
of the Portuguese in the eastern seas, following on the discovery 
of the Cape route. In 1506 Hormuz was taken by 
Albuquerque, and Muscat and the coast of Oman (q.v.) history ot 

• 11 1 t, .„ ■ t i- European 

were occupied by the Portuguese till 1650. In 1516 i n fi uence , 
their fleets appeared in the Red Sea and an unsuccessful 
attempt was made against Jidda; but the effective occupation 
of Yemen by the Turks in the next few years frustrated any 
designs the Portuguese may have had in S.W. Arabia. Even in 
Oman their hold on the country was limited to Muscat and the 
adjacent ports, while the interior was ruled by the old Yariba 



270 



ARABIA 



[HISTORY 



(Ya-'aruba) dynasty from their capital at Rustak. The Persian 
occupation, which followed that of the Portuguese, came to an 
end in the middle of the 18th century, when Ahmad Ibn Said 
expelled the invaders and in 1759 established the Ghafari 
dynasty which still reigns in Oman. He was succeeded by his 
son, who in 1798 made a treaty with the East India Company with 
the object of excluding the French from Oman, and the connexion 

with Great Britain was further strengthened during 
terventio'n tne ^ on S reign of his grandson Sultan Said, 1804-1856. 
in Oman. During the earlier years of his reign he was constantly 

at war with the Wahhabi empire', to which Oman 
became for a time tributary. The piracies committed by the 
Jawasimi Arabs in the gulf compelled the intervention of England, 
and in 1810 their strongholds were destroyed by a British-Indian 
expedition. The overthrow of the Wahhabis in 181 7 restored 
Sultan Said to independence; he equipped and armed on 
Western models a fleet built in Indian ports, and took possession 
of Sokotra and Zanzibar, as well as the Persian coast north of 
the straits of Hormuz as far east as Gwadur, while by his liberal 
policy at home Sohar, Barka and Muscat became prosperous 
commercial ports. 

On his death in 1856 the kingdom was divided, Majld, a 
younger son, taking Zanzibar, while the two elder sons contested 
the succession to Oman. The eldest, Thuweni, with British 
support, finally obtained the throne, and in 1862 an engagement 
was entered into by the French and English governments re- 
specting the independence of the sultans of Oman. He was 
assassinated in 1866, and his successor, Seyyid Turki, reigned 
till 1 888. On his death several claimants disputed the succession ; 
ultimately his son Fesal was recognized by the British govern- 
ment, and was granted a subsidy from British-Indian revenues, 
in consideration of which he engaged not to cede any of his 
territory without the consent of the British government; similar 
engagements have been entered into by the tribes who occupy 
the south coast from the borders of Oman westward to the 
straits of Bab-el-Mandeb. 

The opening of the overland route to India again brought 
the west coast of Arabia into importance. Aden was occupied 

by the British in 1839. The Hejaz coast and some 
sphere of °^ tne Yemen ports were still held by Mehemet Ali, 
influence, as viceroy of Egypt, but on his final withdrawal from 

Arabia in 1845, Hejaz came under direct Turkish rule, 
and the conquest of Yemen in 1872 placed the whole Red Sea 
littoral (with the exception of the Midian coast, ceded by Egypt 
on the accession of Abbas Hilmi Pasha)under Ottoman administra- 
tion. The island of Perim at the southern entrance of the Red Sea 
has been a British possession since 1857, while the promontory 
of Shekh Said on the Arabian side of the strait is in Turkish 
occupation. In order to define the limits between Turkish 
territory and that of the independent Arab tribes in political 
relations with Great Britain, a joint commission of British and 
Turkish officers in 1 902-1 905 laid down a boundary line from 
Shekh Said to a point on the river Bana, 12 m. north-east of the 
small town of Kataba, from which it is continued in a north- 
easterly direction up to the great desert. This delimitation 
places the whole of southern Arabia, east of this line, within the 
British sphere of influence, which thus includes the district 
surrounding Aden (q.v.), the Hadramut and Oman with its 
dependencies. 

The provinces of Hejaz and Yemen are each administered by 
a Turkish governor-general, with headquarters at Taif and Sana 

respectively; the country is nominally divided up 
rule ^ into divisions and districts under minor officials, but 

Turkish rule has never been acquiesced in by the 
inhabitants, and beyond the larger towns, all of which are held 
by strong garrisons, Turkish authority hardly exists. The 
powerful Bedouin tribes of Hejaz have always asserted their 
independence, and are only kept quiet by the large money 
payments made them by the sultan on the occasion of the 
annual pilgrimage to the holy cities. A large part of Asir 
and northern Yemen has never been visited by Turkish 
troops, and such revenues as are collected, mainly from 



vexatious customs and transit duties, are quite insufficient 
to meet the salaries of the officials, while the troops, ill-fed 
and their pay indefinitely in arrears, live on the country as 
best they can. 

A serious revolt broke out in Yemen in 1892. A Turkish 
detachment collecting taxes in the Bani Merwan lands north 
of Hodeda was destroyed by a body of Arabs. This 
reverse set all Yemen aflame; under the leadership Jevoit. 
of the imam, who had, since the Turkish occupation, 
lived in retirement at Sada, 120 m. north of the capital, the power- 
ful tribes between Asir and Sana advanced southwards, occupied 
the principal towns and besieged the few Turkish fortified posts 
that still held out. In many cases the garrisons, Arab troops 
from Syria, went over to the insurgents. Meanwhile, reinforce- 
ments under General Ahmad Feizi Pasha reached Hodeda, 
Manakha was retaken, Sana relieved, and by the end of January 
1893 the country with the exception of the northern mountainous 
districts was reconquered. 

A state of intermittent rebellion, however, continued, and in 
1904 a general revolt took place with which the normal garrison 
of Yemen, the 7 th army corps, was quite unable to cope. The 
military posts were everywhere besieged, and Sana, the capital, 
was cut off from all communication with the coast. During 
February 1905 reinforcements were sent up which raised the 
garrison of Sana to a strength of eight battalions, and in March 
a further reinforcement of about the same strength arrived, 
and fought its way into the capital with the loss of almost all 
its guns and train. The position was then desperate, wholesale 
desertion and starvation had decimated the garrison, and three 
weeks later Ali Riza Pasha, the Turkish commander,, was com- 
pelled to surrender. The fall of Sana made a deep impression 
at Constantinople, every effort was made to hasten out reinforce- 
ments, the veteran Ahmad Feizi Pasha was nominated to the 
supreme command, and Anatolian troops in place of the unre- 
liable Syrian element were detailed. The scale of the queries
may be judged from the fact that the total number of troops 
mobilized up to the beginning of July 1905 amounted to 126 
battalions, 8 squadrons and 15 batteries; the rebel leader 
Mahommed Yahiya had at this time a following of 50,000. 

By the end of June, Ahmad Feizi Pasha was in a position to 
advance on Manakha, where he organized an efficient transport, 
rallied the scattered remnants of Ali Riza's army, and with the 
newly arrived troops had by the middle of July a force of some 
40 battalions available for the advance on Sana. He left 
Manakha on the 17 th of July, and after almost daily fighting 
reached Sana on the 30th of August; on the 31st he entered 
the city without serious opposition, the insurgents having 
retreated northward. 

Authorities. — D. G. Hogarth, Penetration of A rabia (London, 
1904) ; C. Niebuhr, Travels and Description of Arabia (Amsterdam, 
1774) ; A. Zehme, Arabien und die Araber seit Hundert Jahren (Halle, 
I 875); J. L. Burckhardt, Travels in Arabia (London, 1829); R. F. 
Burton, Pilgrimage to El Medinah and Meccah (London, 1855), 
Midian revisited (1879); W. G. Palgrave, Central and Eastern 
Arabia (London, 1865); C. Doughty, Arabia Deserta (Cambridge,' 
1888), and an abridgment, containing mainly the personal narra- 
tive, under the title of Wanderings in Arabia (London, 1908) ; 
L. van den Berg, Le Hadramut et les colonies arabes, &c. (Batavia, 
1885); C. Huber, Journal d'un voyage en Arabie (Paris, 1891); 
J. Euting, Reise in inner Arabien (Leiden, 1896); E. Nolde, Reise 
nach inner Arabien (Brunswick, 1895); L. Hirsch, Reise in Sud 
Arabien (Leiden, 1897); J. T. Bent, Southern Arabia (1895); 
R. Manzoni, II Yemen (Rome, 1884) ; A. Deflers, Voyage en Yemen 
(Paris, 1889); J. Halevy, Journal Asiatique (1872); Lady Anne 
Blunt, Pilgrimage to Nejd (London, 1881); E. Glaser, Petermann's 
Mitt. (1886, 1888 and 1889); W. B. Harris, Journey through Yemen 
(Edinburgh, 1893) ; J. R. Wellsted, Travels in Arabia (London, 
1838); Capt. F. M. Hunter, Aden (London, 1877). Consult also 
Proc. R.G.S. and Geogr. Journal. For geology see H. J. Carter, 
" Memoir on the Geology of the South-East Coast of Arabia," 
Journ. Bombay Branch Roy. Asiat. Soc. vol. iv. pp. 21-96 (1852); 
Doughty's Arabia Deserta'; W. F. Hume, The Rift Valleys and 
Geology of Eastern Sinai (London, 1901). For ancient geography of 
Arabia :— A. Sprenger, Alte Geographic Arabiens (Berne, 1875); 
E. H. Bunbury, History of Ancient Geography (London, 1883); 
D. H. Muller, Hamd<a,ni's Geographic (Leiden, 1884); E. Glaser, 
Geschichte und Geographic Arabiens (Berlin, 1890). (R. A. W.) 



LITERATURE] 



ARABIA 



271 



Literature 

The literature of Arabia has its origin in the songs, impro- 
visations, recitations and stories of the pre-Mahommedan Arabs. 
Of written literature in those days there was, so far as we know, 
none. But where books failed memory was strong and the 
power of retaining things heard was not confined to a professional 
class. At every festive meeting many could contribute a poem 
or a story, many could even improvise the one or the other. 
When members of different tribes met in peace (as at the fair 
of 'Ukaz) the most skilful reciters strove to maintain the honour 
of their own people, and a ready improviser was held in high 
esteem. The smartest epigrams, the fairest similes, the keenest 
satires, spoken or sung on such occasions, were treasured in the 
memory of the hearers and carried by them to their homes. 
But the experience of all peoples in that memory requires to be 
helped by form. Sentences became balanced and were made 
clear by some sort of definite ending. The simplest form of this 
in Arabian literature is the saj' or rhymed prose, in which the 
sentences are usually (though not always) short and end in a 
rhyme or assonance. Mahomet used this form in many parts 
of the Koran (e.g. Sura, 81). The next step was the introduction 
of metre into the body of the sentence and the restriction of 
the passages to a definite length. This in its simplest form gave 
rise to the rajaz verses, where each half-line ends in the same 
rhyme and consists of three feet of the measure H - <-> - . Other 
metres were introduced later until sixteen altogether were re- 
cognized. In all forms the rhyme is the same throughout the 
poem, and is confined to the second half of the line except in the 
first line where the two halves rhyme. While, however, these 
measures were in early use, they were not systematically analysed 
or their rules enunciated until the time of Khalll ibn Ahmad 
in the 8th century. Two other features of Arabian poetry are 
probably connected with the necessity for aiding the memory. 
The first of these is the requirement that each line should have 
a complete sense in itself; this produces a certain jerkiness, 
and often led among the Arabs to displacement in the order 
of the lines in a long poem. The other feature, peculiar to the 
long poem (qasida, elegy), is that, whatever, its real object, 
whatever its metre, it has a regular scheme in the arrangement 
of its material. It begins with a description of the old camping- 
ground, before which the poet calls on his companion to stop, 
while he bewails the traces of those who have left for other places. 
Then he tells of his love and how be had suffered from it, how he 
had journeyed through the desert (this part often contains some 
of the most famous descriptions and praises of animals) until 
his beast became thin and worn-out. Then at last comes the 
real subject of the poem, usually the panegyric of some man of 
influence or wealth to whom the poet has come in hope of reward 
and before whom he recites the poem. 

Poetry. — The influence of the poet in pre-Mahommedan days 
was very great. As his name, ash-Shd'ir, " the knowing man," 
indicates, he was supposed to have more than natural knowledge 
and power. Panegyric and satire (hija.') were his chief instru- 
ments. The praise of the tribe in well-chosen verses ennobled 
it throughout the land, a biting satire was enough to destroy 
its reputation (cf. I. Goldziher's Abhandlungen zur arabischen 
Philologie, i. pp. 1-105). Before Mahomet the ethics of the 
Arabs were summed up in muruwwa (custom). Hospitality, 
generosity, personal bravery were the subjects of praise; mean- 
ness and cowardice those of satire. The existence of poetry 
among the northern Arabs was known to the Greeks even in the 
4th century (cf. St Nilos in Migne's Palrologia Graeca, vol. 79, 
col. 648, and Sozomen's Ecclesiastical History, bk. 6, ch. 38). 
Women as well as men composed and recited poems before the 
days of the Prophet (cf. L. Cheikho's Poetesses of the Jahiliyya, 
in Arabic, Beirut, 1897). 

The transmission of early Arabic poetry has been very im- 
perfect. Many of the reciters were slain in battle, and it was 
not till the 8th to the 10th centuries and even later that the 
earliest collections of these poems were made. Many have to 
be recovered from grammars, dictionaries, &c, where single 



lines or groups of lines are quoted to illustrate the proper use 
of words, phrases or idioms. Moreover, many a reciter was not 
content to declaim the genuine verses of ancient poets, but 
interpolated some of his own composition, and the change of 
religion introduced by Islam led to the mutilation of many 
verses to suit the doctrines of the new creed. 1 

The language of the poems, as of all the best Arabian literature, 
was that of the desert Arabs of central Arabia; and to use it 
aright was the ambition of poets and scholars even in the Abbasid 
period. For the man of the towns its vocabulary was too copious 
to be easily understood, and in the age of linguistic studies 
many commentaries were written to explain words and idioms. 

Of the pre-Mahommedan poets the most famous were the six 
whose poems were collected by Asma'i about the beginning of 
the 9th century (ed. W. Ahlwardt, The Diwans of the Six Ancient 
Arabic Poets, London, 1870). Single poems of four of these — 
Amru-ul-Qais, Tarafa, Zuhair and 'Antara — appear in the 
Mo'allakat (q.v.). The other two were Nabigha (q.v.) and 
'Alqama (q.v.). But besides these there were many others whose 
names were famous; such as Ta'abbata Sharran, a popular 
hero who recites his own adventures with great gusto; his 
companion Shanfara, whose fame rests on a fine poem which has 
been translated into French by de Sacy (in his Chrestomathie 
Arabe) and into English by G. Hughes (London, 1896); AUs ibn 
Hajar of the Bani Tamln, famous for his descriptions of weapons 
and hunting scenes (ed. R. Geyer, Vienna, 1892); Hatim Ta'i, 
renowned for his open-handed generosity as well as for his poetry 
(ed. F. Schulthess, Leipzig, 1897, with German translation); 
and 'Urwa ibn ul-Ward of the tribe of 'Abs, rival of Hatim in 
generosity as well as in poetry (ed. Th. Noldeke, G8ttingen, 
1863). Among these early poets are found one Jew of repute, 
Samau'al (Samuel) ibn Adiya (cf. Th. Noldeke's Beitrage, 
pp. 52-86; art. s.v. " Samuel ibn Adiya" in Jewish Encyc. and 
authorities there quoted), and some Christians such as 'Adl'ibn 
Zaid of Hira, who sang alike of the pleasures of drink and of 
death (ed. by Louis Cheikho in his Les Pokes arabes chritiens, 
pp. 439-474, Beirut, 1890; in this work many Arabian poets 
are considered to be Christian without sufficient reason). One 
poet, a younger contemporary of Mahomet, has attracted much 
attention because his poems were religious and he was a mono- 
theist. This is Umayya ibn Abi-s-Salt, a Meccan who did not 
accept Islam and died in 630. His poems are discussed by 
F. Schulthess in the Orientalische Studien dedicated by Th. 
Noldeke, Giessen, 1906, and his relation to Mahomet by E. Power 
in the Melanges de la faculte orientale de I'universite Saint-Joseph, 
Beirut, 1906). Mahomet's relation to the poets generally was 
one of antagonism because of their influence over the Arabs 
and their devotion to the old religion and customs. Ka'b ibn 
Zuhair, however, first condemned to death, then pardoned, later 
won great favour for himself by writing a panegyric of the 
Prophet (ed. G. Freytag, Halle, 1823). Another poet, A'sha 
(q.v.), followed his example. Labid (q.v.) and Hassan ibn Thabit 
(q.v.) were also contemporary. Among the poetesses of the time 
Khansa (q.v.) is supreme. In the scarcity of poets at this time 
two others deserve mention; Abu Mihjan, who made peace 
with Islam in 630 but was exiled for his love of wine, which he 
celebrated in his verse (ed. L. Abel, Leiden, 1887; cf. C. Land- 
berg's Primeurs arabes, 1, Leiden, 1886), and Jarwal ibn Aus, 
known as al-Hutai'a, a wandering poet whose keen satires led 
to his imprisonment by Omar (Poems, ed. by I. Goldziher in the 
Journal of the German Oriental Society, vols. 46 and 47). 

Had the simplicity and religious severity of the first four 
caliphs continued in their successors, the fate of poetry would 
have been hard. Probably little but religious poetry would have 
been allowed. But the Omayyads (with one exception) were not 
religious men and, while preserving the outward forms of Islam, 
allowed full liberty to the pre-Islamic customs of the Arabs and 
the beliefs and practices of Christians. At the same time the 

1 On the subject of transmission cf. Th. Noldeke's Beitrage zur 
Kenntniss der Poesie der alten Araber (Hanover, 1804); and W. 
Ahlwardt's Bemerkungen iiber die Aechtheit der alten arabischen 
Gedichte (Greifswald, 1872). 



272 



ARABIA 



[LITERATURE 



circumstances of the poet's life were altered. Poetry depended 
on patronage, and that was to be had now chiefly in the court of 
the caliph and the residences of his governors. Hence the centre 
of attraction was now the city with its interests, not the desert. 
Yet the old forms of poetry were kept. The qaslda still required 
the long introduction (see above), which was entirely occupied 
with the affairs of the desert. Thus poetry became more and 
more artificial, until in the Abbasid period poets arose who felt 
themselves strong enough to give up the worn-out forms and 
adopt others more suitable. The names of three great poets 
adorn the Omayyad period: Akhtal, Farazdaq and Jarir were 
contemporaries (see separate articles). The first was a Christian 
of the tribe of Taghlib, whose Christianity enabled him to write 
many verses which would have been impossible to a professing 
Moslem. Protected by the caliph he employed the old weapons 
of satire to support them against the " Helpers " and to exalt 
his own tribe against the Qaisites. Farazdaq of the Bani Tamim, 
a good Moslem but loose in morals, lived chiefly in Medina and 
Kufa, and was renowned for his command of language. Jarir of 
another branch of the Bani Tamim lived in Irak and courted the 
favour of Hajjaj, its governor. His satires were so effective that 
he is said to have crushed forty-three rivals. His great efforts 
were against Farazdaq, who was supported by Akhtal (cf. The 
Naka'id of Jarir and al-Farazdaq, ed. A. A. Bevan, Leiden, 1906 
foil.). Among many minor poets one woman is conspicuous. 
Laila ul-Akhyaliyya (d. 706) was married to a stranger. On the 
death of her lover in battle, she wrote numerous elegies bewailing 
him, and so became famous and devoted the rest of her life to the 
writing of verse. Two poets of the Koreish attained celebrity in 
Arabia itself at this time. Qais ur-Ruqayyat was the poet of 
"Abdallah ibn uz-Zubair (Abdallah ibn Zobair) and helped him 
until circumstances went against him, when he made his peace 
with the caliph. His poems are chiefly panegyrics and love songs 
(ed. N. Rhodonakis, Vienna, 1902). 'Umar ibn Abl Rabi'a 
(c. 643-719) was a wealthy man, who lived a life of ease in his 
native town of Mecca, and devoted himself to intrigues and 
writing love songs (ed. P. Schwarz, Leipzig, 1901-1902). His 
poems were very popular throughout Arabia. As a dweller in 
the town he was independent of the old forms of poetry, which 
controlled all others, but his influence among poets was not great 
enough to perpetuate the new style. One other short-lived 
movement of the Omayyad period should be mentioned. The 
rajaz poems (see above) had been a subordinate class generally 
used for improvisations in pre-Mahommedan times. In the 7 th 
and 8th centuries, however, a group of poets employed them 
more seriously. The most celebrated of these were 'Ajjaj and 
his son Ru'ba of the Bani Tamim (editions by W. Ahlwardt, 
Berlin, 1903; German trans, of Ru'ba's poems by Ahlwardt, 
Berlin, 1904). 

With the establishment of the Abbasid dynasty, a new epoch 
in Arabian poetry began. The stereotyped beginning of the 
qasida had been recognized as antiquated and out of place in 
city life even in the Omayyad period (cf. Goldziher, Abhand- 
lungen, i. 144 ff.). This form had been ridiculed but now it lost 
its hold altogether, and was «nly employed occasionally by way 
of direct imitation of the antique. The rise of Persian influence 
made itself felt in much the same way as the Norman influence 
in England by bringing a newer refinement into poetry. Tribal 
feuds are no longer the main incentives to verse. Individual 
experiences of life and matters of human interest become more 
usual subjects. Cynicism, often followed by religion in a poet's 
later life, is common. The tumultuous mixture of interests and 
passions to be found in a city like Bagdad are the subjects of a 
poet's verse. One of the earliest of these poets, Muti' ibn Ayas, 
shows the new depth of personal feeling and refinement of 
expression. Bashshar ibn Burd (d. 783), a blind poet of Persian 
descent, shows the ascendancy of Persian influence as he openly 
rails at the Arabs and makes clear his own leaning to the Persian 
religion. In the 8th century Abu Nuwas (q.v.) is the greatest 
poet of his time. His language has the purity of the desert, his 
morals are those of the city, his universalism is that of the man of 
the world. Abu-l-'Atahiya (q.v.), his contemporary, is fluent, 



simple and often didactic. Muslim ibn ul-Walid (ed. de Goeje, 
Leiden, 1875), also contemporary, is more conservative of jld 
forms and given to panegyric and satire. In the 9th century two 
of the best-known poets — Abu Tammam (q.v.) and Buhturi (q.v.) 
— were renowned for their knowledge of old poetry (see Hamasa) 
and were influenced by it in their own verse. On the other hand 
Ibn ul-Mo'tazz (son of the caliph) was the writer of brilliant 
occasional verse, free of all imitation. In the 10th century the 
centre of interest is in the court of Saif ud-Daula (addaula) at 
Aleppo. Here in Motanabbi (q.v.) the claims of modern poetry 
not only to equal but to excel the ancient were put forward and 
in part at any rate recognized. Abu Firas (932-968) was a 
member of the family of Saif ud-Daula, a soldier whose poems 
have all the charm that comes from the fact that the writer has 
lived through the events he narrates (ed. by R. Dvorak, Leiden, 
1895). Many Arabian writers count Motanabbi the last of the 
great poets. Yet Abu-l-'Ala ul-Ma'arri (q.v.) was original alike 
in his use of rhymes and in the philosophical nature of his poems. 
Ibn Farid (q.v.) is the greatest of the mystic poets, and Buslri 
(q.v.) wrote the most famous poem extant in praise of the Prophet. 
In the provinces of the caliphate there were many poets, who, 
however, seldom produced original work. Spain, however, pro- 
duced Ibn 'Abdun (d. 1126), famous for the grace and finish of 
his style (ed. with commentary of Ibn Badrun by R. P. A. Dozy, 
Leiden, 1846). The Sicilian Ibn Hamdis (1048-1132) spent the 
last fifty years of his life in Spain (Diwan, ed. Moacada, Palermo, 
1883; Canzoniere, ed. Schiaparelli, Rome, 1897). It was also 
apparently in this country that the strophe form was first used 
in Arabic poems (cf. M. Hartmann's Das arabische Strophen- 
gedicht, Weimar, 1897), and Ibn Quzman (12th century), a 
wandering singer, here first used the language of everyday life 
in the form of verse known as Zajal. 

Anthologies. — As supplemental to the account of poetry may 
be mentioned here some of the chief collections of ancient verse^ 
sometimes made for the sake of the poems themselves, sometimes 
to give a locus classicus for usages of grammar or lexicography, 
sometimes to illustrate ancient manners and customs. The 
earliest of these is the Mo'allakat (q.v.). In the 8th century Ibn 
Mofaddal compiled the collection named after him the Mofad- 
daliyat. From the 9th century we have the Hamasas of AbQ 
Tammam and Buhturi, and a collection of poems of the tribe 
Hudhail (second half ed. in part by J.G.L.Kosegarten, London, 
1854; completed by J. Wellhausen in Skizzen und Vorarbeiten, i'. 
Berlin, 1884). The numerous quotations of Ibn Qutaiba (q.v.) in 
the 'Uyun ul-Akhbdr (ed. C. Brockelmann, Strassburg, 1900 ff.) 
and the Book of Poetry and Poets (ed. M. J. de Goeje, Leiden, 
1904) bring these works into this class. In the 10th century 
were compiled the Jamharat ash'ar al Arab, containing forty-nine 
poems (ed. Bulaq, 1890), the work al-'Iqd ul-Farld of Ibn'Abdr-r- 
Rabbihi (ed. Cairo, various years), and the greatest work of all 
this class, the Kitab ul-Aghdni ( " Book of Songs ") (cf. Abu-l 
Faraj). The 12 th century contributes the Diwan Mukhtar&t 
ush-Shu'ara'i with fifty qasidas. The Khizdnat ul-Adab of 
Abdulqadir, written in the 17th century in the form of a com- 
mentary on verses cited in a grammar, contains much old verse 
(ed. 4 vols., Bulaq, 1882). 

Belles-Lettres and Romances. — Mahomet in the Koran had made 
extensive use of saf or rhymed prose (see above). This form 
then dropped out of use almost entirely for some time. In the 
10th century, however, it was revived, occurring almost simul- 
taneously in the Sermons of Ibn Nubata (946-984) and the 
Letters of Abu Bakr ul-Khwarizmi. Both have been published 
several times in the East. The epistolary style was further 
cultivated by Hamadhani (q.v.) and carried to perfection by 
Abu-1'Ala ul-Ma'arri. Hamadhani was also the first to Write 
in this rhymed prose a new form of work, the Maqama 
( " assembly "). The name arose from the fact that scholars 
were accustomed to assemble for the purpose of rivalling one 
another in orations showing their knowledge of Arabic language, 
proverb and verse. In the Maqdmas of Hamadhani a narrator 
describes how in various places he met a wandering scholar who 
in these assemblies puts all his rivals to shame by his eloquence/. 



LITERATURE] 



ARABIA 



273 



Each oration forms the substanceof a M aqdma, while the Maqamas 
themselves are united to one another by the constant meetings 
of narrator and scholar. Hariri (q.v.) quite eclipsed the fame 
of his predecessor in this department, and his Maqamas retain 
their influence over Arabian literature to the present day. As 
late as the 19th century the sheik Nasif ul YazijI (1800-187 1) 
distinguished himself by writing sixty clever Maqamas in the 
style of Hariri (ed. Beirut, 1856, 1872). While this class of 
literature had devoted itself chiefly to the finesses of the language, 
another set of works was given to meeting the requirements 
of moral education and the training of a gentleman. This, 
which is known as " Adab literature," is anecdotic in style with 
much quotation of early poetry and proverb. Thus government, 
war, friendship, morality, piety, eloquence, are some of the titles 
under which Ibn Qutaiba groups his stories and verses in the 
'Uyun ul Akhbdr. Jdhiz (q.v.) in the 9th century and Baihaqii 
(The Kildb al-Mahasin val-Masdwi, ed. F. Schwally, Giessen, 
1900-1902) early in the 10th, wrote works of this class. A little 
later a Spaniard, Ibn 'Abdrabbihi (Abdi-r-Rabbihi), wrote his 
'Iqd ul-Farid (see section Anthologies). The growth of city 
life in the Abbasid capital led to the desire for a new form 
of story, differing from the old tales of desert life. This was met 
in the first place by borrowing. In the 8th century Ibn Muqaffa", 
a convert from Mazdaism to Islam, translated the Pahlavi 
version of Bidpai's fables (itself a version of the Indian Pancha- 
tantra) into Arabic with the title Kalila wa Dimna (ed. Beirut, 
various years). Owing to the purity of its language and style 
it has remained a classic work. The Book of the 1001 Nights 
(Arabian Nights) also has its basis in translations from the Indian 
through the Persian, made as early as the 9th century. To these 
stories have been added others originating in Bagdad and Egypt 
and a few others, which were at first in independent circulation. 
The whole work seems to have taken its present form (with local 
variations) about the 13th century. Several other romances of 
considerable length are extant, such as the Story of 'Antar 
(ed. 32 vols., Cairo, 1869, &c, translated in part by Terrick 
Hamilton, 4 vols., London, 1820), and the Story of Saif ibn Dhi 
Yczen (ed. Cairo, 1892). (G. W. T.) 

Historical Literature. — Arabian historians differ from all 
others in the unique form of their compositions. Each event is 
related in the words of eye-witnesses or contemporaries trans- 
mitted to the final narrator through a chain of intermediate 
reporters (rdints), each of whom passed on the original report 
to his successor. Often the same account is given in two or 
more slightly divergent forms, which have come down through 
different chains of reporters. Often, too, one event or one im- 
portant detail is told in several ways on the basis of several con- 
temporary statements transmitted to the final narrator through 
distinct lines of tradition. The writer, tfierefore, exercises no inde- 
pendent criticism except as regards the choice of authorities; for 
he rejects accounts of which the first author or one of the inter- 
mediate links seems to him unworthy of credit, and sometimes 
he states which of several accounts seems to him the best. 

A second type of Arabian historiography is that in which an 
author combines the different traditions about one occurrence 
into one continuous narrative, but prefixes a statement as to 
the lines of authorities used and states which of them he mainly 
follows. In this case the writer recurs to the first method, 
already described, only when the different traditions are greatly 
at variance with one another. In yet a third type of history 
the old method is entirely forsaken and we have a continuous 
narrative only occasionally interrupted by citation of the 
authority for some particular point. But the principle still is 
that what has been well said once need not be told again in other 
words. The writer, therefore, keeps as close as he can to the letter 
of his sources, so that quite a late writer often reproduces the 
very words of the first narrator. 

From very early times story-tellers and singers found their 
subjects in the doughty deeds of the tribe on its forays, and 
sometimes in contests with foreign powers and in the impression 
produced by the wealth and might of the sovereigns of Persia 
and Constantinople. The appearance of the Prophet with the 



great changes that ensued, the conquests that made the Arabs 
lords of half the civilized world, supplied a vast store of new 
matter for relations which men were never weary of hearing 
and recounting. They wished to know everything about the 
apostle of God. Every one who had known or seen him was 
questioned and was eager to answer. Moreover, the word of 
God in the Koran left many practical points undecided, and 
therefore it was of the highest importance to know exactly how 
the Prophet had spoken and acted in various circumstances. 
Where could this be better learned than at Medina, where he had 
lived so long and where the majority of his companions continued 
to live ? So at Medina a school was gradually formed, where the 
chief part of the traditions about Mahomet and his first successors 
took a form more or less fixed. Soon men began to assist memory 
by making notes, and pupils sought to take written jottings 
of what they had heard from their teachers. Thus by the close 
.of the 1 st century many dictata were already in circulation. 
For example, Hasan of Basra (d. 728 a.d.) had a great mass 
of such notes, and he was accused of sometimes passing off as 
oral tradition things he had really drawn from books; for oral 
tradition was still the one recognized authority, and it is related 
of more than one old scholar, and even of Hasan of Basra himself, 
that he directed his books to be burned at his death. The books 
were mere helps. Long after this date, when all scholars drew 
mainly from books, the old forms were still kept up. Tabari, 
for example, when he cites a book expresses himself as if he had 
heard what he quotes from the master with whom he read the 
passage or from whose copy he transcribed it. He even ex- 
presses himself in this wise: '"Omar b. Shabba has related to 
me in his book on the history of Basra." No independent book 
of the 1st century from the Flight (i.e. 622-719) has come down 
to us. It is told, however, that Moawiya summoned an old 
man named 'Abid ibn Sharya from Yemen to Damascus to 
tell him all he knew about ancient history and that he induced 
him to write down his information. This very likely formed 
the nucleus of a book which bore the name of that sheik and 
was much read in the 3rd century from the Flight. It seems to be 
lost now. But in the 2nd century (719-816) real books began to 
be composed. The materials were supplied in the first place by 
oral tradition, in the second by the dictata of older scholars, 
and finally by various kinds of documents, such as treaties, 
letters, collections of poetry and genealogical lists. Genealogical 
studies had ( become necessary through Omar's system of assigning 
state pensions to certain classes of persons according to their 
kinship with the Prophet, or their deserts during his lifetime. 
This subject received much attention even in the 1st century, 
but books about it were first written in the 2nd, the most famous 
being those of Ibn al-Kalbi (d. 763), of his son Hisham (d. 819), 
and of Al-Sharqi ibn al-Qutami. Genealogy, which often called 
for elucidations, led on to history. Baladhuri's excellent Ansdb 
al-Ashrdf (Genealogies of the Nobles) is a history of the Arabs 
on a genealogical plan. 

The oldest extant history is the biography of the Prophet 
by Ibn Ishaq (d. 767). This work is generally trustworthy. 
Mahomet's life before he appeared as a prophet and the story 
of his ancestors are indeed mixed with many fables illustrated 
by spurious verses. But in Ibn Ishaq's day these fables were 
generally accepted as history — for many of them had been first 
related by contemporaries of Mahomet — and no one certainly 
thought it blameworthy to put pious verses in the mouth of the 
Prophet's forefathers, though, according to the Fihrist (p. 92), 
Ibn Ishaq was duped by others with regard to the poems he 
quotes. The original work of Ibn Ishaq seems to be lost. That 
which we possess is an edition of it by Ibn Hisham (d. 834) with 
additions and omissions (text ed. by F. Wiistenfeld, Gottingen, 
1858-1860; German translation by Weil, Stuttgart, 1864). 

The Life of the Prophet by Ibn Oqba (d. 758), based on the 
statements of two very trustworthy men, 'Urwa ibn az-Zubair 
(d. 713) and Az-zuhri (d. 742), was. still much read in Syria in 
the 14th century. Fragments of this have been edited by 
E. Sachau, Berlin, 1904. We fortunately possess the Book of 
the Campaigns of the Prophet by al-Waqidi (d. 822) and the 



274 



ARABIA 



[LITERATURE 



important Book of Classes of his disciple Ibn Sa'd (g.v.). WaqidI 
had much more copious materials than Ibn Ishaq, but gives 
way much more to a popular and sometimes romancing style 
of treatment. Nevertheless he sometimes helps us to recognize 
in Ibn Ishaq's narrative modifications of the genuine tradition 
made for a purpose, and the additional details he supplies set 
various events before us in a clearer light. Apart from this his 
chief merits lie in his studies on the subject of the traditional 
authorities, the results of which are given by Ibn Sa'd, and in 
his chronology, which is often excellent. A special study of the 
traditions about the conquest of Syria made by M. J. de Goeje 
in 1864 (Mimoires sur la conquete de la Syrie, 2nd ed., Leiden, 
1900), led to the conclusion that Waqidl's chronology is sound 
as regards the main events, and that later historians have gone 
astray by forsaking his guidance. This result has been confirmed 
by certain contemporary notices found by Th. Noldeke in 1874 
in a Syriac MS. of the British Museum. And that Ibn Ishaq , 
agrees with WaqidI in certain main dates is important evidence 
for the trustworthiness of the former also. For the chronology 
before the year 10 of the Flight WaqidI did his best, but here, 
the material being defective, many of his conclusions are pre- 
carious. WaqidI had already a great library at his disposal. 
He is said to have had 600 chests of books, chiefly dictata written 
by or for himself, but in part real books by Abu Mikhnaf (d. 748), 
Ibn Ishaq (whom he uses but does not name), 'Awana (d. 764), 
Abu Mashar (d. 791) and other authors. Abu Mikhnaf left a 
great number of monographs on the chief events from the death 
of the Prophet to the caliphate of Walld II. These were much 
used by later writers, and we have many extracts from them, 
but none of the works themselves except a sort of romance based 
on his account of the death of Hosain (fjusain) of which Wiisten- 
feld has given a translation. With regard to the history of Irak 
in particular he was deemed to have the best information, and 
for this subject he is Tabarl's chief source, just as MadainI, a 
younger contemporary of WaqidI, is followed by preference in 
all that relates to Khorasan. Madainl's History of the Caliphs 
is the best, if not the oldest, published before Tabarl; but this 
book is known only by the excerpts given by later writers, 
particularly Baladhuri and Tabarl. From these we judge that 
he had great narrative power, with much clear and exact learning, 
and must be placed high as a critical historian. His plan was 
to record the various traditions about an event, choosing them 
with critical skill; sometimes, however, he fused the several 
traditions into a continuous narrative. A just estimate of the 
relative value of the historians can only be reached by careful 
comparison in detail. This has been essayed by Briinnow in 
his study on the Kharijites (Leiden, 1884), in which the narrative 
of Mubarrad in the Kamil is compared with the excerpts of 
MadainI given by Baladhuri and those of Abu Mikhnaf given by 
Tabarl. The conclusion reached is that Abu Mikhnaf and 
MadainI are both well informed and impartial. 

Among the contemporaries of WaqidI and MadainI were 
Ibn Khidash (d. 838), the historian of the family Muhallab, 
whose work was one of Mubarrad's sources for the History of 
the Kharijites; Haitham ibn 'AdI (d. 822), whose works, though 
now lost, are often cited; and Saif ibn 'Omar at-Tamimi, whose 
book on the revolt of the tribes under Abu-Bekr and on the 
Mahommedan conquests was much used by Tabarl. His 
narratives are detailed and often tinged with romance, and he 
is certainly much inferior to WaqidI in accuracy. Wellhausen 
has thoroughly examined the work of Saif in Skizzen und Vor- 
arbeiten, vi. Besides these are to be mentioned Abu "Ubaida 
(d. 825), who was celebrated as a philologist and wrote several 
historical monographs that are often cited, and AzraqI, whose 
excellent History of Mecca was published after his death by his 
grandson (d. 858). With these writers we pass into the 3rd 
century of Islam. But we have still an important point to notice 
in the 2nd century; for in it learned Persians began to take part 
in the creation of Arabic historical literature. Ibn Muqaffa' 
translated the great Book of Persian Kings, and others followed 
his example. Tabarl and his contemporaries, senior and junior, 
such as Ibn Qutaiba, Ya'qubl, Dlnawarl, preserve to us a good 



part of the information about Persian history made known 
through such translations. 1 But even more important than the 
knowledge conveyed by these works was their influence on 
literary style and composition. Half a century later began 
versions from the Greek either direct or through the Syriac. 
The pieces translated were mostly philosophical; but the Arabs 
also learned something, however superficially, of ancient history. 

The 3rd century (816-913) was far more productive than the 
2nd. Abu "Ubaida was succeeded by Ibn al-A'rabl (d. 846), who 
in like manner was chiefly famous as a philologist, and who wrote 
about ancient poems and battles. Much that he wrote is quoted 
in Tabrlzl's commentary on the T}amasa, which is still richer in 
extracts from the historical elucidations of early poems given 
by ar-Riyashl (d. 871). Of special fame as a genealogist was 
Ibn Habib (d. 859), of whom we have a booklet on Arabian tribal 
names (ed. Wiistenfeld, 1850). AzraqI again was followed by 
Fakihl, who wrote a History of Mecca in 885, 2 and 'Omar b. 
Shabba (d. 876), who composed an excellent history of Basra, 
known to us only by excerpts. Of the works of Zubair b. Bakkar 
d . 870), one of Tabarl's teachers, a learned historian and genea- 
logist much consulted by later writers, there is a fragment in the 
Kopriilu library at Constantinople, and another in Gottingen, 
part of which has been made known by Wiistenfeld (Die Familie 
Al-Zobair, Gottingen, 1878). Ya'qubl (Ibn Wadih) wrote a 
short general history of much value (published by Houtsma, 
Leiden, 1883). About India he knows more than his prede- 
cessors and more than his successors down to Berunl. Ibn 
Khordadhbeh's historical works are lost. Ibn 'Abdalhakam 
(d. 871) wrote of the conquest of Egypt and the West. Extracts 
from this book are given by M'G. de Slane in his Histoire des 
Berberes, from which we gather that it was a medley of true 
tradition and romance, and must be reckoned, with the book 
of his slightly senior contemporary, the Spaniard Ibn Hablb, 
in the class of historical romances. A high place must be 
assigned to the historian Ibn Qutaiba or Kotaiba (d. 889), 
who wrote a very useful Handbook of History (ed. Wiistenfeld, 
Gottingen, 1850). Much more eminent is Baladhuri (d. 893), 
whose book on the Arab conquest (ed. M. J. de Goeje, Leiden, 
1865-1866) merits the special praise given to it by Mas'udI, 
and who also wrote a large work, the Ansab al-Ashraf. A 
contemporary, Ibn abl Tahir Taifur (d. 894), wrote on the 
Abbasid caliphs and was drawn on by Tabarl. The sixth part 
of his work is in the British Museum. The universal history 
of Dlnawarl (d. 896), entitled The Long Narratives, has been 
edited by Girgas (1887). 

All these histories are more or less thrown into the shade by 
the great work of Tabarl (q.v.), whose fame has never faded from 
his own day to ours. The Annals (ed. M. de Goeje, Leiden, 
1879-1901) are a general history from the creation to 302 a.h. 
( = a.d. 915). As a literary composition they do not rank very 
high, which may be due partly to the author's years, partly to 
the inequality of his sources, sometimes superabundant, some- 
times defective, partly perhaps to the somewhat hasty condensa- 
tion of his original draft. Nevertheless the value of the book is 
very great: the author's selection of traditions is usually happy, 
and the episodes of most importance are treated with most 
fulness of detail, so that it deserves the high reputation it has 
enjoyed from the first. This reputation rose steadily; there 
were twenty copies (one of them written by Tabarl's own hand) 
in the library of the Fatimite caliph 'Aziz (latter half of the 4th 
century), whereas, when Saladin became lord of Egypt, the 
princely library contained 1200 copies (MaqrizI, i. 408 seq.). 

The Annals soon came to be dealt with in various ways. They 
were published in shorter form with the omission of the names 
of authorities and of most of the poems cited; some passages 
quoted by later writers are not found even in the Leiden edition. 
On the other hand, some interpolations took place, one in the 

1 For details see the introduction to Noldeke's translation of 
Tabarl's Geschichte der Perser und Araber zur Zeit der Sasaniden 
(Leiden, 1879). 

2 Published in excerpt by Wiistenfeld along with AzraqI (Leipzig, 
I857-I859)- 



LITERATURE] 



ARABIA 



275 



author's lifetime and perhaps by his own hand. Then many- 
supplements were written, e.g. by Ferghani (not extant) and by 
Hamadhanl (partly preserved in Paris). 'Arib of Cordova made 
an abridgment, adding the history of the West and continuing 
the story to about 975. ' Ibn Mashkawaih wrote a history from 
the creation to 980, with the purpose of drawing the lessons of 
the story, following Tabari closely, as far as his book is known, 
and seldom recurring to other sources before the reign of 
Moqtadir; what follows is his own composition and shows him 
to be a writer of talent. 2 In 963 an abridgment of the Annals 
was translated into Persian by Bal'ami, who, however, interwove 
many fables. 3 Ibn al-Athir (d. 1234) abridged the whole work, 
usually with judgment, but sometimes too hastily. Though he 
sometimes glided lightly over difficulties, his work is of service 
in fixing the text of Tabari. He also furnished a continuation to 
the year 1224. Later writers took Tabari as their main authority, 
but sometimes consulted other sources, and so add to our know- 
ledge — especially Ibn al-Jauzi (d. 1201), who adds many 
important details. These later historians had valuable help 
from the biographies of famous men and special histories of 
countries and cities, dynasties and princes, on which much 
labour was spent from the 4th century from the Flight onwards. 
The chief historians after Tabari may be briefly mentioned 
in chronological order. RazI (d. a.d. 932) wrote a History of 
Spain; Eutychius (d. 940) wrote Annals (ed. L. Cheikho, Paris, 
1906), which are very important because he gives the Christian 
tradition; Suli (d. 946) wrote on the Abbasid caliphs, their 
viziers and court poets; Mas'udi (q.v.) composed various his- 
torical and geographical works (d. 956). Of Tabari's contem- 
porary Hamza Ispahan! (c. 940) we have the Annals (ed. Gott- 
waldt, St Petersburg, 1844); Ibn al-Qutlya wrote a History of 
Spain; Ibn Zulaq (d. 997) a History of Egypt; 'Otbi wrote the 
History of Mahmud of Ghazna, at whose court he lived (printed 
on the margin of the Egyptian edition of Ibn al-Athir) ; Tha'labi 
(d. 1036) wrote a well-known History of the Old Prophets; Abu 
Nu'aim al-Ispahani (d. 1039) wrote a History of Ispahan, chiefly 
of the scholars of that city; Tha'alibi (d. c. 1038) wrote, inter 
alia, a well-known History of the Poets of his Time, published at 
Damascus, 1887; Biruni (q.v.) (d. 1048) takes a high place among 
historians; Koda'i (d. 1062) wrote a Description of Egypt and 
also various historical pieces, of which some are extant; Ibn 
Sa'id of Cordova (d. 1070) wrote a View of the History of the 
Various Nations. Bagdad and its learned men found an ex- 
cellent historian in al-Khatib al-Baghdadi (d. io7i),and Spain 
in Ibn Hayan (d. 1076), and half a century later in Ibn Khaqan 
(d. 1 135) and Ibn Bassam (d. 1147). Sam'ani (d. 1167) wrote 
an excellent book on genealogies; 'Umara (d. 1175) wrote a 
History of Yemen (ed. H. C. Kay, London, 1892); Ibn 'Asaqir 
(d. 1 1 76) a History of Damascus and her Scholars, which is of great 
value, and exists in whole or in part in several libraries. The 
Biographical Dictionary of the Spaniard Ibn Pascual (d. 1182) 
and that of Dabbi, a somewhat junior contemporary, are edited 
in Codera's Bibliotheca Arab. Hisp. (1883-1885); Saladin found 
his historian in the famous Tmad uddln (d. 1201) (Arabic text, 
ed. C. Landberg, Leiden, 1888). Ibn ul-Jauzi, who died in the 
same year, has been already mentioned. Abdulwahid's History 
of the Almohades, written in 1224, was published by Dozy (2nd 
ed., 1881). Abdullatif or Abdallatlf (d. 1232) is known by his 
writings about Egypt (trans, de Sacy, 1810); Ibn al-Athir 
(d. 1233) wrote, in addition to the Chronicle already mentioned, 
a Biographical Dictionary of Contemporaries of the Prophet. 
Qifti (d. 1248) is especially known by his History of Arabic 
Philologists. Sibt ibn al-Jauzi (d. 1256), grandson of the Ibn 
al-Jauzi already mentioned, wrote a great Chronicle, of which 
much the larger part still exists. Codera has edited (Madrid, 
1886) Ibn al-'Abbar's (d. 1260) Biographical Lexicon, already 

1 Of this work the Gotha Library has a portion containing 290-320 
A.H., of which the part about the West has been printed by Dozy in 
the Bayon, and the rest was published at Leiden in 1897. 

2 A fragment (198-251 a.h.) is printed in de Goeje, Fragm. Hist. 
Ar. (vol. ii., Leiden, 1871). 

3 The first part was rendered into French by Dubeux in 1836. 
There is an excellent French translation by Zotenberg (1874). 



known by Dozy's excerpts from it. Ibn al-'Adlm (d. 1262) is 
famed for his History of Aleppo, and Abu Shama (d. 1267) wrote 
a well-known History of Saladin and Nureddin, taking a great 
deal from Tmad uddin. Ibn abi Usaibia (d. 1269) wrote a 
History of Physicians, ed. A. Miiller. The History of Ibn al-' Amid 
(d. 1276), better known as Elmacin, was printed by Erpenius in 
1625. Ibn Sa'id al-Maghribi (d. 1274 or 1286) is famous for his 
histories, but still more for his geographical writings. The 
noted theologian Nawawi (q.v.; d. 1278) wrote a Biographical 
Dictionary of the Worthies of the First Ages of Islam. Pre- 
eminent as a biographer is Ibn Khallikan (q.v.; d. 1282), whose 
much-used work was partly edited by de Slane and completely 
by Wiistenfeld (1835-1840), and translated into English by the 
former scholar (4 vols., 1843-1871). 

Abu '1-Faraj, better known as Bar-Hebraeus (d. 1286), wrote, 
besides his Syriac Chronicle, an Arabic History of Dynasties (ed. 
E. Pocock, Oxford, 1663, Beirut, 1890). Ibn 'Adrian's History 
of Africa and Spain has been published by Dozy (2 vols., Leiden, 
1848-1851), and the Qartas of Ibn abi Zar' by Tornberg (1843). 
One of the best-known of Arab writers is Abulfeda (d. 133 1) (q.v.). 
Not less famous is the great Encyclopaedia of his contemporary 
Nuwairi (d. 1332), but only extracts from it have been printed. 
Ibn Sayyid an-Nas (d. 1334) wrote a full biography of the 
Prophet; Mizzi (d. 1341) an extensive work on the men from 
whom traditions have been derived. We still possess, nearly 
complete, the great Chronicle of Dhahabi (d. 1347), a very 
learned biographer and historian. The geographical and his- 
torical Masalik al-Absar of Ibn Fadlallah (d. 1348) is known at 
present by extracts given by Quatremere and Amari. Ibn al- 
Wardi (d. c. 1349), best known by his Cosmography, wrote a 
Chronicle which has been printed in Egypt. Safadi (d., 1363) 
got a great name as a biographer. Yafi'I (d. 1367) wrote a 
Chronicle of Islam and Lives of Saints. Subki (d. 1369) published 
Lives of the Theologians of the Shafi'ite School. Of Ibn Kathir's 
History the greatest part is extant. For the history of Spain 
and the Maghrib the writings of Ibn al-Khatib (d. 1374) are of 
acknowledged value. Another history, of which we possess the 
greater part, is the large work of Ibn al-Furat (d. 1404). Far 
superior to all these, however, is the famous Ibn Khaldun (q.v.) 
(d. 1406). Of the historical works of the famous lexicographer 
FairuzabadI (q.v.) (d. 1414) only a Life of the Prophet remains. 
Maqrizi (d. 1442) is the subject of a separate article; Ibn Hajar 
(d. 1448) is best known by his Biographical Dictionary of Contem- 
poraries of the Prophet, published in the Bibliotheca Indica. 
Ibn 'Arabshah (d. 1450) is known by his History of Timur 
(Leeuwarden, 1767). 'Aini (d. 1451) wrote a General History, 
still extant. Abu'l-Mahasin ibn Taghrlbirdi (d. 1469) wrote at 
length on the history of Egypt; the first two parts have been 
published by Juynboll and Matthes, Leiden, 1855-1861. Fliigel 
has published Ibn Kotlubogha's Biographies of the Hanifite 
Jurists. Ibn Shihna (d. 1485) wrote a History of Aleppo. Of 
Sakhawi we possess a bibliographical work on the historians. 
The polymath Suytiti (q.v.) (d. 1505) contributed a History of the 
Caliphs and many biographical pieces. SamhQdi's History of 
Medina is known through the excerpts of Wiistenfeld (1861). Ibn 
Iyas (d. 1524) wrote a History of Egypt, and Diarbekri (d. 1559) 
a Life of Mahomet. To these names must be added Maqqari 
(Makkari) (q.v.) and Hajji Khalifa (q.v.) (d. 1658). He made 
use of European sources, and with him Arabic historiography 
may be said to cease, though he had some unimportant successors. 

A word must be said of the historical romances, the beginnings 
of which go back to the first centuries of Islam. The interest in 
all that concerned Mahomet and in the allusions of the Koran 
to old prophets and races led many professional narrators to 
choose these subjects. The increasing veneration paid to the 
Prophet and love for the marvellous soon gave rise to fables about 
his childhood, his visit to heaven, &c, which have found their 
way even into sober histories, just as many Jewish legends told 
by the converted Jew Ka'b al-Ahbar and by Wahb ibn Monabbih, 
and many fables about the old princes of Yemen told by 'Abid, 
are taken as genuine history (see, however, Mas'udi, iv. 88 seq.). 
A fresh field for romantic legend was found in the history of the 



276 



ARABIAN PHILOSOPHY 



victories of Islam, the exploits of the first heroes of the 
faith, the fortunes of ' All and his house. Then, too, history was 
often expressly forged for party ends. The people accepted all 
this, and so a romantic tradition sprang up side by side with the 
historical, and had a literature of its own, the beginnings of which 
must be placed as early as the 2nd century of the Flight. The 
oldest specimens still extant are the fables about the conquest of 
Spain ascribed to Ibn Habib (d. 852) , and those about the conquest 
of Egypt and the West by Ibn "Abd al-Hakam (d. 871). In 
these truth and falsehood are mingled. But most of the extant 
literature of this kind is, in its present form, much more recent; 
e.g. the Story of the Death of Hosain by the pseudo-Abu Mikhnaf 
(translated by Wustenfeld) ; the Conquest of Syria by Abu Isma'Il 
al-Basrl (edited by Nassau Lees, Calcutta, 1854, and discussed by 
de Goeje, 1864); the pseudo-Waqidl (see Hamaker, De Expugna- 
Hone Memphidis et Alexandria^, Leiden, 1835); the pseudo-Ibn 
Qutaiha (see Dozy, Recherches) ; the book ascribed to A'sam Kufl, 
&c. Further inquiry into the origin of these works is called for, 
but some of them were plainly directed to stirring up fresh zeal 
against the Christians. In the 6th century of the Flight some 
of these books had gained so much authority that they were 
used as sources, and thus many untruths crept into accepted 
history (M. J. deG.;G. W. T.) 

Geography. — The writing of geographical books naturally began 
with the description of the Moslem world, and that for practical 
purposes. Ibn Khordadhbeh, in the middle of the 9th century, 
wrote a Book of Roads and Provinces to give an account of the high- 
ways, the posting-stations and the revenues of the provinces. In 
the same century Ya'qubi wrote his Book of Countries, describing 
specially the great cities of the empire. A similar work describing 
the provinces in some detail was that of Qudama or Kodama (d. 
922). Hamdani (q.v.) was led to write his great geography of Arabia 
by his love for the ancient history of his land. Muqaddasi (Mokad- 
dasi) at the end of the 10th century was one of the early travellers 
whose works were founded on their own observation. The study of 
Ptolemy's geography led to a wider outlook, and the writing of 
works on geography (q.v.) in general. A third class of Arabian 
geographical works were those written to explain the names of places 
which occur in the older poets. Such books were written by Bakri 
(q.v.) and Yaqut (q.v.) 1 

Grammar and Lexicography. — Arab tradition ascribes the first 
grammatical treatment of the language to Abu-1-Aswad ud-Du'all 
(latter half of the 7th century), but the certain beginnings of Arabic 
grammar are found a hundred years later. The Arabs from early 
times have always been proud of their language, but its systematic 
study seems to have arisen from contact with Persian and from the 
respect for the language of the Koran. In Irak the two towns of 
Basra and Kufa produced two rival schools of philologists. Bagdad 
soon had one of its own (cf. G. Fliigel's Die grammatischen Schulen 
der Araber, Leipzig, 1862). Khalil ibn Ahmad (718-791), an Arab 
from Oman, of the school of Basra, was the first to enunciate the 
laws of Arabic metre and the first to write a dictionary. His pupil 
Sibawaihi (q.v.), a Persian, wrote the grammar known simply as 
The Book, which is generally regarded in the East as authoritative 
and almost above criticism. Other members of the school of Basra 
were Abu 'Ubaida (q.v.), Asma'i (q.v.), Mubarrad (q.v.) and Ibn 
Duraid (q.v.). The school of Kufa claimed to pay more attention 
to the living language (spoken among the Bedouins) than to written 
laws of grammar. Among its teachers were Kisa'i, the tutor of 
Harun al-Rashid's sons, Ibn A'rabi, Ibn as-Sikkit (d. 857) and Ibn 
ul-Anbari (885-939). In the fourth century of Islam the two schools 
of Kufa and Basra declined in importance before the increasing 
power of Bagdad, where Ibn Qutaiba, Ibn Jinni (941-1002) and 
others carried on the work, but without the former rivalry of the 
older schools. Persia from the beginning of the 10th century pro- 
duced some outstanding students of Arabic. Hamadhani (d. 932) 
wrote a book of synonyms (ed. L. Cheikho, Beirut, 1885). Jauhari 
(q.v.) wrote his great dictionary the Sahah. Tha'alibi (q.v.) and 
Jurjani (q.v.) were almost contemporary, and a little later came 
Zamakhsharl (q.v.), whose philological works are almost as famous 
as his commentary on the Koran. The most important dictionaries 
of Arabic are late in origin. The immense work, Lisan ul Arab 
(ed. 20 vols., Bulaq, 1883-1889), was compiled by Ibn Manzur 
(1232-13 n), the Q&miis by Fairuzabadi, the Taj id' Arils (ed. 10 vols., 
Bulaq, 1890), founded on the Qdmus, by Murtada uz-Zabldl (1732- 

Scientific Literature. — The literature of the various sciences is 
dealt with elsewhere. It is enough here to mention that such 
existed, and that it was not indigenous. It was in the early Abbasid 
period that the scientific works of Greece were translated into Arabic, 

1 The chief Arabian geographical works have been edited by 
M. J. de Goeje in his Bibliotheca Geographorum arabicorum (Leiden, 
1874 ff.). 



Origin. 



often through the Syriac, and at •che same time the influence of 
Sanskrit works made itself felt. Astronomy seems in this way to 
have come chiefly from India. The study of mathematics learned 
from Greece and India was developed by Arabian writers, who in 
turn became the teachers of Europe in the 16th century. Medical 
literature was indebted for its origin to the works of Galen and the 
medical school of Gondesapur. Many of the Arabian philosophers 
were also physicians and wrote on medicine. Chemistry proper was 
not understood, but Arabian writings on alchemy led Europe to it 
later. So also the literature of the animal world (cf. Damiri) is not 
zoological but legendary, and the works on minerals are practical 
and not scientific. See Arabian Philosophy and historical sections 
of such scientific articles as Astronomy, &c. (G. W. T.) 

ARABIAN PHILOSOPHY. What is known as " Arabian " 
philosophy owed to Arabia little more than its name and its 
language. It was a system of Greek thought, expressed in a 
Semitic tongue, and modified by Oriental influences, called into 
existence amongst the Moslem people by the patronage of their 
more liberal princes, and kept alive by the intrepidity and zeal 
of a small band of thinkers, who stood suspected and disliked 
in the eyes of their nation. Their chief claim to the notice of 
the historian of speculation comes from their warm reception 
of Greek philosophy when it had been banished from its original 
soil, and whilst western Europe was still too rude and ignorant 
to be its home (9th to 12th century). 

In the course of that exile the traces of Semitic or Mahommedan 
influence gradually faded away, and the last of the line of 
Saracenic thinkers was a truer exponent of the one 
philosophy which they all professed to teach than 
the first. The whole movement is little else than a chapter in 
the history of Aristotelianism. That system of thought, after 
passing through the minds of those who saw it in the hazy 
light of an orientalized Platonism, and finding many laborious 
but narrow-purposed cultivators in the monastic schools of 
heretical Syria, was then brought into contact with the ideas 
and mental habits of Islam. But those in whom the two currents 
converged did not belong to the pure Arab race. Of the so- 
called Arabian philosophers of the East, al-Farabl, Ibn-Sina 
and al-Ghazall were natives of Khorasan, Bokhara and the 
outlying provinces of north-eastern Persia; whilst al-Kindi, 
the earliest of them, sprang from Basra, on the Persian Gulf, 
on the debatable ground between the Semite and the Aryan. 
In Spain, again, where Ibn-Bajja, Ibn-Tufail and Ibn Rushd 
rivalled or exceeded the fame of the Eastern schools, the Arabians 
of pure blood were few, and the Moorish ruling class was deeply 
intersected by Jewish colonies, and even by the natives of 
Christian Spain. Thus, alike at Bagdad and at Cordova, Arabian 
philosophy represents the temporary victory of exotic ideas 
and of subject races over the theological one-sidedness of Islam, 
and the illiterate simplicity of the early Saracens. 

Islam had, it is true, a philosophy of its own among its theo- 
logians (see Mahommedan Religion). It was with them that 
the Moslem theology — the science of the word (Kaldm) — -first 
came into existence. Its professors, the Mutdkallimun (known 
in Hebrew as Medabberim, and as Loquentes in the Latin versions) , 
may be compared with the scholastic doctors of the Catholic 
Church. Driven in the first instance to speculation in theology 
by the needs of their natural reason, they came, in after days, 
when Greek philosophy had been naturalized in the Caliphate, 
to adapt its methods and doctrines to the support of their views. 
They employed a quasi-philosophical method, by which, accord- 
ing to Maimonides, they first reflected how things ought to be 
in order to support, or at least not contradict, their opinions, 
and then, when their minds were made up with regard to this 
imaginary system, declared that the world was no otherwise 
constituted. The dogmas of creation and providence, of divine 
omnipotence, chiefly exercised them; and they sought to assert 
for God an immediate action in the making and the keeping 
of the world. Space they looked upon as pervaded by atoms 
possessing no quality or extension, and time was similarly divided 
into innumerable instants. Each change in the constitution 
of the atoms is a direct act of the Almighty. When the fire 
burns, or the water moistens, these terms merely express the 
habitual connexion which our senses perceive between one thing 



ARABIAN PHILOSOPHY 



277 



and another. It is not the man that throws a stone who is its 
real mover: the supreme agent has for the moment created 
motion. If a living being die, it is because God has created 
the attribute of death; and the body remains dead, only because 
that attribute is unceasingly created. Thus, on the one hand, 
the object called the cause is denied to have any efficient power 
to produce the so-called effect; and, on the other hand, the 
regularities or laws of nature are explained to be direct inter- 
ferences by the Deity. The supposed uniformity and necessity 
of causation is only an effect of custom, and may be at any 
moment rescinded. In this way, by a theory which, according 
to Averroes, involves the negation of science, the Moslem 
theologians believed that they had exalted God beyond the 
limits of the metaphysical and scientific conceptions of law, 
form and matter; whilst they at the same time stood aloof 
from the vulgar doctrines, attributing a causality to things. 
Thus they deemed they had left a clear ground for the possibility 
of miracles. 

But at least one point was common to the theological and the 
philosophical doctrine. Carrying out, it may be, the principles 
of the Neo-Platonists, they kept the sanctuary of the Deity 
securely guarded, and interposed between him and his creatures 
a spiritual order of potent principles, from the Intelligence, 
which is the first-born image of the great unity, to the Soul and 
Nature, which come later in the spiritual rank. Of God the 
philosophers said we could not tell what He is, but only what 
He is not. The highest point, beyond which strictly philosophical 
inquirers did not penetrate, was the active intellect, — a sort of 
soul of the world in Aristotelian garb — the principle which 
inspires and regulates the development of humanity, and in 
which lies the goal of perfection for the human spirit. In theo- 
logical language the active intellect is described as an angel. 
The inspirations which the prophet receives by angelic messengers 
are compared with the irradiation of intellectual light, which 
the philosopher wins by contemplation of truth and increasing 
purity of life. But while the theologian incessantly postulated 
the agency of that God whose nature he deemed beyond the pale 
of science, the philosopher, following a purely human and natural 
aim, directed his efforts to the gradual elevation of his part of 
reason from its unformed state, and to its final union with the 
controlling intellect which moves and draws to itself the spirits 
of those who prepare themselves for its influences. The philo- 
sophers in their way, like the mystics of Persia (the Sufites) 
in another, tended towards a theory of the communion of man 
with the spiritual world, which may be considered a protest 
against the practical and almost prosaic definiteness of the creed 
of Mahomet. 

Arabian philosophy, at the outset of its career in the 9th 
century, was able without difficulty to take possession of those 
resources for speculative thought which the Latins had barely 
achieved at the close of the 12th century by the slow process of 
rediscovering the Aristotelian logic from the commentaries and 
verses of Bogtius. What the Latins painfully accomplished, 
owing to their fragmentary and unintelligent acquaintance with 
ancient philosophy, was already done for the Arabians by the 
scholars of Syria. In the early centuries of the Christian era, 
both within and without the ranks of the church, the Platonic 
tone and method were paramount throughout the East. Their 
influence was felt in the creeds which formulated the orthodox 
dogmas in regard to the Trinity and the Incarnation. But in 
its later days the Neo-Platonist school came more and more to 
find in Aristotle the best exponent and interpreter of the philo- 
sopher whom they thought divine. It was in this spirit that 
Porphyry, Themistius and Joannes Philoponus composed their 
commentaries on the treatises of the Peripatetic system which, 
modified often unconsciously by the dominant ideas of its 
expositors, became in the 6th and 7th centuries the philosophy 
of the Eastern Church. But the instrument which, in the hands 
of John of Damascus (Dama.scenus), was made subservient to 
theological interests, became in the hands of others a dissolvent 
of the doctrines which had been reduced to shape under the pre- 
valence of the elder Platonism. Peripatetic studies became 



the source of heresies; and conversely, the heretical sects 
prosecuted the study of Aristotle with peculiar zeal. The church 
of the Nestorians, and that of the Monophysites, in their several 
schools and monasteries, carried on from the 5th to the 8th 
century the study of the earlier part of the Organon, with almost 
the same means, purposes and results as were found among the 
Latin schoolmen of the earlier centuries. Up to the time when 
the religious zeal of the emperor Zeno put a stop to the Nestorian 
school at Edessa, this " Athens of Syria " was active in trans- 
lating and popularizing the Aristotelian logic. Their banishment 
from Edessa in 489 drove the Nestorian scholars to Persia, where 
the Sassanid rulers gave them a welcome; and there they con- 
tinued their labours on the Organon. A new seminary of logic 
and theology sprang up at Nislbis, not far from the old locality; 
and at Gandisapora (or Nishapur), in the east of Persia, there 
arose a medical school, whence Greek medicine, and in its 
company Greek science and philosophy, ere long spread over the 
lands of Iran. Meanwhile the Monophysites had followed in 
the steps of the Nestorians, multiplying Syriac versions of the 
logical and medical science of the Greeks. Their school at Resaina 
is known from the name of Sergius, one of the first of these trans- 
lators, in the days of Justinian; and from their monasteries 
at Kinnesrln (Chalcis) issued numerous versions of the intro- 
ductory treatises of the Aristotelian logic. To the Isagoge of 
Porphyry, the Categories and the Hermeneutica of Aristotle, 
the labours of these Syrian schoolmen were confined. These 
they expounded, translated, epitomized and made the basis of 
their compilations, and the few who were bold enough to attempt 
the Analytics seem to have left their task unaccomplished. 

The energy of the Monophysites, however, began to sink with 
the rise of the Moslem empire; and when philosophy revived 
amongst them in the 13 th century, in the person of Gregorius 
Bar-Hebraeus (Abulfaragius) (1226-1286), the revival was due 
to the example and influence of the Arabian thinkers. It was 
otherwise with the Nestorians. Gaining by means of their 
professional skill as physicians a high rank in the society of the 
Moslem world, the Nestorian scholars soon made Bagdad familiar 
with the knowledge of Greek philosophy and science which they 
possessed. But the narrow limits of the Syrian studies, which 
added to a scanty knowledge of Aristotle some acquaintance 
with his Syrian commentators, were soon passed by the curiosity 
and zeal of the students in the Caliphate. During the 8th and 
9th centuries, rough but generally faithful versions of Aristotle's 
principal works were made into Syriac, and then from the 
Syriac into Arabic. The names of some of these translators, 
such as Johannitius (Hunain ibn-Ishaq), were heard eveain the 
Latin schools. By the labours of Hunain and his family the 
great body of Greek science, medical, astronomical and mathe- 
matical, became accessible to the Arab-speaking races. But for 
the next three centuries fresh versions, both of the philosopher 
and of his commentators, continued to succeed each other. 

To the Arabians Aristotle represented and summed up Greek 
philosophy, even as Galen became to them the code of Greek 
medicine. They adopted the doctrine and system which the 
progress of human affairs had made the intellectual aliment 
of their Syrian guides. From first to last Arabian philosophers 
made no claim to originality; their aim was merely to propagate 
the truth of Peripateticism as it had been delivered to them. 
It was with them that the deification of Aristotle began; and 
from them the belief that in him human intelligence had reached 
its limit passed to the later schoolmen (see Scholasticism). 
The progress amongst the Arabians on this side lies in a closer 
adherence to their text, a nearer approach to the bare exegesis 
of their author, and an increasing emancipation from control 
by the tenets of the popular religion. 

Secular philosophy found its first entrance amongst the 
Saracens in the days of the early caliphs of the Abbasid dynasty, 
whose ways and thoughts had been moulded by their 
residence in Persia amid the influences of an older caliphate. 
creed, and of ideas which had in the last resort sprung 
from the Greeks. The seat of empire had been transferred to 
Bagdad, on the highway of Oriental commerce; and the distant 



278 



ARABIAN PHILOSOPHY 



Khorasan became the favourite province of the caliph. Then 
was inaugurated the period of Persian supremacy, during which 
Islam was laid open to the full current of alien ideas and culture. 
The incitement came, however, not from the people, but from 
the prince: it was in the light of court favour that the colleges 
of Bagdad and Nishapur first came to attract students from 
every quarter, from the valleys of Andalusia as well as the 
upland plains of Transoxiana. Manstir, the second of the 
Abbasids, encouraged the appropriation of Greek science; but 
it was al-Ma'mun, the son of Harun al-Rashid, who deserves in 
the Mahommedan empire the same position of royal founder 
and benefactor which is held by Charlemagne in the history of 
the Latin schools. In his reign (813-833) Aristotle was first 
translated into Arabic. Orthodox Moslems, however, distrusted 
the course on which their chief had entered, and his philosophical 
proclivities became one ground for doubting as to his final 
salvation. 

In the eastern provinces the chief names of Arabian philosophy 
are those known to the Latin schoolmen as Alkindius, Alfarabius, 
Avicenna and Algazel, or under forms resembling these. The 
first of these, Alkindius (see Kindi), flourished at the court of 
Bagdad in the first half of the 9th century. His claims to notice 
at the present day rest upon a few works on medicine, theology, 
music and natural science. With him begins that encyclopaedic 
character — the simultaneous cultivation of the whole field of 
investigation which is reflected from Aristotle on the Arabian 
school. In him too is found the union of Platonism and Aristo- 
telianism expressed in Neo-PIatonic terms. Towards the close 
of the 10th century the presentation of an entire scheme of 
knowledge, beginning with logic and mathematics, and ascending 
through the various departments of physical inquiry to the 
region of religious doctrine, was accomplished by a sdciety 
which had its chief seat at Basra, the native town of al-Kindi. 
This society — the Brothers of Purity or Sincerity (Ikhwan us 
Safa'i) — divided into four orders, wrought in the interests of 
religion no less than of science; and though its attempt to 
compile an encyclopaedia of existing knowledge may have been 
premature, it yet contributed to spread abroad a desire for 
further information. The proposed reconciliation between 
science and faith was not accomplished, because the compromise 
could please neither party. The fifty-one treatises of which 
this encyclopaedia consists are interspersed with apologues 
in true Oriental style, and the idea of goodness, of moral per- 
fection, is as prominent an end in every discourse as it was 
in the alleged dream of al-Ma'mun. The materials of the work 
come chiefly from Aristotle, but they are conceived in a Platoniz- 
ing spirit, which places as the bond of all things a universal 
soul of the world with its partial or fragmentary souls. Con- 
temporary with this semi-religious and semi-philosophical 
society lived Alfarabius (see Farabi), who died in 950. His 
paraphrases of Aristotle formed the basis on which Avicenna 
constructed his system, and his logical treatises produced a 
permanent effect on the logic of the Latin scholars. He gave the 
tone and direction to nearly all subsequent speculations among 
the Arabians. His order and enumeration of the principles 
of being, his doctrine of the double aspect of intellect, and of 
the perfect beatitude which consists in the aggregation of noble 
minds when they are delivered from the separating barriers of 
individual bodies, present at least in germ the characteristic 
theory of Averroes. But al-Farabi was not always consistent 
in his views; a certain sobriety checked his speculative flights, 
and although holding that the true perfection of man is reached 
in this life by the elevation of the intellectual nature, he came 
towards the close to think the separate existence of intellect 
no better than a delusion. 

Unquestionably the most illustrious name amongst the 
Oriental Moslems was Avicenna (980-1037). His rank in the 
Aviceaaa. me dieval world as a philosopher was far beneath his 
fame as a physician. Still, the logic of Albertus 
Magnus and succeeding doctors was largely indebted to him 
for its formulae. In logic Avicenna starts from distinguishing 
between the isolated concept and the judgment or assertion; 



from which two primitive elements of knowledge there is arti- 
ficially generated a complete and scientific knowledge by the two 
processes of definition and syllogism. But the chief interest 
for the history of logic belongs to his doctrine in so far as it bears 
upon the nature and function of abstract ideas. The question 
had been suggested alike to East and West by Porphyry, and 
the Arabians were the first to approach the full statement of the 
problem. Farabi had pointed out that the universal and in- 
dividual are not distinguished from each other as understanding 
from the senses, but that both universal and individual are in 
one respect intellectual, just as in another connexion they play 
a part in perception. He had distinguished the universal essence 
in its abstract nature, from the universal considered in relation 
to a number of singulars. These suggestions formed the basis 
of Avicenna's doctrine. The essences or forms — the intelligibilia 
which constitute the world of real knowledge — may be looked 
at in themselves (metaphysically) , or as embodied in the things 
of sense (physically), or as expressing the processes of thought 
(logically). The first of these three points of view deals with the 
form or idea as self-contained in the principles of its own being, 
apart from those connexions and distinctions which it receives 
in real (sensuous) science, and through the act of intellect. 
Secondly, the form may be looked at as the similarity evolved 
by a process of comparison, as the work of mental reflection, 
and in that way as essentially expressing a relation. When 
thus considered as the common features derived by examination 
from singular instances, it becomes a universal or common term 
strictly so called. It is intellect which first makes the abstract 
idea a true universal. Intellectus in formis agit universalitatem. 
In the third place, the form or essence may be looked upon as 
embodied in outward things (in singular ibus propriis), and 
thus it is the type more or less ' represented by the members 
of a natural kind. It is the designation of these outward things 
which forms the " first intention " of names; and it is only at a 
later stage, when thought comes to observe its own modes, 
that names, looked upon as predicables and universals, are taken 
in their " second intention." Logic deals with such second in- 
tentions. It does not consider the forms ante muUiplicitalem, 
i.e. as eternal ideas — nor in multiplicitate, i.e. as immersed in the 
matter of the phenomenal world — but post muUiplicitalem, i. e. 
as they exist in and for the intellect which has examined and 
compared. Logic does not come in contact with things, except 
as they are subject to modification by intellectual forms. In 
other words, universality, individuality and speciality are all 
equally modes of our comprehension or notion; their meaning 
consists in their setting forth the relations attaching to any 
object of our conception. In the mind, e.g., one form may be 
placed in reference to a multitude of things, and as thus related 
will be universal. The form animal, e.g., is an abstract intelligible 
or metaphysical idea. When an act of thought employs it as 
a schema to unify several species, it acquires its logical aspect 
(respectus) of generality; and the various living beings qualified 
to have the name animal applied to them constitute the natural 
class or kind. Avicenna's view of the universal may be com- 
pared with that of Abelard, which calls it " that whose nature 
it is to be predicated of several," as if the generality became 
explicit only in the act of predication, in the sermo or proposition, 
and not in the abstract, unrelated form or essence. The three 
modes of the universal before things, in things, and after things, 
spring from Arabian influence, but depart somewhat from his 
standpoint. 

The place of Avicenna amongst Moslem philosophers is seen in 
the fact that ShahrastanI takes him as the type of all, and that 
Ghazall's attack against philosophy is in reality almost entirely 
directed against Avicenna. His system is in the main a codifica- 
tion of Aristotle modified by fundamental views of Neo-Platonist 
origin, and it tends to be a compromise with theology. In order, 
for example, to maintain the necessity of creation, he taught that 
all things except God were admissible or possible in their own 
nature, but that certain of them were rendered necessary by 
the act of the creative first agent, — in other words, that the 
possible could be transformed into the necessary. Avicenna's 



ARABIAN PHILOSOPHY 



279 



theory of the process of knowledge is an interesting part of his 
doctrine. Man has a rational soul, one face of which is turned 
towards the body, and, by the help of the higher aspect, acts as 
practical understanding; the other face lies open to the reception 
and acquisition of the intelligible forms, and its aim is to become 
a reasonable world, reproducing the forms of the universe and 
their intelligible order. In man there is only the susceptibility 
to reason, which is sustained and helped by the light of the active 
intellect. Man may prepare himself for this influx by removing 
the obstacles which prevent the union of the intellect with the 
human vessel destined for its reception. The stages of this 
process to the acquisition of mind are generally enumerated by 
Avicenna as four; in this part he follows not Aristotle, but the 
Greek commentator. The first stage is that of the hylic or 
material intellect, a state of mere potentiality, like that of a child 
for writing, before he has ever put pen to paper. The second 
stage is called in habitu; it is compared to the case of a child 
that has learned the elements of writing, when the bare possi- 
bility is on the way to be developed, and is seen to be real. In 
this period of half-trained reason, it appears as happy conjecture, 
not yet transformed into art or science proper. When the power 
of writing has been actualized, we have a parallel to the intellectus 
in aclu — the way of science and demonstration is entered. And 
when writing has been made a permanent accomplishment, 
or lasting property of the subject, to be taken up at will, it 
corresponds to the intellectus adeptus — the complete mastery 
of science. The whole process may be compared to the gradual 
illumination of a body naturally capable of receiving light. 
There are, however, grades of susceptibility to the active intellect, 
i.e. in theological language, to communication with God and 
his angels. Sometimes the receptivity is so vigorous in its 
affinity, that without teaching it rises at one step to the vision 
of truth, by a certain " holy force " above ordinary measure. 
(In this way philosophy tried to account for the phenomenon 
of prophecy, one of the ruling ideas of Islam.) But the active 
intellect is not merely influential on human souls. It is the 
universal giver of forms in the world. 

In several points Avicenna endeavoured to give a rationale 
of theological dogmas, particularly of prophetic rule, of miracles, 
divine providence and immortality. The permanence of in- 
dividual souls he supports by arguments borrowed from those 
of Plato. The existence of a prophet is shown to be a corollary 
from a belief in God as a moral governor, and the phenomena 
of miracles are required to evidence the genuineness of the 
prophetic mission. Thus Avicenna, like his predecessors, 
tried to harmonize the abstract forms of philosphy with the 
religious faith of his nation. But his arguments are generally 
vitiated by the fallacy of assuming what they profess to prove. 
His failure is made obvious by the attack of Ghazali on the 
tendencies and results of speculation. 

To Ghazali (q.v.) it seemed that the study of secular philosophy 
had resulted in a general indifference to religion, and that the 
abazill. scepticism which concealed itself under a pretence of 
piety was destroying the life and purity of the nation. 
With these views he carried into the fields of philosophy the aims 
and spirit of the Moslem theologian. His restless life was the 
reflex of a mental history disturbed by prolonged agitation. 
Revolting, in the height of his success, against the current 
creed, he began to examine the foundations of knowledge. The 
senses are contradicted by one another, and disproved by 
reason. Reason, indeed, professes to furnish us with necessary 
truths; but what assurance have we that the verdicts of reason 
may not be reversed by some higher authority ? Ghazali then 
interrogated all the sects in succession to learn their criterion of 
truth. He first applied to the theological schoolmen, who 
grounded their religion on reason; but their aim was only to 
preserve the faith from heresy. He turned to the philosophers, 
and examined the accepted Aristotelianism in a treatise which 
has come down to us — The Destruction of the Philosophers. He 
assails them on twenty points of their mixed physical and meta- 
physical peripateticism, from the statement of which, in spite 
«f his pretended scepticism, we can deduce some very positive 



metaphysical opinions of his own. He claims to have shown 
that the dogmas of the eternity of matter and the permanence 
of the world are false; that their description of the Deity as 
the demiurgos is unspiritual; that they fail to prove the existence, 
the unity, the simplicity, the incorporeality or the knowledge 
(both of species and accidents) of God; that their ascription 
of souls to the- celestial spheres is unproved; that their theory 
of causation, which attributes effects to the very natures of 
the causes, is false, for that all actions and events are to be 
ascribed to the Deity; and, finally, that they cannot establish 
the spirituality of the soul, nor prove its mortality. These criti- 
cisms disclose nothing like a sceptical state of mind, but rather 
a reversion from the metaphysical to the theological stage of 
thought. He denies the intrinsic tendencies, or souls, by which 
the Aristotelians explained the motion of the spheres, because 
he ascribes their motion to God. The sceptic would have denied 
both. G. H. Lewes censures Renan for asserting of Ghazali's 
theory of causation—" Hume n'a rien dit plus." It is true that 
Ghazali maintains that the natural law according to which effects 
proceed inevitably from their causes is only custom, and that 
there is no necessary connexion between them. But while Hume 
absolutely denies the necessity, Ghazali merely removes it one 
stage farther back, and plants it in the mind of the Deity. This, 
of course, is not metaphysics, but theology. Having, as he 
believed, refuted the opinions of the philosophers, he next in- 
vestigated the pretensions of the Allegorists, who derived their 
doctrines from an imam. These Arabian ultramontanes had 
no word for the doubter. They could not, he says, even under- 
stand the problems they sought to resolve by the assumption 
of infallibility, and he turned again, in his despair, to the in- 
structors of his youth — the Sufis. In their mystical intuition 
of the laws of life, and absorption in the immanent Deity, he at 
last found peace. This shows the true character of the treatise 
which, alike in medieval and modern times, has been quoted as 
containing an exposition of his opinions. The work called The 
Tendencies of the Philosophers, translated in 1506, with the title 
Logica et Philosophia Algazelis Arabis, contains neither the logic 
nor the philosophy of Ghazali. It is a mere abstract or state- 
ment of the Peripatetic systems, and was made preliminary to 
that Destruction of which we have already spoken. 

This indictment against liberal thought from the standpoint 
of the theological school was afterwards answered in Spain by 
Averroes; but in Bagdad it heralded the extinction of the light 
of philosophy. Moderate and compliant with the popular 
religion as Alfarabius and Avicenna had always been, as com- 
pared with their Spanish successor, they had equally failed to 
conciliate the popular spirit, and were classed in the same cate- 
gory with the heretic or the member of an immoral sect. The 
1 2th century exhibits the decay of liberal intellectual activity 
in the Caliphate, and the gradual ascendancy of Turkish races 
animated with all the intolerance of semi-barbarian proselytes 
to the Mahommedan faith. Philosophy, which had only sprung 
up when the purely Arabian influences ceased to predominate, 
came to an end when the sceptre of the Moslem world passed 
away from the dynasty of Persia. Even in 1150 Bagdad had 
seen a library of philosophical books burned by command of the 
caliph Mostanjid; and in 1192 the same place might have wit- 
nessed a strange scene, in which the books of a physician were 
first publicly cursed, and then committed to the flames, while 
their owner was incarcerated. Thus, while the Latin church 
showed a marvellous receptivity for ethnic philosophy, and 
assimilated doctrines which it had at an earlier date declared 
impious, in Islam the theological system entrenched itself 
towards the end of the 12th century in the narrow orthodoxy 
of the Asharites, and reduced the votaries of Greek philosophy 
to silence. 

The same phenomena were repeated in Spain under the 
Mahommedan rulers of Andalusia and Morocco, with this 
difference, that the time of philosophical development . s ^ 
was shorter, and the heights to which Spanish thinkers P 

soared were greater. The reign of al-Hakam the Second (061- 
976) inaugurated in Andalusia those scientific and philosophical 



28o 



ARABIAN PHILOSOPHY 



studies which were simultaneously prosecuted by the Society 
of Basra. From Cairo, Bagdad, Damascus and Alexandria, 
books both old and new were procured at any price for the library 
of the prince; twenty-seven free schools were opened in Cordova 
for the education of the poor; and intelligent knowledge was 
perhaps more widely diffused in Mahommedan Spain than in 
any other part of Europe at that day. The mosques of the city 
were filled with crowds who listened to lectures on science and 
literature, law and religion. But the future glory thus pro- 
mised was long postponed. The usurping successor of Hakam 
found it a politic step to request the most notable doctors of the 
sacred law to examine the royal library; and every book treat- 
ing of philosophy, astronomy and other forbidden topics was 
condemned to the flames. But the spirit of research, fostered 
by the fusion of races and the social and intellectual competition 
thus engendered, was not crushed by these proceedings; and 
for the next century and more the higher minds of Spain found 
in Damascus and Bagdad the intellectual aliment which they 
desired. At last, towards the close of the nth century, the 
long-pent spiritual energies of Mahommedan Spain burst forth 
in a brief series of illustrious men. Whilst the native Spaniards 
were narrowing the limits of the Moorish kingdoms, and whilst 
the generally fanatical dynasty of the Almohades might have 
been expected to repress speculation, the century preceding 
the close of Mahommedan sway saw philosophy cultivated 
by Avempace, Abubacer and Averroes. Even amongst the 
Almohades there were princes, such as Yusuf (who began his 
reign in 1163) and YaqQb Almanstir (who succeeded in 1184), 
who welcomed the philosopher at their courts and treated him 
as an intellectual compeer. But about 1195 the old distrust of 
philosophy revived; the philosophers were banished in disgrace; 
works on philosophical topics were ordered to be confiscated and 
burned; and the son of Almansur condemned a certain Ibn- 
Habib to death for the crime of philosophizing. 

Arabian speculation in Spain was heralded by Avicebron or 
Ibn Gabirol (g.v.), a Jewish philosopher (1021-1058). About 
Avempace. a generation later the rank of Moslem thinkers was 
introduced by AbQ-Bakr Muhammad ibn Yahya, 
surnamed Ibn-Bajja, and known to the Latin world as Avem- 
pace. He was born at Saragossa, and died comparatively young 
at Fez in 1138. Besides commenting on various physical 
treatises of Aristotle's, he wrote some philosophical essays, 
notably one on the Republic or Regime of the Solitary, under- 
standing by that the organized system of rules, by obedience to 
which the individual may rise from the mere life of the senses 
to the perception of pure intelligible principles and may partici- 
pate in the divine thought which sustains the world. These 
rules for the individual are but the image or reflex of the political 
organization of the perfect or ideal state; and the man who 
strives to lead this life is called the solitary, not because he with- 
draws from society, but because, while in it, he guides himself 
by reference to a higher state, an ideal society. Avempace 
does not develop at any length this curious Platonic idea of the 
perfect state. His object is to discover the highest end of human 
life, and with this view he classifies the various activities of the 
human soul, rejects such as are material or animal, and then 
analyses the various spiritual forms to which the activities may 
be directed. He points out the graduated scale of such forms, 
through which the soul may rise, and shows that none are final 
or complete in themselves, except the pure intelligible forms, 
the ideas of ideas. These the intellect can grasp, and in so 
doing it becomes what he calls intellectus acquisitus, and is in a 
measure divine. This self-consciousness of pure reason is the 
highest object of human activity, and is to be attained by the 
speculative method. The intellect has in itself power to know 
ultimate truth and intelligence, and does not require a mystical 
illumination as Ghazall taught. Avempace's principles, it is 
clear, lead directly to the Averroistic doctrine of the unity of 
intellect, but the obscurity and incompleteness of the Regime 
do not permit us to judge how far he anticipated the later thinker. 
(See Munk, Melanges de phil. juive et arabe, pp. 383-410.) 

The same theme was developed by Ibn.-Tufail (q.v.) in his 



philosophical romance, called Hayy ibn-Yakdhan (the Living, 
Son of the Waking One), best known by Pococke's Latin version, 
as the Philosophus Autodidactus. It describes the process by 
which an isolated truth-seeker detaches himself from his lower 
passions, and raises himself above the material earth and the orbs 
of heaven to the forms which are the source of their movement, 
until he arrives at a union with the supreme intellect. The 
experiences of the religious mystic are paralleled with the 
ecstatic vision in which the philosophical hermit sees a world 
of pure intelligences, where birth and decease are unknown. 
It was this theory which Averroes (1126-1198), the last and 
most famous of the thinkers of Moslem Spain, carried out to his 
doctrine of the unity of intellect. 

For Aristotle the reverence of Averroes was unbounded, 
and to expound him was his chosen task. The uncritical re- 
ceptivity of his age, the defects of the Arabic versions, Averroes. 
the emphatic theism of his creed, and the rationalizing 
mysticism of same Oriental thought, may have sometimes led 
him astray, and given prominence to the less obvious features 
of Aristotelianism. But in his conception of the relation 
between philosophy and religion, Averroes had a light which 
the Latins were without. The science, falsely so called, of the 
several theological schools, their groundless distinctions and 
sophistical demonstrations, he regarded as the great source 
of heresy and scepticism. The allegorical interpretations and 
metaphysics which had been imported into religion had taken 
men's minds away from the plain sense of the Koran. God had 
declared a truth meet for all men, which needed no intellectual 
superiority to understand, in a tongue which each human soul 
could apprehend. Accordingly, the expositors of religious 
metaphysics, Ghazall included, are the enemies of true religion, 
because they make it a mere matter of syllogism. Averroes 
maintains that a return must be made to the words and teaching 
of the prophet; that science must not expend itself in dogma- 
tizing on the metaphysical consequences of fragments of doctrine 
for popular acceptance, but must proceed to reflect upon and 
examine the existing things of the world. Averroes, at the same 
time, condemns the attempts of those who tried to give demon- 
strative science where the mind was not capable of more than 
rhetoric: they harm religion by their mere negations, destroy- 
ing an old sensuous creed, but cannot build up a higher and 
intellectual faith. 

In this spirit Averroes does not allow the fancied needs of 
theological reasoning to interfere with his study of Aristotle, 
whom he simply interprets as a truth-seeker. The points by 
which he told on Europe were all implicit in Aristotle, but 
Averroes set in relief what the original had left obscure, and 
emphasized things which the Christian theologian passed by or 
misconceived. Thus Averroes had a double effect. He was 
the great interpreter of Aristotle to the later Schoolmen. On the 
other hand, he came to represent those aspects of Peripateticism 
most alien to the spirit of Christendom; and the deeply religious 
Moslem gave his name to the anti-sacerdotal party, to the 
materialists, sceptics and atheists, who defied or undermined 
the dominant beliefs of the church. 

On three points Averroes, like other Moslem thinkers, came 
specially into relation, real or supposed, with the religious creed, 
viz. the creation of the world, the divine knowledge of particular 
things, and the future of the human soul. 

The real grandeur of Averroes is seen in his resolute prosecution 
of the standpoint of science in matters of this world, and in his 
recognition that religion is not a branch of knowledge to be 
reduced to propositions and systems of dogma, but a personal 
and inward power, an individual truth which stands distinct 
from, but not contradictory to, the universalities of scientific 
law. In his science he followed the Greeks, and to the School- 
men he and his compatriots rightly seemed philosophers of the 
ancient world. He maintained alike the claim of demonstrative- 
science with its generalities for the few who could live in that 
ethereal world, and the claim of religion for all — the common 
life of each soul as an individual and personal consciousness*. 
But theology, or the mixture of the two, he regarded as a source 



ARABIAN PHILOSOPHY 



281 



of evil to both — fostering the vain belief in a hostility of philo- 
sophers to religion, and meanwhile corrupting religion by a 
pseudo-science. 

The latent nominalism of Aristotle only came gradually to 
be emphasized through the prominence which Christianity 
gave to the individual life, and, apart from passing notices as 
in Abelard, first found clear enunciation in the school of Duns 
Scotus. The Arabians, on the contrary, emphasized the idealist 
aspect which had been adopted and promoted by the Neo- 
Platonist commentators. Hence, to Averroes the eternity of the 
world finds its true expression in the eternity of God. The 
ceaseless movement of growth and change, which presents 
matter in form after form as a continual search after a finality 
which in time and movement is not and cannot be reached, 
represents only the aspect the world shows to the physicist and 
to the senses. In the eye of reason the full fruition of this desired 
finality is already and always attained; the actualization, in- 
visible to the senses, is achieved now and ever, and is thus beyond 
the element of time. This transcendent or abstract being is that 
which the world of nature is always seeking. He is thought or 
intellect, the actuality, of which movement is but the fragment- 
ary attainment in successive instants of time. Such a mind 
is not in the theological sense a creator, yet the onward move- 
ment is not the same as what some modern thinkers seem to 
mean by development. For the perfect and absolute, the con- 
summation of movement is not generated at any point in the 
process; it is an ideal end, which guides the queries of nature,
and does not wait upon them for its achievement. God is the 
unchanging essence of the movement, and therefore its eternal 
cause. 

A special application of this relation between the prior perfect, 
and the imperfect, which it influences, is found in the doctrine 
of the connexion of the abstract (transcendent) intellect with 
man. This transcendent mind is sometimes connected with 
the moon, according to the theory of Aristotle, who assigned 
an imperishable matter to the sphere beyond the sublunary, 
and in general looked upon the celestial orbs as living and intelli- 
gent. Such an intellect, named active or productive, as being 
the author of the development of reason in man, is the permanent, 
eternal thought, which is the truth of the cosmic and physical 
movement. It is in man that the physical or sensible passes 
most evidently into the metaphysical and rational. Humanity 
is the chosen vessel in which the light of the intellect is revealed ; 
and so long as mankind lasts there must always be some indi- 
viduals destined to receive this light. What seems from the 
material point of view to be the acquisition of learning, study 
and a moral life, is from the higher point of view the manifesta- 
tion of the transcendent intellect in the individual. The pre- 
paration of the heart and faculties gives rise to a series of grades 
between the original predisposition and the full acquisition of 
actual intellect. These grades in the main resemble those given 
by Avicenna. But beyond these, Averroes claims as the highest 
bliss of the soul a union in this life with the actual intellect. 
The intellect, therefore, is one and continuous in all individuals, 
who differ only in the degree which their illumination has 
attained. Such was the Averroist doctrine of the unity of intellect 
— the eternal and universal nature of true intellectual life. 
By his interpreters it was transformed into a theory of one soul 
common to all mankind, and when thus corrupted conflicted 
not unreasonably with the doctrines of a future life, common 
to Islam and Christendom. 

Averroes, rejected by his Moslem countrymen, found a hearing 
among the Jews, to whom Maimonides had shown the free paths 
of Greek speculation. In the cities of Languedoc and 
°PP° aents Provence, to which they had been driven by Spanish 
roism. fanaticism, the Jews no longer used the learned Arabic, 
and translations of the works of Averroes became 
necessary. His writings became the text-book of Levi ben 
Gerson at Perpignan, and of Moses of Narbonne. Meanwhile, 
before 1250, Averroes became accessible to the Latin Schoolmen 
by means of versions, accredited by the names of Michael Scot 
and others. William of Auvergne is the first Schoolman who 



criticizes the doctrines of Averroes, not, however, by name. 
Albertus Magnus and St Thomas devote special treatises to an 
examination of the Averroist theory of the unity of intellect, 
which they labour to confute in order to establish the orthodoxy 
of Aristotle. But as -early as Aegidius Romanus (1247-1316), 
Averroes had been stamped as the patron of indifference to 
theological dogmas, and credited with the emancipation which 
was equally due to wider experience and the lessons of the 
Crusades. There had never been an absence of protest against 
the hierarchical doctrine. Berengar of Tours (nth century) had 
struggled in that interest, and with Abelard, in the 12th century, 
the revolt against authority in belief grew loud. The dialogue 
between a Christian, a Jew and a philosopher suggested a com- 
parative estimate of religions, and placed the natural religion of 
the moral law above all positive revelations. Nihilists and 
naturalists, who deified logic and science at the expense of 
faith, were not unknown at Paris in the days of John of Salis- 
bury. In such a critical generation the words of Averroism 
found willing ears, and pupils who outran their teacher. Paris 
became the centre of a sceptical society, which the decrees of 
bishops and councils, and the enthusiasm of the orthodox doctors 
and knights-errant of Catholicism, were powerless to extinguish. 
At Oxford Averroes told more as the great commentator. In 
the days of Roger Bacon he had become an authority. Bacon, 
placing him beside Aristotle and Avicenna, recommends the 
study of Arabic as the only way of getting the knowledge which 
bad versions made almost hopeless. In Duns Scotus, Averroes 
and Aristotle are the unequalled masters of the science of proof; 
and he pronounces distinctly the separation between Catholic 
and philosophical truth, which became the watchword of Aver- 
roism. By the 14th century Averroism was the common leaven 
of philosophy; John Baconthorpe is the chief of Averroists, and 
Walter Burley has similar tendencies. 

Meanwhile Averroism had come to be regarded by the great 
Dominican school as the arch-enemy of the truth. When the 
emperor Frederick II. consulted a Moslem free-thinker on the 
mysteries of the faith, when the phrase or legend of the " Three 
Impostors " presented in its most offensive form the scientific 
survey of the three laws of Moses, Christ and Mahomet, and 
when the characteristic doctrines of Averroes were misunder- 
stood, it soon followed that his name became the badge of the 
scoffer and the sceptic. What had begun with the subtle dis- 
putes of the universities of Paris, went on to the materialist 
teachers in the medical schools and the sceptical men of the world 
in the cities of northern Italy. The patricians of Venice and 
the lecturers of Padua made Averroism synonymous with 
doubt and criticism in theology, and with sarcasm against the 
hierarchy. Petrarch refuses to believe that any good thing can 
come out of Arabia, and speaks of Averroes as a mad dog barking 
against the church. In works of contemporary art Averroes 
is at one time the comrade of Mahomet and Antichrist; at 
another he lies with Arius and Sabellius, vanquished by the 
lance of St Thomas. 

It was in the universities of north Italy that Averroism 
finally settled, and there for three centuries it continued as 
a stronghold of Scholasticism to resist the efforts of 
revived antiquity and of advancing science. Padua 



The school 
of Padua. 



became the seat of Averroist Aristotelianism; and, 
when Padua was conquered by Venice in 1405, the printers of 
the republic spread abroad the teaching of the professors in the 
university. As early as 1300, at Padua, Petrus Aponensis, a 
notable expositor of medical theories, had betrayed a heterodoxy 
in faith; and John of Jandun, one of the pamphleteers on the 
side of Louis of Bavaria, was a keen follower of Averroes, whom 
he styles a " perfect and most glorious physicist." Urbanus 
of Bologna, Paul of Venice (d. 1428), and Cajetanus de Thienis 
(1387-1465), established by their lectures and their discussions 
the authority of Averroes; and a long list of manuscripts rests 
in the libraries of Lombardy to witness the diligence of these 
writers and their successors. Even a lady of Venice, Cassandra 
Fedele, in 1480, gained her laurels in defence of Averroist theses. 
With Pietro Pomponazzi (q.v.) in 1495, a brilliant epoch began 



282 



ARABIAN PHILOSOPHY 



Summary- 



tor the school of Padua. Questions of permanent and present 
interest took the place of outworn scholastic problems. The 
disputants ranged themselves under the rival commentators, 
Alexander and Averroes; and the immortality of the soul became 
the battle-ground of the two parties. Pomponazzi defended the 
Alexandrist doctrine of the utter mortality of the soul, whilst 
Agostino Nifo (q.v.), the Averroist, was entrusted by Leo X. 
with the task of defending the Catholic doctrine. The parties 
seemed to have changed when Averroism thus took the side of 
the church; but the change was probably due to compulsion. 
Nifo had edited the works of Averroes (1495-1497); but his 
expressions gave offence to the dominant theologians, and he 
had to save himself by distinguishing his personal faith from his 
editorial capacity. Alessandro Achillini, the persistent philo- 
sophical adversary of Pomponazzi, both at Padua and subse- 
quently at Bologna, attempted, along with other moderate but 
not brilliant Averroists, to accommodate their philosophical 
theory with the requirements of Catholicism. It was this com- 
paratively mild Averroism, reduced to the merely explanatory 
activity of a commentator, which continued to be the official 
dogma at Padua during the 16th century. Its typical repre- 
sentative is Marc-Antonio Zimara (d. i552),theauthorof arecon- 
ciliation between the tenets of Averroes and those of Aristotle. 

Meanwhile, in 1497, Aristotle was for the first time expounded 
in Greek at Padua. Plato had long been the favourite study 
at Florence; and Humanists, like Erasmus, Ludovicus 
Vives and Nizolius, enamoured of the popular philo- 
sophy of Cicero and Quintilian, poured out the vials of their 
contempt on scholastic barbarism with its " impious and thrice- 
accursed Averroes." The editors of Averroes complain that 
the popular taste had forsaken them for the Greek. Neverthe- 
less, while Fallopius, Vesalius and Galileo were claiming atten- 
tion to their discoveries, G. Zabarella, Francesco Piccolomini 
(1520-1604) and Cesare Cremonini (1550-1631) continued the 
traditions of Averroism, not without changes and additions. 
Cremonini, the last of them, died in 1631, after lecturing twelve 
years at Ferrara, and forty at Padua. The great educational 
value of Arabian philosophy for the later schoolmen consisted 
in its making them acquainted with an entire Aristotle. At 
the moment when it seemed as if everything had been made 
that could be made out of the fragments of Aristotle, and the 
compilations of Capella, Cassiodorus and others, and when 
mysticism and scepticism seemed the only resources left for 
the mind, the horizon of knowledge was suddenly widened by 
the acquisition of a complete Aristotle. Thus the mistakes 
inevitable in the isolated study of an imperfect Organon could 
not henceforth be made. The real bearing of old questions, 
and the meaninglessness of many disputes, were seen in the 
new conception of Aristotelianism given by the Metaphysics 
and other treatises. The former Realism and Nominalism were 
lifted into a higher phase by the principle of the universalizing 
action of intellect — Intellectus in formis agit universalitatem. 
The commentaries of the Arabians in this respect supplied 
nutriment more readily assimilated by the pupils than the pure 
text would have been. 

Arabian philosophy, whilst it promoted the exegesis of Aristotle 
and increased his authority, was not less notable as the source 
of the separation between theology and philosophy. Speculation 
fell on irreligious paths. In many cases the heretical movement 
was due less to foreign example than to the indwelling tendencies 
of the dominant school of realism. But it is not less certain that 
the very considerable freedom of the Arabians from theological 
bias prepared the time when philosophy shook off its ecclesiastical 
vestments. In the hurry of first terror, the church struck 
Aristotle with the anathema launched against innovations in 
philosophy. The provincial council of Paris in 1209, which 
condemned Amalricus and his followers, as well as David of 
Dinant's works, forbade the study of Aristotle's Natural Philo- 
sophy and the Commentaries. In 1215 the same prohibition 
was repeated, specifying the Metaphysics and Physics, and the 
Commentaries by the Spaniard Mauritius (i.e. probably Averroes). 
Meanwhile Albertus Magnus and Thomas Aquinas, accepting 



the exegetical services of the Arabians, did their best to contro- 
vert the obnoxious doctrine of the Intellect, and to defend the 
orthodoxy of Aristotle against the unholy glosses of infidels. 
But it is doubtful whether even they kept as pure from the 
infection of illegitimate doctrine as they supposed. The tide 
meanwhile flowed in stronger and stronger. In 1270 Etienne 
Tempier, bishop of Paris, supported by an assembly of theo- 
logians, anathematized thirteen propositions bearing the stamp 
of Arabian authorship; but in 1277 the same views and others 
more directly offensive to Christians and theologians had to be 
censured again. Raymond Lully, in a dialogue with an infidel 
thinker, broke a lance in support of the orthodox doctrine, and 
carried on a crusade against the Arabians in every university; 
and a disciple of Thomas Aquinas drew up a list {De erroribus 
philosophorum) of the several delusions and errors of each of 
the thinkers from Kindi to Averroes. Strong in their conviction 
of the truth of Aristotelianism, the Arabians carried out their 
logical results in the theological field, and made the distinction 
of necessary and possible, of form and matter, the basis of con- 
clusions in the most momentous questions. They refused to 
accept the doctrine of creation because it conflicted with the 
explanation of forms as the necessary evolution of matter. 
They denied the particular providence of God, because knowledge 
in the divine sphere did not descend to singulars. They ex- 
cluded the Deity from all direct action upon the world, and 
substituted for a cosmic principle the active intellect, — thus 
holding a form of Pantheism. But all did not go the same length 
in their divergence from the popular creed. 

The half-legendary accounts which attribute the introduction 
of Arabian science to Gerbert, afterwards Pope Sylvester II., 
to Constantinus Africanus and to Adelard of Bath, if they have 
any value, refer mainly to medical science and mathematics. 
It was not till about the middle of the 12th century that under 
the patronage of Raymond, archbishop of Toledo, a society of 
translators, with the archdeacon Dominicus Gundisalvi at their 
head, produced Latin versions of the Commentaries of Avicenna, 
and Ghazali, of the Fons Vitae of Avicebron, and of several 
Aristotelian treatises. The working translators were converted 
Jews, the best-known among them being Joannes Avendeath. 
With this effort began the chief translating epoch for Arabic 
works. Avicenna's Canon of Medicine was first translated into 
Latin by Gerard of Cremona (d. 1187), to whom versions of other 
medical and astronomical works are due. The movement 
towards introducing Arabian science and philosophy into Europe, 
however, culminated under the patronage of the emperor 
Frederick II. (1212-1250). Partly from superiority to the 
narrowness of his age, and partly in the interest of his struggle 
with the Papacy, this Malleus ecclesiae Romanae drew to his 
court those savants whose pursuits were discouraged by the 
church, and especially students in the forbidden lore of the 
Arabians. He is said to have pensioned Jews for purposes of 
translation. One of the scholars to whom Frederick gave a 
welcome was Michael Scot, the first translator of Averroes. 
Scot had sojourned at Toledo about 121 7, and had accomplished 
the versions of several astronomical and physical treatises, 
mainly, if we believe Roger Bacon, by the labours of a Jew named 
Andrew. But Bacon is apparently hypercritical in his estimate of 
the translators from the Arabic. Another protege of Frederick's 
was Hermann the German (Alemannus), who, between the years 
1243 and 1256, translated amongst other things a paraphrase of 
al-Farabi on the Rhetoric, and of Averroes on the Poetics and 
Ethics of Aristotle. Jewish scholars held an honourable place 
in transmitting the Arabian commentators to the schoolmen. 
It was amongst them, especially in Maimonides, that Aristo- 
telianism found refuge after the light of philosophy was ex- 
tinguished in Islam; and the Jewish family of the Ben-Tibbon 
were mainly instrumental in making Averroes known to southern 
France. 

See S. Munk, Melanges de philosophic juive et arabe (Paris, 1859) ; 
E. Renan, De Philosophia Peripatetica apud Syros (1852), and 
Averroes et I'Averroisme (Paris, 3rd ed., 1867); Am. Jourdain, 
Recherches critiques sur I'dge et Vorigine des traductions latines 
d'Aristote (Paris, 2 me ed., 1843) ; B. Haureau, Philosophic scolastique 



ARABIAN SEA— ARABS 



283 



(Paris, 1850), tome i. p. 359; E. Vachefot, £cole d'Alexandrie 
(1846-1851), tome iii. p. 85; Schmolders, Documenta philosophiae 
Arabum (Bonn, 1836), and Essai sur les ecoles philosophtques chez les 
Arabes (Paris, 1842); Shahrastani, History of Religious and Philo- 
sophical Sects, in German translation by Haarbriicker (Halle, 1850- 
1851); Dieterici, Streit zwischen Mensch und Thier (Berlin, 1858), 
and his other translations of the Encyclopaedia of the Brothers of 
Sincerity (1861 to 1872); T.'J. de Boer, The History of Philosophy 
in Islam (London, 1903) ; K. Prantl, Geschichte der Logik (Leipzig, 
1861); and the Histories of Philosophy; also the literature under 
the biographies of philosophers mentioned. (W. W. ; G. W. T.) 

ARABIAN SEA (anc. Mare Erythraeum) , the name applied 
to the portion of the Indian Ocean bounded E. by India, N. by 
Baluchistan and part of the southern Persian littoral, W. by 
Arabia, and S., approximately, by a line between Cape Guardafui, 
the north-east point of Somaliland, and Cape Comorin in India. 
It has two important branches — at the south-west the Gulf of 
Aden, connecting with the Red Sea through the strait of Bab-el- 
Mandeb; and at the north-west the Gulf of Oman, connecting 
with the Persian Gulf. Besides these larger ramifications, there 
are the Gulfs of Cambay and Kach on the Indian coast. An 
interest and importance belong to this sea as forming part of the 
chief highway between Europe and India. Its islands are few 
and insignificant, the chief being Sokotra, off the African, and 
the Laccadives, off the Indian coast. 

ARABICI, a religious sect originating about the beginning of 
the 3rd century, which is mentioned by Augustine (De Haeres. 
c. lxxxiii.), and called also 8uriTO\pvxlTai (" mortal-souled ") by 
John of Damascus (De Haeres. c. xc.) The name is given to 
the Arabians mentioned by Eusebius (Hist. Eccl. vi. 37), whose 
distinctive doctrine was a form of Christian materialism, showing 
itself in the belief that the soul perished and was restored to life 
along with the body. We may compare Tatian's view of the 
soul as a subtler variety of matter. According to Eusebius, 
they were convinced of their error by Origen, and renounced it 
at a council held about a.d. 246. 

ARABI PASHA (c. 1839- ), more correctly Ahmad 'Arabi, 
to which in later years he added the epithet al-Misrl, " the 
Egyptian," Egyptian soldier and revolutionary leader, was born 
in Lower Egypt in 1839 or 1840 of a fellah family. Having 
entered the army as a conscript he was made an officer by Said 
Pasha in 1862, and was employed in the transport department 
in the Abyssinian campaign of 1875 under Ismail Pasha. A 
charge of peculation, unproved, was made against him in con- 
nexion with this expedition and he was placed on half-pay. 
During this time he joined a secret society formed by Ali Rubi 
with the object of getting rid of Turkish officers from the 
Egyptian army. Arabi also attended lectures at the mosque 
El Azhar and acquired a reputation as an orator. In 1878 he 
was employed by Ismail in fomenting a disturbance against the 
ministry of Nubar, Rivers Wilson and de Blignieres, and received 
in payment a wife from Ismail's harem and the command of a 
regiment. This increased his influence with the secret society, 
which, under the feeble government of Tewfik Pasha and the 
Dual Control, began to agitate against Europeans. In all that 
followed Arabi was put forward as the leader of the discon- 
tented Egyptians; he was in reality little more than the mouth- 
piece and puppet of abler men such as Ali Rubi and Mahmud 
Sami. On the 1st of February 1881 Arabi and two other 
Egyptian colonels, summoned before a court-martial for acts 
of disobedience, were rescued by their soldiers, and the khedive 
was forced to dismiss his then minister of war in favour of 
Mahmud Sami. A military demonstration on the 8th of 
September 1881, led by Arabi, forced the khedive to increase 
the numbers and pay of the army, to substitute Sherif Pasha 
for Riaz Pasha as prime minister, and to convene an assembly 
of notables. Arabi became under-secretary for war at the 
beginning of 1882, but continued his intrigues. The assembly 
of notables claimed the right of voting the budget, and thus 
came into conflict with the foreign controllers who had been 
appointed to guard the interests of the bondholders in the 
management of the Egyptian finances. Sherif fell in February, 
Mahmud Sami became prime minister, and Arabi (created a 
pasha) minister of war. Arabi, after a brief fall from office, 



acquired a dictatorial power that alarmed the British govern- 
ment. British and French warships went to Alexandria at the 
beginning of June; on the nth of that month rioting in that 
city led to the sacrifice of many European fives. Order could 
only be restored through the intervention of Arabi, who now 
adopted a more- distinctly anti-European attitude. His arming 
of the forts at Alexandria was held to constitute a menace to 
the British fleet. On the refusal of France to co-operate, the 
British fleet bombarded the forts (nth July), and a British force, 
under Sir Garnet Wolseley, defeated Arabi on the 13th of 
September at Tel-el-Kebir. Arabi fled to Cairo where he sur- 
rendered, and was tried (3rd of December) for rebellion. In 
accordance with an understanding made with the British 
representative, Lord Dufferin, Arabi pleaded guilty, and sentence 
of death was immediately commuted to one of banishment for 
life to Ceylon. The same sentence was passed on Mahmud 
Sami and others. After Arabi's exile had lasted for nearly 
twenty years, however, the khedive Abbas II. exercised his 
prerogative of mercy, and in May 1901 Arabi was permitted to 
return to Egypt. Arabi, as has been said, was rather the figure- 
head than the inspirer of the movement of 1 881-188 2; and 
was probably more honest, as he was certainly less intelligent, 
than those whose tool, in a large measure, he was. The move- 
ment which he represented in the eye of Europe, whatever the 
motives of its leaders, " was in its essence a genuine revolt 
against misgovernment," l and it was a dim recognition of this 
fact which led Arabi to style himself " the Egyptian." 

See Egypt: History; also the accounts of Arabi in Khedives 
and Pashas, by C. F. Moberly Bell (1884) ; and in Lord Cromer's 
Modern Egypt (1908). 

ARABISTAN (formerly Khuzistan), a province of Persia, 
bounded on the S. by the Persian Gulf, on the W. by Turkish 
territory, on the N. by Luristan and on the E. by the Bakhtiari 
district and Fars. It has its modern name, signifying " land of 
the Arabs," from the Arabs who form the bulk of the population, 
and is subdivided into the districts of Muhamrah, Fellahiyeh 
(the old Dorak), Ram Hormuz (popularly known as Ramiz), 
Havizeh, Shushter and Dizful. It has a population of about 
200,000 and pays a yearly revenue of about £30,000. The soil 
is very fertile, but since the dam over the Karun at Ahvaz was 
swept away and the numerous canals which diverted the waters 
of the river for irrigation became useless, a great part of the 
province is uncultivated, and most of the crops and produce 
depend for water on rainfall and wells. The climate is hot, and 
in the low-lying, swampy districts very unhealthy; the prevail- 
ing winds are north-west and south-east, the former hot and 
dry from the arid districts west of Mesopotamia, the latter bear- 
ing much moisture from the Persian Gulf and the Indian Ocean. 
The principal Arab tribes are the Kab (generally known as 
Chaab) and Beni Lam, the former mostly settled in towns and 
villages and by religion Shi'ites, the latter nomads and Sunnites. 
The staples of food are dates and fish in the south, elsewhere 
the produce of the herds and flocks and rice, wheat and barley. 
Other products are maize, cotton, silk and indigo, and the manu- 
factures include carpets without pile, coarse woollens, cottons 
and silk nettings. Dyeing is extensively carried on in Dizful 
where most of the indigo is grown. 

Khuzistan (meaning " the land of the Khuz ") was a part of 
the Biblical Elam; the classical Susiana, and appears in the great 
inscription of Darius as Uvaja. 

ARABS, the name given to that branch of the Semitic race 
which from the earliest historic times inhabited the: south- 
western portion of the Arabian peninsula. The name, to-day 
the collective term for the overwhelming majority of the sur- 
viving Semitic peoples, was originally restricted to the nomad 
tribes who ranged the north of the peninsula east of Palestine 
and the Syro-Arabian desert. In this narrow sense " Arab " 
is used in the Assyrian inscriptions, in the Old Testament and 
in the Minaean inscriptions. Before the Christian era it had 
come to include all the inhabitants of the peninsula. This, it is 
suggested, may have been due to the fact that the " Arabs " 
1 Lord Cromer in Egypt, No. 1, 1905, p. 2. 



284 



ARABS 



were the chief people near the Greek and Roman colonies in 
Syria and Mesopotamia. Classical writers use the term both 
in its local and general sense. The Arabs to-day occupy, besides 
Arabia, a part of Mesopotamia, the western shores of the Red 
Sea, the eastern coast of the Persian Gulf and the north of 
Africa. The finest type of the race is found in south Arabia 
among the Ariba Arabs, among the mountaineers of Hadramut 
and Yemen and among the Bedouin tribes roaming over the 
interior of central and northern Arabia. The Arabs of the 
coasts and those of Mesopotamia are hybrids, showing Turkish, 
Negroid and Hamitic crossings. The people of Syria and 
Palestine are hybrids of Arab, Phoenician and Jewish descent. 
The theory that early Arab settlements were made on the east 
coast of Africa as far as Sofala south of the Zambezi, is without 
foundation; the earliest Arab settlement on the east coast of 
Africa that can be proved is Magadoxo (Mukdishu) in the 10th 
century, and the ruined cities of Mashonaiand, once supposed 
to be the remains of Arab settlements, are now known to be 
of medieval African origin. On the East African coast-lands 
Arab influence is still considerable. Traces of the Arab type 
are met with in Asia Minor, the Caucasus, western Persia and 
India, while the influence of the Arab language and civiliza- 
tion is found in Europe (Malta and Spain), China and Central 
Asia. 

The Arabs are at once the most ancient as they in many ways 
are the purest surviving type of the true Semite. Certainly 
Ethnolozy ^ e inhabitants of Yemen are not, and in historic 
times never were, pure Semites. Somali and other 
elements, generally described under the collective racial name 
of Hamitic, are clearly traceable; but the inland Arabs still 
present the nearest approach to the primitive Semitic type. 
The origin of the Arab race can only be a matter of conjecture. 
From the remotest historic times it has been divided into two 
branches, which from their geographical position it is simplest 
to call the North Arabians and the South Arabians. Arabic 
and Jewish tradition trace the descent of the latter from Joktan 
(Arabic Kahtan) son of Heber, of the former from Ishmael. 
The South Arabians — the older branch — were settled in the 
south-western part of the peninsula centuries before the uprise 
of the Ishmaelites. These latter include not only Ishmael's 
direct descendants through the twelve princes (Gen. xxv. 16), 
but the Edomites, Moabites, Ammonites, Midianites and other 
tribes. This ancient and undoubted division of the Arab race 
— roughly represented to-day by the universally adopted 
classification into Arabs proper and Bedouin Arabs (see 
Bedouins) — has caused much dispute among ethnologists. 
All authorities agree in declaring the race to be Semitic in the 
broadest ethnological signification of that term, but some 
thought they saw in this division of the race an indication of a 
dual origin. They asserted that the purer branch of the Arab 
family was represented by the sedentary Arabs who were of 
Hamitic (Biblical Cushite), i.e. African ancestry, and that the 
nomad Arabs were Arabs only by adoption, and were nearer 
akin to the true Semite as sons of Ishmael. Many arguments 
were adduced in support of this theory. (1) The unquestioned 
division in remote historic times of the Arab race, and the im- 
memorial hostility between the two branches. (2) The concur- 
rence of pre-Islamitic literature and records in representing the 
first settlement of the " pure " Arab as made in the extreme 
south-western part of the peninsula, near Aden. (3) The use 
of Himyar, " dusky " or " red " (suggesting African affinities), 
as the name sometimes for the ruling class, sometimes for the 
entire people. (4) The African affinities of the Himyaritic 
language. (5) The resemblance of the grammar of the Arabic 
now spoken by the " pure " Arabs, where it differs from that 
of the North, to the Abyssinian grammar. (6) The marked 
resemblance of the pre-Islamitic institutions of Yemen and its 
allied provinces — its monarchies, courts, armies and serfs — to 
the historical Africo-Egyptian type and even to modern Abys- 
sinia. (7) The physique of the " pure " Arab, the shape and 
size of the head, the slenderness of the lower limbs, all suggesting 
an African rather than an Asiatic origin. (8) The habits of the 



people, viz. their sedentary rather than nomad occupations, 
their fondness for village life, for dancing, music and society, 
their cultivation of the soil, having more in common with African 
life than with that of the western Asiatic continent. (9) The 
extreme facility of marriage which exists in all classes of the 
southern Arabs with the African races, the fecundity of such 
unions and the slightness or even total absence of any caste 
feeling between the dusky " pure " Arab and the still darker 
African, pointing to a community of origin. And further argu- 
ments were found in the characteristics of the Bedouins, their 
pastoral and nomad tendencies; the peculiarities of their idiom 
allied to the Hebrew; their strong clan feeling, their con- 
tinued resistance to anything like regal power or centralized 
organization. 

Such, briefly, were the more important arguments; but 
latterly ethnologists are inclined to agree that there is little 
really to be said for the African ancestry theory and that the 
Arab race had its beginning in the deserts of south Arabia, 
that in short the true Arabs are aborigines. 

Mahommedans call the centuries before the Prophet's birth 
waql-el jahiliya, " the time of ignorance," but the fact is that 
the Arab world has in some respects never since reached so high 
a level as it had in those days which it suits Moslems to paint in 
dreary colours. Writing was a fine art and poetry flourished. 
Eloquence was an accomplishment all strove to acquire, and 
each year there were assemblies, lasting sometimes a month, 
which were devoted to contests of skill among the orators and 
poets, to listen to whose friendly rivalry tribesmen journeyed 
long distances. Last, that surest index of a people's civilization 
— the treatment of women — contrasted very favourably with 
their position under the Koran. Women had rights and were 
respected. The veil and the harem system were unknown before 
Mahomet. According to Noldeke the Nabataean inscriptions 
and coins show that women held a high social position in northern 
Arabia, owning large estates and trading independently. Poly- 
andry and polygamy, it is true, were practised, but the right of 
divorce belonged to the woman as well as the man. Two kinds 
of marriage were celebrated. One was a purely personal con- 
tract, with no witnesses, the wife not leaving her home or passing 
under marital authority. The other was a formal marriage, the 
woman becoming subject to her husband by purchase or capture. 
Even captive women were not kept in slavery. Arabic wealth 
and culture had indeed thus early reached a stage which justified 
Professor Robertson Smith in writing, " In this period the name 
of Arab was associated to Western writers with ideas of effemi- 
nate indolence and peaceful opulence . . . the golden age of 
Yemen." But long before Mahomet's time this early Arab 
predominance was at an end, possibly due in great measure 
to the loss of the caravan trade through the increase of shipping. 
The abandonment of great cities and the ruin of many tribes 
contributed to the apparent nationalization of the Arab peoples. 
Though the traditional jealousy and hostility of the two branches, 
the Yemenites and Maadites or Ishmaelites, remained, the Arab 
world had attained by the levelling process of common mis- 
fortune the superficial unity it presents to-day. The nation thus 
formed, never a nation in the strict sense of the word, was 
distinctively and thoroughly Semitic in character and language, 
and has remained unchanged to the present day. The sporadic 
brilliancy of the ancient Arab kingdoms gave place to a social 
and political lethargy, the continuation of which for many cen- 
turies made the uprise of Saracenic empires seem a miracle to 
a world ignorant of the Arab past. The Arab race up to 
Mahomet's day had been in the main pagan. Monotheism, if 
it ever prevailed, early gave place to sun and star worship, 
or simple idolatry. Professor Robertson Smith suggests that 
totemism was the earliest form of Arabian idolatry, and that 
each tribe had its sacred animal. This he supports by the fact 
that some tribal names were derived from those of animals, and 
that animal-worship was not unknown in Arabia. What seems 
certain is that Arab religion was of a complex hybrid nature, 
not much to be wondered at when one remembers that Arabia 
was the asylum of many religious refugees, Zoroastrians, Jews, 



ARABS 



285 



Christians. In the later pre-Islamitic times spirits, or jinns, 
as they were called, of which each tribe or family had its 
own, were worshipped, and there was but a vague idea of a 
Supreme Being. Images of the jinns to the number of 
360, one for each day of the lunar year, were collected in 
the temple at Mecca, the chief seat of their worship. That 
worship was of a sanguinary nature. Human sacrifice was 
fairly frequent. Under the guise of religion female infanticide 
was a common practice. At Mecca the great object of worship 
was a plain black stone, and to it pilgrimages were made from 
every part of Arabia. This stone was so sacred to the Arabs 
that even Mahomet dared not dispense with it, and it remains 
the central object of sanctity in the Ka'ba to-day. The temples 
of the Sabaeans and the Minaeans were built east of their 
cities, a fact suggesting sun-worship, yet this is not believed to 
have been the cult of the Minaeans. Common to both was the 
worship of Attar, the male Ashtoreth. 

With the appearance of Mahomet the Arabs took anew a place 
in the world's history. 

Physically the Arabs are one of the strongest and noblest 
races of the world. Baron de Larrey, surgeon-general to 
Physique. Napoleon on his expedition to Egypt and Syria, 
writes: " Their physical structure is in all respects 
more perfect than that of Europeans; their organs of sense 
exquisitely acute, their size above the average of men in general, 
their figure robust and elegant, their colour brown; their in- 
telligence proportionate to their physical perfection and without 
doubt superior, other things being equal, to that of other 
nations." The typical Arab face is of an oval form, lean- 
featured; the eyes a brilliant black, deep-set under bushy 
eyebrows; nose aquiline, forehead straight but not high. In 
body the Arab is muscular and long-limbed, but lean. De- 
formed individuals or dwarfs are rare among Arabs; nor, except 
leprosy, which is common, does any disease seem to be hereditary 
among them. They often suffer from ophthalmia, though not 
in the virulent Egyptian form. They are scrupulously clean 
in their persons, and take special care of their teeth, which are 
generally white and even. Simple and abstemious in their 
habits, they often reach an extreme yet healthy old age; nor 
is it common among them for the faculties of the mind to give 
way sooner than those of the body. 

Thus, physically, they yield to few races, if any, of mankind; 
mentally, they surpass most, and are only kept back in the 
Character. marcn °f progress by the remarkable defect of or- 
ganizing power"and incapacity for combined action. 
Lax and imperfect as are their forms of government, it is with 
impatience that even these are borne; of the four caliphs 
who alone reigned — if reign theirs could be called — in Arabia 
proper, three died a violent death; and of the Wahhabi princes, 
the most genuine representatives in later times of pure Arab 
rule, almost all have met the same fate. The Arab face, which 
is not unkindly, but never smiling, expresses that dignity and 
gravity which are typical of the race. While the Arab is always 
polite, good-natured, manly and brave, he is also revengeful, 
cruel, untruthful and superstitious. Of the Arab nature Burck- 
hardt (other authorities, e.g. Barth and Rohlfs, are far less com- 
plimentary) wrote: " The Arab displays his manly character when 
he defends his guest at the peril of his own life, and submits 
to the reverses of fortune, to disappointment and distress, with 
the most patient resignation. He is distinguished from a Turk 
by the virtues of pity and gratitude. The Turk is cruel, the Arab 
of a more kind temper; he pities and supports the wretched, and 
never forgets the generosity shown to him even by an enemy." 
The Arab will lie and cheat and swear false oaths, but once his 
word is pledged he may be trusted to the last. There are some 
oaths such as Wallah (by Allah) which mean nothing, but such 
an oath as the threefold one with wa, bi and ta as particles of 
swearing the meanest thief will not break. In temper, or at 
least in the manifestation of it, the Arab is studiously calm; 
and he rarely so much as raises his voice in a dispute. But this 
outward tranquillity covers feelings alike keen and permanent; 
and the remembrance of a rash jest or injurious word, uttered 



years before, leads only too often to that blood-revenge which 
is a sacred duty everywhere in Arabia. 

There exist, however, marked tribal or almost semi-national 
diversities of character among the Arabs. Thus, the inhabitants 
of Hejaz are noted for courtesy and blamed for fickleness; those 
of Nejd are distinguished by their stern tenacity and dignity 
of deportment; the nations of Yemen are gentle and pliant, but 
revengeful; those of Hasa and Oman cheerful and fond of sport, 
though at the same time turbulent and unsteady. Anything 
approaching to a game is rare in Nejd, and in the Hejaz religion 
and ,the yearly occurrence of the pilgrim ceremonies almost 
exclude all public diversions; but in Yemen the well-known 
game of the " jerid," or palm-stick, with dances and music is 
not rare. In Oman such amusements are still more frequent. 
Again in Yemen and Oman, coffee-houses, where people resort 
for conversation, and where public recitals, songs and other 
amusements are indulged in, stand open all day; while nothing 
of the sort is tolerated in Nejd. So too the ceremonies of circum- 
cision or marriage are occasions of gaiety and pastime on the 
coast, but not in the central provinces. 

An Arab town, or even village, except it be the merest hamlet, 
is invariably walled round; but seldom is a stronger material 
than dried earth used; the walls are occasionally 
flanked by towers of like construction. A dry ditch and 
often surrounds the whole. The streets are irregular customs. 
and seldom parallel. The Arab, indeed, lacks an 
eye for the straight. The Arab carpenter cannot form a right 
angle; an Arab servant cannot place a cloth square on a table. 
The Ka'ba at Mecca has none of its sides or angles equal. The 
houses are of one or two storeys, rarely of three, with flat mud 
roofs, little windows and no external ornament. If the town 
be large, the expansion of one or two streets becomes a market- 
place, where are ranged a few shops of eatables, drugs, coffee, 
cottons or other goods. Many of these shops are kept by women. 
The chief mosque is always near the market-place; so is also 
the governor's residence, which, except in size and in being 
more or less fortified Arab fashion, does not differ from a private 
house. Drainage is unthought of; but the extreme dryness of 
the air obviates the inconvenience and disease that under other 
skies could not fail to ensue, and which in the damper climates 
of the coast make themselves seriously felt. But the streets are 
roughly swept every day, each householder taking care of the 
roadway that lies before his own door. Whitewash and colour 
are occasionally used in Yemen, Hejaz and Oman; elsewhere a 
light ochre tint, the colour of the sun-dried bricks, predominates, 
and gives an Arab town the appearance at a distance of a 
large dust-heap in the centre of the bright green ring of gardens 
and palm-groves. Baked bricks are unknown in Arabia, and 
stone buildings are rare, especially in Nejd. Palm branches 
and the like, woven in wattles, form the dwellings, of the poorer 
classes in the southern districts. Many Arab towns possess 
watch-towers, like huge round factory chimneys in appearance, 
built of sun-dried bricks, and varying in height from 50 to 100 ft. 
or even more. Indeed, two of these constructions at the town 
of Birkat-el-Mauj, in Oman, are said to be each of 170 ft. in 
height, and that of Nezwah, in the same province, is reckoned 
at 140; but these are of stone. 

The principal feature in the interior of an Arab house is the 
" kahwah " or coffee-room. It is a large apartment spread with 
mats, and sometimes furnished with carpets and a few cushions. 
At one end is a small furnace or fireplace for preparing coffee. 
In this room the men congregate; here guests are received, and 
even lodged; women rarely enter it, except at times when 
strangers are unlikely to be present. Some of these apartments 
are very spacious and supported by pillars; one wall is usually 
built transversely to the compass direction of the Ka'ba; it 
serves to facilitate the performance of prayer by those who 
may happen to be in the kahwah at the appointed times. The 
other rooms are ordinarily small. 

The Arabs are proverbially hospitable. A stranger's arrival 
is often the occasion of an amicable dispute among the wealthier 
inhabitants as to who shall have the privilege of receiving him. 



286 



ARABS 



Arab cookery is of the simplest. Roughly-ground wheat cooked 
with butter; bread in thin cakes, prepared on a heated iron 
plate or against the walls of an open oven; a few vegetables, 
generally of the leguminous kinds; boiled mutton or camel's 
flesh, among the wealthy; dates and fruits — this is the menu 
of an ordinary meal. Rice is eaten by the rich and fish is 
common on the coasts. Tea, introduced only a few decades 
back, is now largely drunk. A food of which the Arabs are fond 
is locusts boiled in salt and water and then dried in the sun. 
They taste like stale shrimps, but there is a great sale for them. 
Spices are freely employed; butter much too largely for a 
European taste. 

After eating, the hands are always washed, soap or the ashes 
of an alkaline plant being used. A covered censer with burning 
incense is then passed round, and each guest perfumes his hands, 
face, and sometimes his clothes; this censer serves also on first 
receptions and whenever special honour is intended. In Yemen 
and Oman scented water often does duty for it. Coffee, without 
milk or sugar, but flavoured with an aromatic seed brought from 
India, is served to all. This, too, is done on the occasion of a 
first welcome, when the cups often make two or three successive 
rounds; but, in fact, coffee is made and drunk at any time, as 
frequently as the desire for it may suggest itself; and each time 
fresh grains are sifted, roasted, pounded and boiled — a very 
laborious process, and one that requires in the better sort of 
establishments a special servant or slave for the work. Arabs 
generally make but one solid meal a day — that of supper, soon 
after sunset. Even then they do not eat much, gluttony being 
rare among them, and even daintiness esteemed disgraceful. 
Wine, like other fermented drinks, is prohibited by the Koran, 
and is, in fact, very rarely taken, though the inhabitants of the 
mountains of Oman are said to indulge in it. On the coast 
spirits of the worst quality are sometimes procured; opium 
and hashish are sparingly indulged in. On the other hand, 
wherever Wahhabiism has left freedom of action, tobacco- 
smoking prevails; short pipes of clay, long pipes with large 
open bowls, or most frequently the water-pipe or " nar- 
ghileh," being used. The tobacco smoked is generally strong 
and is either brought from the neighbourhood of Bagdad or 
grown in the country itself. The strongest quality is that of 
Oman ; the leaf is broad and coarse, and retains its green colour 
even when dried; a few whiffs have been known to produce 
absolute stupor. The aversion of the Wahhabis to tobacco is 
well known; they entitle it " mukhzi " or "the shameful," 
and its use is punished with blows, as the public use of wine 
would be elsewhere. 

In dress much variety prevails. The loose cotton drawers 
girded at the waist, which in hot climates do duty for trousers, 
are not often worn, even by the upper classes, in Nejd 
or Yemama, where a kind of silk dressing-gown is 
thrown over the long shirt; frequently, too, a brown or black 
cloak distinguishes the wealthier citizen; his head-dress is a 
handkerchief fastened round the head by a band. But in Hejaz, 
Yemen and Oman, turbans are by no means uncommon; the 
ordinary colour is white; they are worn over one or more skull- 
caps. Trousers also form part of the dress in the two former 
of these districts; and a voluminous sash, in which a dagger 
or an inkstand is stuck, is wrapped round the waist. The poorer 
folk, however, and the villagers often content themselves with 
a broad piece of cloth round the loins, and another across the 
shoulders. In Oman trousers are rare, but over the shirt a long 
gown, of peculiar and somewhat close-fitting cut, dyed yellow, 
is often worn. The women in these provinces commonly put 
on loose drawers and some add veils to their head-dresses; 
they are over-fond of ornaments (gold and silver); their hair 
is generally arranged in a long plait hanging down behind. All 
men allow their beards and moustaches full growth, though 
this is usually scanty. Most Arabs shave their heads, and indeed 
all, strictly speaking, ought by Mahommedan custom to do so. 
An Arab seldom or never dyes his hair. Sandals are worn more 
often than shoes; none but the very poorest go barefoot. 

Slavery is still, as of old times, a recognized institution through- 



Dress. 



out Arabia; and an illicit traffic in blacks is carried on along 
the coasts of the Persian Gulf and the Red Sea. The 
slaves themselves were obtained chiefly from the east 
African coast districts down as far as Zanzibar, but this 
source of supply was practically closed by the end of the 
19th century. Slaves are usually employed in Arabia as 
herdsmen or as domestic servants, rarely in agricultural work; 
they also form a considerable portion of the bodyguards with 
which Eastern greatness loves to surround itself. Like their 
countrymen elsewhere, they readily embrace the religion of their 
masters and become zealous Mahommedans. Arab custom 
enfranchises a slave who has accepted Islam at the end of seven 
years of bondage, and when that period has arrived, the master, 
instead of exacting from his slave the price of freedom, generally, 
on giving him his liberty, adds the requisite means for support- 
ing himself and a family in comfort. Further, on every important 
occasion, such as a birth, circumcision, a marriage or a death, 
one or more of the household slaves are sure of acquiring their 
freedom. Hence Arabia has a considerable free black popula- 
tion; and these again, by inter-marriage with the whites 
around, have filled the land with a mulatto breed of every shade, 
till, in the eastern and southern provinces especially, a white 
skin is almost an exception. In Arabia no prejudice exists 
against negro alliances; no social or political line separates 
the African from the Arab. A negro may become a sheik, 
a kadi, an amir, or whatever his industry and his talents may 
render him capable of being. This is particularly so in Nejd, 
Yemen and Hadramut; in the Hejaz and the north a faint 
line of demarcation may be observed between the races. 

The Arabs are good soldiers but poor generals. Personal 
courage, wonderful endurance of privation, fixity of purpose, 
and a contempt of death are qualities common to 
almost every race, tribe and clan that compose the qualities. 
Arab nation. In skirmishing and harassing they have 
few equals, while at close quarters they have often shown them- 
selves capable of maintaining, armed with swords and spears 
alone, a desperate struggle against guns and bayonets, neither 
giving nor receiving quarter. Nor are they wholly ignorant 
of tactics, their armies, when engaged in regular war, being 
divided into centre and wings, with skirmishers in front and a 
reserve behind, often screened at the outset of the engagement 
by the camels of the expedition. These animals, kneeling and 
ranged in long parallel rows, form a sort of entrenchment, from 
behind which the soldiers of the main body fire their matchlocks, 
while the front divisions, opening out, act on either flank of the 
enemy. This arrangement of troops may be traced in Arab 
records as far back as the 5th century, and was often exemplified 
during the Wahhabi wars. 

Arab women are scarcely less distinguished for their bravery 
than the men. Records of armed heroines occur frequently to 
the chronicles or myths of the pre-Islamitic time; and in authen- 
tic history the Battle of the Camel, 656 a.d., where Ayesha, the 
wife of Mahomet, headed the charge, is only the first of a number 
of instances in which Arab amazons have taken, sword in hand, 
no inconsiderable share in the wars and victories of Islam. Even 
now it is the custom for an Arab force to be always accompanied 
by some courageous maiden, who, mounted on a blackened 
camel, leads the onslaught, singing verses of encouragement 
for her own, of insult for the opposing tribe. Round her litter 
the fiercest of the battle rages, and her capture or death is the 
signal of utter rout; it is hers also to head the triumph after the 
victory of her clan. 

There is little education, in the European sense of the word, in 
Arabia. Among the Bedouins there are no schools, and few, 
even of the most elementary character, in the towns 
or villages. Where they exist, little beyond the 
mechanical reading of the Koran, and the equally mechanical 
learning of it by rote, is taught. On the other hand, Arab male- 
children, brought up from early years among the grown-up 
men of the house or tent, learn more from their own parents 
and at home than is common in other countries; reading 
and writing are in most instances thus acquired, or rather 



ARACAJU— ARACHNIDA 



287 



transmitted; besides such general principles of grammar and 
eloquence, often of poetry and history, as the elders themselves 
may be able to impart. To this family schooling too are due 
the good manners, politeness, and self-restraint that early dis- 
tinguish Arab children. In the very few instances where a 
public school of a higher class exists, writing, grammar and 
rhetoric sum up its teachings. Law and theology, in the narrow 
sense that both these words have in the Islamitic system, are 
explained in afternoon lectures given in most mosques; and 
some verses of the Koran, with one of the accepted commentaries, 
that of Baidawl for example, form the basis of the instruction. 
Great attention is paid to accuracy of grammar and purity of 
diction throughout Arabia; yet something of a dialectic differ- 
ence may be observed in the various districts. The purest Arabic, 
that which is as nearly as possible identical in the choice of words 
and in its inflections with the language of the Koran, is spoken 
in Nejd, and the best again of that in the province of Suder. 
Next in purity comes the Arabic of Shammar. Throughout the 
Hejaz in general, the language, though extremely elegant, is 
not equally correct; in el-Hasa, Bahrein and Oman it is de- 
cidedly influenced by the foreign element called Nabataean. 
In Yemen, as in other southern districts of the peninsula, Arabic 
merges insensibly into the Himyaritic or African dialect of 
Hadramut and Mahra. (See Semitic Languages.) 

Bibliography. — Lieutenant Wellsted, Travels in Arabia (Lond., 
1838) ; " Narrative of a Journey to the Ruins of Nakeb el Hajar " 
(Jour. R. Geog. Soc. vii. 20) ; Carsten Niebuhr, Travels through 
Arabia (transl. into English by Robert Heron, 2 vols., Edin., 1792); 
John Lewis Burckhardt, Travels in Arabia (2 vols., Lond., 1829); 
Notes on the Bedouins and Wahabis, (2 vols., Lond., 1830; in German, 
Weimar, 1831) ; C. J. Cruttendtn, Journal of an Excursion to Suna'a, 
the Capital of Yemen (Bombay, 1838); A. Sprenger, Die alte Geo- 
graphie Arabiens als Grundlage der Entwicklungsgeschichte des 
Semitismus (Berne, 1875) ; Sir Richard F. Burton, Personal Narra- 
tive of a Pilgrimage to El Medinah and Meccah (Lond., 1855); W. 
Robertson Smith, Kinship and Marriage in Early Arabia (Cam- 
bridge); E. Reclus, Les Arabes (Brussels, 1898); Lady Anne Blunt, 
A Pilgrimage to Nejd (2 vols., Lond., 1881) ; C. M. Doughty, Arabia 
Deserta (2 vols., 1888); Rev. S. M. Zwemer, Arabia: the Cradle of 
Islam (1900) ; Albrecht Zehme, Arabien und die Araber, seit hunderi 
Jahren (1875). 

ARACAJtJ, a city and seaport of Brazil, capital of the state 
of Sergipe, 170 m. N.N.E. of Bahia, on the river Cotinguiba, 
or Cotindiba, 6 m. from the coast. The municipality, of which 
it forms a part, had a population in 1890 of 16,336, about two- 
thirds of whom lived in the city itself. Aracaju is a badly built 
town on the right bank of the river at the base of a ridge of low 
sand-hills and has the usual features of an unprogressive pro- 
vincial capital. Good limestone is quarried in its vicinity, and 
the country tributary to this port produces large quantities of 
sugar. Cotton is also grown, and the back country sends down 
hides and skins for shipment. The anchorage is good, but a 
dangerous bar at the mouth of the river prevents the entrance 
of vessels drawing more than 12 ft. The port is visited, there- 
fore, only by the smaller steamers of the coastwise lines. The 
river is navigable as far as the town of Maroim, about 10 m. 
beyond Aracaju. The city was founded in 1855. 

ARACATY, or Aracat!, a city and port of Brazil, in the state 
of Ceara, 75 m. 3.E. of Fortaleza, on the river Jaguaribe, 8 m. 
from the sea. Pop. of the municipality (1890) 20,182, of whom 
about 12,000 belonged to the city. A dangerous bar at the 
mouth of the river permits the entrance only of the smaller 
coasting steamers, but the port is an important commercial 
centre, and exports considerable quantities of cotton, hides, 
manicoba, rubber, fruit, and palm wax. 

ARACHNE, in Greek mythology, the daughter of Idmon of 
Colophon in Lydia, a dyer in purple. She had acquired such 
skill in the art of weaving that she ventured to challenge Athena. 
While the goddess took as subjects her quarrel with Poseidon 
as to the naming and possession of Attica, and the warning 
examples of those who ventured to pit themselves against the 
immortals, Arachne depicted the metamorphoses of the gods 
and their amorous adventures. Her work was so perfect that 
Athena, enraeed at being unable to find any blemish in it, tore 



it to pieces. Arachne hanged herself in despair; but the goddess 
out of pity loosened the rope, which became a cobweb, while 
Arachne herself was changed into a spider (Ovid, Metam. vi. 
5-145). The story probably indicates the superiority of Asia 
over Greece in the textile arts. 

ARACHNIDA, the zoological name given in 181 5 by Lamarck 
(Gr. apaxwi, a spider) to a class which he instituted for the 
reception of the spiders, scorpions and mites, previously classified 
by Linnaeus in the order Aptera of his great group Insecta. 
Lamarck at the same time founded the class Crustacea for the 
lobsters, crabs and water-fleas, also until then included in the 
order Aptera of Linnaeus. Lamarck included the Thysanura 
and the Myriapoda in his class Arachnida. The Insecta of 
Linnaeus was a group exactly equivalent to the Arthropoda 
founded a hundred years later by Siebold and Stannius. It was 
thus reduced by Lamarck in area, and made to comprise only 
the six-legged, wing-bearing " Insecta." For these Lamarck 
proposed the name Hexapoda; but that name has been little used, 
and they have retained to this day the title of the much larger 
Linnaean group, viz. Insecta. The position of the Arachnida 
in the great sub-phylum Arthropoda, according to recent ana- 
tomical and embryological researches, is explained in the article 
Arthropoda. The Arachnida form a distinct class or line of 
descent in the grade Euarthropoda, diverging (perhaps in 
common at the start with the Crustacea) from primitive Euar- 
thropods, which gave rise also to the separate lines of descent 
known as the classes Diplopoda, Crustacea, Chilopoda and 
Hexapoda. 




Fig. 1. — Entosternum, entosternite or plastron of Limidus 
polyphemus, Latr. Dorsal surface. 
LAP, Left anterior process. PLR, Posterior lateral rod or 

RAP, Right anterior process. tendon. 

PhN, Pharyngeal notch. PLP, Posterior lateral process. 

ALR, Anterior lateral rod or tendon. Natural size. 

(From Lankester, Q. J. Mic. Sci., N.S. vol. xxiv., 1884.) 

Limulus an Arachnid. — Modern views as to the classifica- 
tion and affinities of the Arachnida have been determined by 
the demonstration that Limulus and the extinct Eurypterines 
(Pterygotus, &c.) are Arachnida; that is to say, are identical 
in the structure and relation of so many important parts with 
Scorpio, whilst differing in those respects from other Arthropoda, 
that it is impossible to suppose that the identity is due to homo- 
plasy or convergence, and the conclusion must be accepted that 
the resemblances arise from close genetic relationship. The view 
that Limulus, the king-crab, is an Arachnid was maintained as 
long ago as 1829 by Strauss-Diirckheim (1), on the ground of its 
possession of an internal cartilaginous sternum — also possessed 
by the Arachnida (see figs. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6) — and of the simi- 
larity of the disposition of the six leg-like appendages around 
the mouth in the two cases (see figs. 45 and 63). The evidence 
of the exact equivalence of the segmentation and appendages 
of Limulus and Scorpio, and of a number of remarkable points 
of agreement in structure, was furnished by Ray Lankester in 
an article published in 1881 (" Limulus an Arachnid," Quart. 
Journ. Micr. Sci. vol. xxi. N.S.), and in a series of subsequent 
memoirs, in which the structure of the entosternum, of the coxal 
glands, of the eyes, of ■ the veno-pericardiaj: muscles, of the 



288 



ARACHNIDA 



respiratory lamellae, and of other parts, was for the first time 
described, and in which the new facts discovered were shown 
uniformly to support the hypothesis that Limulus is an Arachnid. 
A list of these memoirs is given at the close of this article (2, 3, 
4, 5 and IS). The Eurypterines (Gigantostraca) were included 
in the identification, although at that time they were supposed 




PMP. 

Fig. 2. — Ventral surface of the entosternum of Limulus Poly- 
phemus, Latr. Letters as in fig. I with the addition of NF, neural 
fossa protecting the aggregated ganglia of the central nervous sys- 
tem; PVP, left posterior ventral process; PMP, posterior median 
process. Natural size. 

(From Lankester.) 

to possess only five pairs of anterior or prosomatic appendages. 
They have now been shown to possess six pairs (fig. 47), as do 
Limulus and Scorpio. 

The various comparisons previously made between the struc- 
ture of Limulus and the Eurypterines on the one hand, and that 
of a typical Arachnid, such as Scorpio, on the other, had been 
vitiated by erroneous notions as to the origin of the nerves 
supplying the anterior appendages of Limulus (which were finally 
removed by Alphonse Milne-Edwards in his beautiful memoir 

(6) on the structure 
of that animal), and 
secondly by the errone- 
ous identification of the 
double sternal plates 
of Limulus, called 
" chilaria," by Owen, 
with a pair of append- 
ages (7). Once the 
identity of the chilaria 
with the pentagonal 
sternal plate of the 
scorpion is recognized 
— an identification first 
insisted on by Lan- 
Fig. 3.— Entosternum of scorpion {Pal- kester— the whole 
amnaeus Indus, de Geer) ; dorsal surface, series of segments and 
asp, Paired anterior process of the sub- appendages in the two 

^Sub-netalarch. f im * ls > LimuluS and 

ap, Anterior lateral process (same as RAP Scorpio, are seen to cor- 

and LAP in fig. 1). respond most closely, 

Imp, Lateral median process (same as ALR segment for segment, 

and PLR of fig. 1) with anot her (see 

pp, Posterior process (same as PLP in „ , „* ,L, 

n „ j). figs. 7 and 8). The 

pf, Posterior flap or diaphragm of New- structure of the proso- 

P ort - matic appendages or 

«ji and m*, Perforations of the diaphragm j i s also seen to pre- 

tor the passage 01 muscles. ° , . . .. r 

DR, The paired dorsal ridges. sent manv significant 

GC, Gastric canal or foramen. points of agreement 

AC, Arterial canal or foramen. (see figures), but a curi- 
ous discrepancy existed 

(After Lankester, loc.cti.) • t i . • , j . 

in the six-jomted struc- 
ture of the limb in Limulus, which differed from the seven-jointed 
limb of Scorpio by the defect of one joint. R. I. Pocock of the 
British Museum has observed that in Limulus a marking exists 
on the fourth joint, which apparently indicates a previous 




-DR. 



e 




division of this segment into two, and thus establishes the agree- 
ment of Limulus and Scorpio in this small feature of the number 
of segments in the legs (see fig. 11). 

It is not desirable to occupy the limited space of this article by a 
full description of the limbs and segments of Limulus and Scorpio. 
The reader is referred to the complete series of figures here given, 
with their explanatory legends (figs. 12, 13, 14, 15). Certain matters, 
however, require comment and explanation to render the comparison 
intelligible. The tergites, or chitinized dorsal halves of the body 
rings, are fused to form a 
" prosomatic carapace," or 
carapace of the prosoma, in 
both Limulus and Scorpio 
(see figs. 7 and 8). This 
region corresponds in both 
cases to six somites, as indi- 
cated by the presence of six 
pairs of limbs. On the sur- 
face of the carapace there are 
in both animals a pair of 
central eyes with simple lens 
and a pair of lateral eye- 
tracts, which in Limulus 
consist of closely-aggregated 
simple eyes, forming a " com- 
pound " eye, whilst in 
Scorpio they present several 
separate small eyes. The 

microscopic structure of the Fig. 4.— Ventral surface of the same 
central and the lateral eyes entosternum as that drawn in fig. 3. 
has been shown by Lankester Letters as in fig. 3 with the addition 
and A. G. Bourne (5) to f nc, neural canal or foramen, 
differ; but the lateral eyes of ,., t T , t , ... 

Scorpio were shown by them (A < ter Lankesto . l °°- «*■> 

to be similar in structure to the lateral eyes of Limulus, and the 
central eyes of Scorpio to be identical in structure with the 
central eyes of Limulus (see below). 

Following the prosoma is a region consisting of six segments (figs. 14 
and 15), each carrying a pair of plate-like 
appendages in both Limulus and Scorpio. 
This region is called the mesosoma. The 
tergites of this region and those of the 
following region, the metasoma, are 
fused to form a second or posterior 
carapace in Limulus, whilst remaining 
free in Scorpio. The first pair of foli- 
aceous appendages in each animal is 
the genital operculum; beneath it are 
found the openings of the genital ducts. 
The second pair of mesosomatic append- 
ages in Scorpio are known as the 
" pectens." Each consists of an axis, 
bearing numerous blunt tooth-like pro- Fig. 5. — Entosternum of 
cesses arranged in a series. This is one of themygalomorphous 
represented in Limulus by the first gill- spiders; ventral surface, 
bearing appendage. The leaves (some Ph.N., pharyngeal notch. 
150 in number) of the gill-book (see The posterior median pro- 
figure) correspond to the tooth-like C ess with its repetition of 
processes of the pectens of Scorpio, triangular segments closely 
The next four pairs of appendages (com- resembles the same process 
pleting the mesosomatic series of six) j n Limulus. 
consist, in both Scorpio and Limulus, 

of a base carrying each 130 to 150 (From Lankester, Ik. cU .) 
blood-holding, leaf-like plates, lying on 

one another like the leaves of a book. Their minute structure is 
closely similar in the two cases; the leaf-like plates receive blood 
from the great sternal sinus, and 
serve as respiratory organs. The 
difference between the gill-books of 
Limulus and the lung-books of 
Scorpio depends on the fact that the 
latter are adapted to aerial respira- 
tion, while the former serve for 
aquatic respiration. The appendage 
carrying the gill-book stands out on 
the surface of the body in Limulus, 
and has other portions developed 
besides the gill-book and its base; 
it is fused with its fellow of the 
opposite side On the other hand, in 

Scorpio, the gill-book-bearing ap- „ , __rw a a1 snrfarp of 
pendage has sunk below the surface, , f IG " „ r^°^Lrnnm »« 
forming a recess or chamber for j£e «™ f^f.' 6 ™"^ N aS 
itself, which communicates with the th , at draw f m , £*■ 5- Ph - N - 
exterior by an oval or circular pharyngeal notch. 
" Stigma " (fig. 10, stg). That this t Alter Lankester. loc. at.) 

in-sinking has taken place, and that the lung-books or in-sunken 
gill-books of Scorpio really represent appendages (that is to say, 
limbs or parapodia) is proved by their developmental history (see 





ARACHNIDA 



289 



figs. 17 and 18). They appear at first as outstanding processes on 
the surface of the body. 

The exact mode in which the in-sinking of superficial outstanding 
limbs, carrying gill-lamellae, has historically taken place has been a 
matter of much speculation. It was to be hoped that the specimen 
of the Silurian scorpion (Palaeophonus) from Scotland, showing the 
ventral surface of the mesosoma (fig. 49), would throw light on this 
matter; but the specimen recently carefully studied by the writer 
and Pocock reveals neither gill-bearing limbs nor stigmata. The 
probability appears to be against an actual introversion of the 
appendage and its lamellae, as was at one time suggested by 
Lankester. It is probable that such an in-sinking as is shown in the 




Fig. 7. — Diagram of the dorsal 

oc, Lateral compound eyes. 

oc', Central monomeniscous eyes. 

PA, Post-anal spine. 

I to VI, The six appendage- 
bearing somites of the pro- 
soma. 

VII, Usually considered to be 
the tergum of the genital 
somite, but suggested by 
Pocock to be that of the other- 



surface of Limulus polyphemus. 

wise suppressed praegenital 

somite. 
VIII to XIII, The six somites of 

the mesosoma, each with a 
movable pleural spine and a 
pair of dorsal entopophysis or 
muscle-attaching ingrowths. 
XIV to XVIII, The confluent or 
unexpressed six somites of the 
metasoma. 

[According to the system of numbering explained in the text, if 
VII is the tergum of the praegenital somite (as is probable) it should 
be labelled Prg without any number, and the somites VIII to XIII 
should be lettered 1 to 6, indicating that they are the six normal 
somites of the mesosoma; whilst XV to XVIII should be replaced 
by the numbers 7 to 12 — an additional suppressed segment (making 
up the typical six) being reckoned to the metasomatic fusion.] 
(From Lankester, Q. J. Micr. Set. vol. xxi., 1S81.) 

accompanying diagram has taken place (fig. 15); but we are yet in 
need of evidence as to the exact equivalence of margins, axis, &c, 
obtaining between the lung-book of Scorpio and the gill-book of 
Limulus. Zoologists are familiar with many instances (fishes, 
crustaceans) in which the protective walls of a water-breathing 
organ or gill-apparatus become converted into an air-breathing 
organ or lung, but there is no other case known of the conversion 
of gill processes themselves into air-breathing plates. 

The identification of the lung-books of Scorpio with the gill-books 
of Limulus is practically settled by the existence of the pectens in 
Scorpio (fig. 14, VIII) on the second mesosomatic somite. There is 
no doubt that these are parapodial or limb appendages, carrying 
numerous imbricated secondary processes, and therefore comparable 
in essential structure to the leaf-bearing plates of the second meso- 



• Colo 



cs 



somatic somite of Limulus. They have remained unenclosed and 
projecting on the surface of the body, as once were the appendages 
of the four following somites. But they have lost their respiratory 
function. In non-aquatic life such an unprotected organ cannot 
subserve respiration. The " pectens " have become more firmly 
chitinized and probably somewhat altered in shape as compared 
with their condition in the aquatic ancestral scorpions. Their 
present function in scorpions is not ascertained. They are not 
specially sensitive under ordinary conditions, and may be touched 
or even pinched without causing any discomfort to the scorpion. 
It is probable that they acquire special sensibility at the breeding 
season and serve as " guides " in copulation. The shape of the legs 
and the absence of paired terminal claws in the Silurian Palaeophonus 
(see figs. 48 and 49) as compared with living 
scorpions (see fig. 10) show that the early oc.-, 
scorpions were aquatic, and we may hope 
some day in better-preserved specimens than , 
the two as yet discovered, to find the respira-*'"" 
tory organs of those creatures in the con- 
dition of projecting appendages serving 
aquatic respiration somewhat as in Limulus, 
though not necessarily repeating the exact 
form of the broad plates of Limulus. 

It is important to note that the series of 
lamellae of the lung-book and the gill-book 
correspond exactly in structure, the narrow, 
flat blood-space in the lamellae being inter- 
rupted by pillar-like junctions of the two 
surfaces in both cases (see Lankester (4)), and 
the free surfaces of the adjacent lamellae being 
covered with a very delicate chitinous cuticle 
which is drawn out into delicate hairs and 
processes. The elongated axis which opens 
at the stigma in Scorpio and which can be 
cleared of soft, surrounding tissues and co- 
agulated blood so as to present the appearance 
of a limb axis carrying the book-like leaves 
of the lung is not really, as it would seem to 
be at first sight, the limb axis. That is neces- 
sarily a blood-holding structure and is 
obliterated and fused with soft tissues of the 
sternal region so that the lamellae cannot be 
detached and presented as standing out 
from it. The apparent axis or basal support 
of the scorpion's lung-books shown in the 
figures, is a false or secondary axis and merely 
a part of the infolded surface which forms 
the air-chamber. The maceration of the soft 
parts of a scorpion preserved in weak spirit; 
and the cleaning of the chitinized in-grown 
cuticle give rise to the false appearance of a 
limb axis carrying the lamellae. The margins 
of the lamellae of the scorpion's lung-book, 
which are lowermost in the figures (fig. 15) 
and appear to be free, are really those which 
are attached to the blood-holding axis. The 
true free ends are those nearest the stigma. 



\ 



I -a 
fxn 



^xra 



307 



XV 



I XVI 



zvn 



xwn 



PA 



FiG. 8. — Diagram 
of the dorsal surface 
Passing on now from the mesosoma we of a scorpion to com- 
come in Scorpio to the metasoma of six pare with fig. 7. 
segments, the first of which is broad whilst Letters and Roman 
the rest are cylindrical. The last is perforated numerals as in fig. 7, 
by the anus and carries the post-anal spine excepting that VII 
or sting. The somites of the metasoma carry is here certainly the 
no parapodia. In Limulus the metasoma is tergum of the first 
practically suppressed. In the allied extinct somite of the mesa- 
Eurypterines it is well developed, and re- soma — the genital 
sembles that of Scorpio. In the embryo somite — and is not 
Limulus (fig, 42) the six somites of the a survival of the em- 
mesosoma are not fused to form a carapace bryonic praegenital 
at an early stage, and they are followed by somite. The anus (not 
three separately marked metasomatic somites; seen) is on the sternal 
the other three somites of the metasoma have surface, 
disappeared in Limulus, but are. represented (From Lankester, he. cit.) 
by the unsegmented prae-anal region. It is 

probable that we have in the metasoma of Limulus a case of the dis- 
appearance of once clearly demarcated somites. It would be possible 
to suppose, on the other hand, that new somites are only heginning 
to make their appearance here. The balance of various considera- 
tions is against the latter hypothesis. Following the metasoma in 
Limulus, we have as in Scorpio the post-anal spine — in this case 
not a sting, but a powerful and important organ of locomotion, 
serving to turn the animal over when it has fallen upon its 
back. The nature of the post-anal spine has been strangely mis- 
interpreted by some writers. Owen (7) maintained that it repre- 
sented a number of coalesced somites, regardless cf its post-anal 
position and mode of development. The agreement of the grouping 
of the somites, of the form of the parapodia (appendages, limbs) in each 
region, of the position of the genital aperture and operculum, of the 
position and character of the eyes, and of the powerful post-anal spines 
not seen in other Arthropods, is very convincing as to the affinity 

II 



290 



ARACHNIDA 



of Limulus and Scorpio. Perhaps the most important general agree- 
ment of Scorpio compared with Limulus and the Eurypterines is the 
division of the body into the three regions (or tagmata) — prosoma, 
mesosoma and metasoma — each consisting of six segments, the 
prosoma having leg-like appendages, the mesosoma having f oliaceous 
appendages, and the metasoma being destitute of appendages. 

In 1893, some years after the identification of the somites of 
Limulus with those of Scorpio, thus indicated, had been published, 
zoologists were startled by the discovery by a Japanese zoologist, 
Kishinouye (8), of a seventh prosomatic somite in the embryo of 
Limulus longispina. This was seen in longitudinal sections, as shown 
in fig. 19. The simple identification of somite with somite in Limulus 
and Scorpio seemed to be threatened by this discovery. But in 
1896 Dr August Brauer of Marburg (9) discovered in the embryo 
of Scorpio a seventh prosomatic somite (see VII PrG, figs. 17 and 18), 
or, if we please so to term it, a praegenital somite, hitherto unrecog- 
nized. In the case of Scorpio this segment is indicated in the embryo 
by the presence of a pair of rudimentary appendages, carried by a 
well-marked somite. As in Limulus, so in Scorpio, this unexpected 
somite and its appendages disappear in the course of development. 
In fact, more or less complete " excalation " of the somite takes place. 
Owing to its position it is convenient to term the somite which is 
excalated in Limulus and Scorpio " the praegenital somite." It 
appears not improbable that the sternal plates wedged in between 



\a 




Fig. 9. — Ventral view of the posterior carapace or meso-meta- 
somatic (opisthosomatic) fusion of Limulus polyphemus. The soft 
integument and limbs of the mesosoma have been removed as well 
as all the viscera and muscles, so that the inner surface of the terga 
of these somites with their entopophyses are seen. The unsegmented 
dense chitinous sternal plate of the metasoma (XIII to XVIII) is 
not removed. Letters as in fig. 7. 

(After Lankester, loc. cii.). 

the last pair of legs in both Scorpio and Limulus, viz. the pentagonal 
sternite of Scorpio (fig. 10) and the chilaria of Limulus (see figs. 13 
and 20), may in part represent in the adult the sternum of the ex- 
calated praegenital somite. This has not been demonstrated by an 
actual following out of the development, but the position of these 
pieces and the fact that they are (in Limulus) supplied by an in- 
dependent segmental nerve, favours the view that they may comprise 
the sternal area of the vanished praegenital somite. This inter- 
pretation, however, of the " metasternites " of Limulus and Scorpio 
is opposed by the coexistence in Thelyphonus (figs. 55, 57 and 58) 
of a similar metasternite with a complete praegenital somite. H. J. 
Hansen (10) has recognized that the " praegenital somite " persists 
in a rudimentary condition, forming a " waist " to the series of 
somites in the Pedipalpi and Araneae. The present writer is of 
opinion that it will be found most convenient to treat this evanescent 
somite as something special, and not to attempt to reckon it to 
either the prosoma or the mesosoma. These will then remain as 
typically composed each of six appendage-bearing somites — the 
prosoma comprising in addition the ocular prosthomere. 1 When 
the praegenital somite or traces of it are present it should not be 
called " the seventh prosomatic " or the " first mesosomatic," but 
simply the " praegenital somite." The first segment of the meso- 
soma of Scorpio and Limulus thus remains the first segment, and can 
be identified as such throughout the Eu-arachnida, carrying as it 
always does the genital apertures. But it is necessary to remember, 
in the light of recent discoveries, that the sixth prosomatic pair of 
appendages is carried on the seventh somite of the whole series, 
there being two prosthomeres or somites in front of the mouth, the 
first carrying the eyes, the second the chelicerae ; also that the first 
mesosomatic or genital somite is not the seventh or even the eighth 
of the whole series of somites which have been historically present, 

1 See the article Aethropoda for the use of the term " prosthomere." 



but is the ninth, owing to the presence or to the excalation of a 
praegenital somite. It seems that confusion and trouble will be 
best avoided by abstaining 
from the introduction of 
the non-evident somites, 
the ocular and the prae- 
genital, into the numerical 
nomenclature of the com- 
ponent somites of the three 
great body regions. We 
shall, therefore, ignoring 
the ocular somite, speak of 
the first, second; third, 
fourth, fifth and sixth leg- 
bearing somites of the pro- 
soma, and indicate the 
appendages by the Roman 
numerals, I, II, III, IV, 
V, VI, and whilst ignoring 
the praegenital somite we 
shall speak of the first, 
second, third, &c, somite of 
the mesosoma or opistho- 
soma (united mesosoma and 
metasoma) and indicate 
them by the Arabic 
numerals. 

There are a number of 
other important points of 
structure besides those re- 
ferring to the somites and 
appendages in which 
Limulus agrees with Scorpio 
or other Arachnida and 
differs from other Arthro- 
poda. The chief of these 
are as follows: — Fig. 10. — Ventral view of a scorpion, 

1. The Composition of the Palamnaeus indus, de Geer, to show 
Head (that is to say, of the the arrangement of the coxae of the 
anterior part of the pro- limbs, the sternal elements, genital 
soma) with especial Reference plate and pectens. 

t °tte& : &\° ninFr ° nt °f. the M, Mouth behind the oval median 
Mouth.— It appears (see camerostome. 
Arthropoda) that there is j The chelicerae . 

II, Ihe chelae. 

Ill to VI, the four pairs of walking legs. 

Vllgo, The genital somite or first 

somite of the mesosoma with the 

genital operculum (a fused pair of 

limbs). 
VWlp, The pectiniferous somite. 
IX^g to Xlls/g, the four pulmonary 

somites. 




■ULsty 



embryological evidence of 
the existence of two somites 
in Arachnida which were 
originally post-oral, but 
have become prae-oral by 
adaptational shifting of the 
oral aperture. These 
forwardly-slipped somites 
prosthomeres." 



are called 

The first of" these has in me( The j metastern i te of 

Arachmds as in other the prosoma behind all the coxae. 

x, The sternum of the pectiniferous 
somite. 

y, The broad first somite of the meta- 



as in 
Arthropods, its pair of ap- 
pendages represented by 
the eyes. The second has 
for its pair of appendages 
the small pair of limbs 
which in all living Arachnids is either chelate or retrovert (as in 
spiders), and is known as the chelicerae. It is possible, as maintained 
by some writers (Patten and others), that the lobes of the cerebral 
nervous mass in Arach- 
nids indicate a larger 
number of prosthomeres 
as having fused in this 
region, but there is no 
embryological evidence at 
present which justifies us 
in assuming the existence 
in Arachnids of more than 
two prosthomeres. The 
position of the chelicerae 
of Limulus and of the 
ganglionic nerve-masses 
from which they receive 
their nerve-supply, is 
closely similar to that of Fig. ii. — Third leg of Limulus poly- 
the same structures in phemus, showing the division of the fourth 
Scorpio. The cerebral segment of the leg by a groove S into 
mass is in Limulus more two, thus giving seven segments to the 
easily separated by dis- leg as in scorpion, 
section as a median lobe (From a drawing by Pocock.) 

distinct from the laterally- 
placed ganglia of the cheliceral somite than is the case in Scorpio, but 
the relations are practically the same in the two forms. Formerly 
it was supposed that in Limulus both the chelicerae and the next 
following pair of appendages were prosthomerous, as in Crustacea, 
I but the dissections of Alphonse Milne-Edwards (6) demonstrated 




ARACHNIDA 



291 



the true limitations of the cerebrum, whilst embryological researches 
have done as much for Scorpio. Limulus thus agrees with Scorpio 
and differs from the Crustacea, in which there are three prostho- 
meres — one ocular and two carrying palpiform appendages. It is 
true that in the lower Crustacea (Apus, &c.) we have evidence of the 
gradual movement forward of the nerve-ganglia belonging to these 




Fig. 12. — The prosomatic appendages of Limulus polyphemus 
(right) and Scorpio (left), Palamnaeus indus compared. The corre- 
sponding appendages are marked with the same Roman numeral. 
The Arabic numerals indicate the segments of the legs. 
cox, Coxa or basal segment of the ex 1 , The exopodite of the sixth 



leg. 



limb of Limulus. 



stc, The sterno-coxal process or a, b, c, d, Movable processes on the 



jaw-like up-growth of the coxa. 

epc, The articulated movable 

outgrowth of the coxa, called 

the epi-coxite (present only in 

III of the scorpion and III, 

IV and V of Limulus). 



same leg (see for some sug- 
gestions on the morphology 
of this leg, Pocock in Quart. 
Journ. Micr. Set. March 1901 ; 
see also fig. 50 below and 
explanation). 



(From Lankester, loc. cit.) 

palpiform appendages. But although in such lower Crustacea the 
nerve-ganglia of the third prosthomere have not fused with the 
anterior nerve-mass, there is no question as to the prae-oral position 
of two appendage-bearing somites in addition to the ocular prostho- 
mere. The Crustacea have, in fact, three prosthomeres in the head 
and the Arachnida only two, and Limulus agrees with the Arachnida 
in this respect and differs from the Crustacea. The central nervous 
systems of Limulus and of Scorpio present closer agreement in 
structure than can be found when a Crustacean is compared with 
either. The wide divarication of the lateral cords in the prosoma 
and their connexion by transverse commissures, together with the 
" attraction " of ganglia to the prosomatic ganglion group which 




properly belong to hinder segments, are very nearly identical in the 
two animals. The form and disposition of the ganglion cells are also 
peculiar and closely similar in the two. (See Patten (42) for important 
observations on the neuromeres, &c, of Limulus and Scorpio.) 

2. The Minute Structure of the Central Eyes and of the Lateral 
Eyes. — Limulus agrees with Scorpio not only in having a pair of 
central eyes and also lateral eyes, but in the microscopic structure of 
those organs, which differs in the central and lateral eyes respectively. 
The central eyes are " simple eyes," that is to say, have a single lens, 
and are hence called " monomeniscous." The lateral eyes are in 
Limulus " compound eyes," that is to say, consist of many lenses 
placed close together; beneath each lens is a complex of protoplasmic 
cells, in which the optic nerve terminates. Each such unit is termed 
an " ommatidium." The lateral eyes of Scorpio consist of groups 
of separate small lenses each with its ommatidium, but they do not 
form a continuous compound eye as in Limulus. The ommatidium 
(soft structure beneath the lens-unit of a compound eye) is very 
simple in both Scorpio and Limulus. It consists of a single layer 
of cells, continuous with those which secrete the general chitinous 
covering of the prosoma. The cells of the ommatidium are a good 
deal larger than the neighbouring common cells of the epidermis. 
They secrete the knob-like lens (fig. 22). But they also receive the 
nerve fibres of the optic nerve. They are at the same time both 
optic nerve-end cells, that is to say, retina cells, and corneagen cells or 
secretors of the chitinous lens-like cornea. In Limulus (fig. 23) each 
ommatidium has a peculiar ganglion cell developed in a central 
position, whilst the »/ 

ommatidium of the 
lateral eyelets of 
Scorpio shows 
small intermediate 
cells between the 
larger nerve - end 
cells. The struc- 
ture of the lateral 
eye of Limulus was 
first described by 
Grenacher, and 
further and more 
accurately by 
Lankester and 
Bourne (5) and by 
Watase ; that of 
Scorpio by Lan- 
kester and Bourne, Fig. 13. — Diagrams of the meta-sternite si, 
who showed that with genital operculum op, and the first lamelli- 
the statements of gerous pair of appendages ga, with uniting 
von Graber were sternal element st of Scorpio (left) and Limulus 
erroneous, and (right). 

that the lateral (From Lankester, ta;. «U 

eyes ot Scorpio 

have a single cell-layered or " monostichous " ommatidium like that 
of Limulus. Watase has shown, in a very convincing way, how by 
deepening the pit-like set of cells beneath a simple lens the more com- 
plex ommatidia of the compound eyes of Crustacea and Hexapoda may 
be derived from such a condition as that presented in the lateral 
eyes of Limulus and Scorpio. (For details the reader is referred 
to Watase (11) and to Lankester and Bourne (5).) The structure of 
the central eyes of Scorpio and spiders and also of Limulus differs 
essentially from that of the lateral eyes in having two layers of cells 
(hence called diplostichous) beneath the lens, separated from one 
another by a membrane (figs. 24 and 25). The upper layer is the 
corneagen and secretes the lens, the lower is the retinal layer. The 
mass of soft cell-structures beneath a large lens of a central eye is 
called an " ommatoeum." It shows in Scorpio and Limulus a 
tendency to segregate into minor groups or " ommatidia." It is 
found that in embryological growth the retinal layer of the central 
eyes forms as a separate pouch, which is pushed in laterally beneath 
the corneagen layer from the epidermic cell layer. Hence it is in 
origin double, and consists of a true retinal layer and a post-retinal 
layer (fig. 24, B), though these are not separated by a membrane. 
Accordingly the diplostichous ommatoeum or soft tissue of the 
Arachnid's central eye should strictly be called " triplostichous," 
since the deep layer is itself doubled or folded. The retinal cells of 
both the lateral and central eyes of Limulus and Scorpio produce 
cuticular structures on their sides; each such piece is a rhabdomere 
and a number (five or ten) uniting form a rhabdom (fig. 26). In 
the specialized ommatidia of the compound eyes of Crustacea and 
Hexapods the rhabdom is an important structure. 1 It is a very 
significant fact that the lateral and central eyes of Limulus and 
Scorpio not only agree each with each in regard to their mono- 
stichous and diplostichous structure, but also in the formation in 
both classes of eyes of rhabdomeres and rhabdoms in which the 
component pieces are five or a multiple of five (fig. 26). Whilst 
each unit of the lateral eye of Limulus has a rhabdom of ten 8 pieces 




1 See fig. 12 in the article Arthropoda. 

2 Though ten is the prevailing number of retinula cells and rhabdo- 
meres in the lateral eye of Limulus, Watase states that they may be 
as few as nine and as many as eighteen. 



292 



ARACHNIDA 



forming a star-like chitinous centre in section, each lateral eye of 
Scorpio has several rhabdoms of five or less rhabdomeres, indicating 
that the Limulus lateral eye-unit is more specialized than the detached 
lateral eyelet of Scorpio, so as to present a coincidence of one lens 
with one rhabdom. Numerous rhabdomeres (grouped as rhabdoms in 
Limulus) are found in the retinal layer of the central eyes also. 
Whilst Limulus agrees thus closely with Scorpio in regard to the 




Fig. 14. — The first three pairs of mesosomatic appendages of Scorpio and 
Limulus compared. 



gp, Genital pore. 

epst, Epistigmatic sclerite. 

stg, Stigma or orifice of the hollow 

tendons of the branchial plates of 

Limulus. 



(4). 



Soc. 



VII, The genital operculum. 

VIII, The pectens of Scorpio and the 
first branchial plate of Limulus. 

IX, The first pair of lung-books of 
Scorpio and the second branchial 
plate of Limulus. 

(After Lankester, 7oc. cil. ) 

eyes, it is to be noted that no Crustacean has structures corre- 
sponding to the peculiar diplostichous central eyes, though these 
occur again (with differences in detail) in Hexapoda. Possibly, 
however, an investigation of the development of the median eyes of 
some Crustacea(Apus,Palaemon)may prove them to be diplostichous 
in origin. 

3. The so-called " Coxal Glands." — In 1882 {Proc. Roy. 
No. 221) Lankester described under the name "coxal 
glands" a pair of brilliantly white oviform bodies lying in 
the Scorpion's prosoma immediately above the coxae of 
the fifth and sixth pairs of legs (fig. 27). These bodies 
had been erroneously supposed by Newport (12) and 
other observers to be glandular outgrowths of the ali- 
mentary canal. They are really excretory glands, and 
communicate with the exterior by a very minute aperture 
on the posterior face of the coxa of the fifth limb on each 
side. When examined with the microscope, by means of 
the usual section method, they are seen to consist of a 
labyrinthine tube lined with peculiar cells, each cell having 
a deep vertically striated border on the surface farthest 
from the lumen, as is seen in the cells of some renal organs. 
The coils and branches of the tube are packed by connective 
tissue and blood spaces. A similar pair of coxal glands, 
lobate instead of ovoid in shape, was described by 
Lankester in Mygale, and it was also shown by him that 
the structures in Limulus called " brick-red glands " by 
Packard have the same structure and position as the coxal 
glands of Scorpio and Mygale. In Limulus these organs 
consist each of four horizontal lobes lying on the coxal 
margin of the second, third, fourth, and fifth prosomatic 
limbs, the four lobes being connected to one another by 
a transverse piece or stem (fig. 28). Microscopically their 
structure is the same in essentials as that of the coxal 
glands of Scorpio (13). Coxal glands have since been 
recognized and described in other Arachnida. In 1900 it 
was shown that the coxal gland of Limulus is provided 
with a very delicate thin-walled coiled duct which opens, 
even in the adult condition, by a minute pore on 
the coxa of the fifth leg (Patten and Hazen, 13a). 
Previously to this, Lankester's pupil Gulland had shown (1885) that 
in the embryo the coxal gland is a comparatively simple tube, 
which opens to the exterior in this position and by its other extremity 
into a coelomic space. Similar observations were made by Laurie 
(17) in Lankester's laboratory (1890) with regard to the early 
condition of the coxal gland of Scorpio, and by Bertkau (41) as to 
that of the spider Atypus. H. M. Bernard (13b) showed that the 



opening remains in the adult scorpion. In all the embryonic or 
permanent opening is on the coxa of the fifth pair of prosomatic 
limbs. Thus an organ newly discovered in Scorpio was found to 
have its counterpart in Limulus. 

The name " coxal gland " needs to be carefully distinguished 
from " crural gland," with which it is apt to be confused. The crural 
glands, which occur in many terrestrial Arthropods, are epidermal 
in origin and totally distinct from the coxal glands. The 
coxal glands of the Arachnida are structures of the same 
nature as the green glands of the higher Crustacea and 
the so-called " shell glands " of the Entomostraca. The 
latter open at the base of the fifth pair of limbs of the 
Crustacean, just as the coxal glands open on the coxal 
joint of the fifth pair of limbs of the Arachnid. Both 
belong to the category of " coelomoducts," namely, 
tubular or funnel-like portions of the coelom opening to 
the exterior in pairs in each somite (potentially,) and 
usually persisting in only a few somites as either "urocoels" 
(renal organs) or "gonocoets" (genital tubes). In Peripatus 
they occur in every somite of the body. They have till 
recently been very generally identified with the nephridia 
of Chaetopod worms, but there is good reason for con- 
sidering the true nephridia (typified by the nephridia 
of the earthworm) as a distinct class of organs (see 
Lankester in vol. ii. chap. iii. of A Treatise on Zoology, 
1900). The genital ducts of Arthropoda are, like the 
green glands, shell glands and coxal glands, to be re- 
garded as coelomoducts (gonocoels). The coxal glands 
do not establish any special connexion between Limulus 
and Scorpio, since thay also occur in the same somite 
in the lower Crustacea, but it is to be noted that the 
coxal glands of Limulus are in minute structure and 
probably in function more like those of Arachnids than 
those of Crustacea. 

4. The Entosternites and their Minute Structure. — Strauss- 
Durckheim (1) was the first to insist on the affinity 
between Limulus and the Arachnids, indicated by the 
presence of a free suspended entosternum or plastron 
or entosternite in both. We have figured here (figs. 1 to 
6) the entosternites of Limulus, Scorpio and Mygale. 
Lankester some years ago made a special study of the 
histology (3) of these entosternites for the purpose of 
comparison, and also ascertained the relations of the 
very numerous muscles which are inserted into them 
The entosternites are cartilaginous in texture, but they 
have neither the chemical character nor the microscopic structure 
of the hyaline cartilage of Vertebrates. They yield chitin in 
place of chondrin or gelatin — as does also the cartilage of 
the Cephalopod's endoskeleton. In microscopic structure they all 
present the closest agreement with one another. We find a firm, 
homogeneous or sparsely fibrillated matrix in which are embedded 







Fig. 15. — The remaining three pairs of mesosomatic appendages of Scorpio 
and Limulus. Letters as in fig. 14. /130 indicates that there are 130 lamellae 
in the scorpion's lung-book, whilst /150 indicates that 150 similar lamellae are 
counted in the gill of Limulus. 

(After Lankester, loc. cil.) 

nucleated cells (corpuscles of protoplasm) arranged in rows of three, 
six or eight, parallel with the adjacent lines of fibrillation. 

A minute entosternite having the above-described structure is 
found in the Crustacean Apus between the bases of the mandibles, 
and also in the Decapoda in a similar position, but in no Crustacean 
does it attain to any size or importance. On the other hand, the 
entosternite of the Arachnida is a very large and important feature 



ARACHNIDA 



2 93 




jn the structure of the prosoma, and must play an important part 
in the economy of these organisms. In Limulus (figs. I and 2) it 
has as many as twenty-five pairs of muscles attached to it, coming 

Fig. 16. — Diagram to 
show the way in which an 
outgrowing gill - process 
bearing blood-holding 
lamellae, may give rise, if 
the sternal body wall sinks 
inwards, to a lung-chamber 
with air-holding lamellae. 

I is the embryonic condi- 
tion. 

bs, Blood sinus. 

L is the condition of out- 
growth with gl, gill 
lamellae. 

A is the condition of in- 
sinking of the sternal 
surface and consequent 
enclosure of the Iamel- 
ligerous surface of the 
appendage in a chamber 
with narrow orifice — the 
pulmonary air - holding 
chamber. 

pi, Pulmonary lamellae. 

bs, Blood sinus. 

(After Kingsiey.) 

to it from the bases of the surrounding limbs and from the dorsal 
carapace and from the pharynx. It consists of an oblong plate 2 in. 
in length and 1 in breadth, with a pair of tendinous outgrowths 
standing out from it at right angles on each side. It "floats" 

between the prosomatic nerve 

— sgc centres and the alimentary 
".'_ obi canal. In each somite of the 

— I mesosoma is a small, free ento- 
"2 \". sternite having a similar posi- 

jl tion, but below or ventral to 

the nerve cords, and having a 

— IV smaller number of muscles 

— v attached to it. The entoster- 
... ,,j nite was probably in origin 

J vtip r R ar * °^ tne fibrous connective 

PrGoS^ 1 _.L_:j^ - JL_g^'TT''" J.:: t tissue lying close to the integu- 

abp 2 ._.L..'.-^QL^>'7 "~ J 1 ment of the sternal surface — 

a ^' ....\.u.<~wL- E"'~T giving attachment to muscles 

^f* i. : J^_A_K"'vr''"' ^r corresponding more or less to 

"?*, •V"^tr^I' 'i. vi, those at present attached to 

^.j V- -M. ^ Jfe" " jT * it. It became isolated and 

V--ft*o»— /■ a in detached, why or with what 

advantage to the organism it 

_ _ , , .is difficult to say, and at that 

Fig 17.— Embryo of scorpion iod q{ Arachmdan deve i op . 
ventral V1 ew showing somites and £ ent the great ventra , ner £ e 
appendages. cords occupied a more lateral 

sgc, Frontal groove. position than they do at 

sa, Rudiment of lateral eyes. present. We know that such 

obi, Camerostome (upper lip). a lateral position of the nerve 

so, Sense-organ of Patten. cords preceded the median 

PrGabp 1 , Rudiment of the appen- position in both Arthropoda 

dage of the praegenital somite an d Chaetopoda. Subse- 

which disappears. quently to the floating off of 

abp 1 , Rudiment of the right half of the entosternite the approxi- 

the genital operculum. " mation of the nerve cords took 

abp 3 , Rudiment of the right pecten. place in the prosoma, and thus 
abp i to abp 1 . Rudiments of the four they were able to take up a 

appendages which carry the pul- position below the entosternite. 

monary lamellae. In the mesosoma the approxi- 

I to VI, Rudiments of the six limbs mation had occurred before the 

of the prosoma. entosternites were formed. 

VIIPrG, The evanescent praegenital In the scorpion (figs. 3 and 4) 

somite. the entosternite has tough 

VIII, The first mesosomatic somite membrane - like outgrowths 
or genital somite. which connect . it with the 

IX, The second mesosomatic somite body-wall, both dorsally and 
or pectiniferous somite. ventrally forming an oblique 

X to XIII, The four pulmoniferous diaphragm, cutting off the 
somites. _ _ cavity of the prosoma from 

XIV, The first metasomatic somite, that of the mesosoma. It was 
(After Brauer, Zeiisch. wiss. Zool. vol. lix., described by Newport as " the 
l895 ' diaphragm." Only the central 

and horizontal parts of this structure correspond precisely to the ento- 
sterniteof Limulus : the right and left anterior processes (marked ap in 
figs. 3 and 4, and RAP, LAP, in figs. I and 2) correspond in the two 
animals, and the median lateral process Imp of the scorpion represents 
the tendinous outgrowths ALR, PLR of Limulus. The scorpion's 










J?i~- -"'• 


^"-r_.l_ 


_J.i^?..:. 


•fe}-^ 


■•','■.■.•■..... 


c-^s 


hcj.-,., „-. 


•--1'* 


;K-.~ 


<>\ 


V.. _. 


WMi$?Mt0i: 





..VIIPrG 

go 
■ VIII 

Km 
•IX 
.abp* 
. abp* 
. abp" 
.abp'' 



Fig. 18. — Portion of a simi- 
lar embryo at a later stage 
of growth. The praegenital 
somite, VII PrG, is still 
present, but has lost its 
rudimentary appendages; 
the genital operculum, 
left half; Km, the left 
pecten; abp 1 to abp 7 , the 
rudimentary appendages of 
the lung-sacs. 

(After Brauer, loc. cil.) 



entosternite gives rise to outgrowths, besides the great posterior 
flaps, pf, which form the diaphragm, unrepresented in Limulus. 
These are a ventral arch forming a neural canal through which the 
great nerve cords pass (figs. 3 and 4, snp), and further a dorsal 
gastric canal and arterial canal which transmit the alimentary tract 
and the dorsal artery respectively (figs. 3 and 4, GC, DR). 

In Limulus small entosternites are found in each somite of the 
appendage-bearing mesosoma, and we 
find in Scorpio, in the only somite of 
the mesosoma which has a well- 
developed pair of appendages, that of 
the pectens, a small entosternite with 
ten pairs of muscles inserted into it. 
The supra-pectinal entosternite lies 
ventral to the nerve cords. 

In Mygale (figs. 5 and 6) the form 
of the entosternite is more like that 
of Limulus than is that of Scorpio. 
The anterior notch Ph.N. is similar 
to that in Limulus, whilst the imbri- 
cate triangular pieces of the posterior 
median region resemble the similarly- 
placed structures of Limulus in a 
striking manner. 

It must be confessed that we are 
singularly ignorant as to the functional 
significance of these remarkable organs g° t 
— the entosternites. Their movement 
in an upward or downward direction 
in Limulus and Mygale must exert a 
pumping action on the blood con- 
tained in the dorsal arteries and the 
ventral veins respectively. In Scorpio 
the completion of the horizontal plate by oblique flaps, so as to form 
an actual diaphragm shutting off the cavity of the prosoma from the 
rest of the body, possibly gives to the organs contained in the 
anterior chamber a physiological 
advantage in respect of the supply 
of arterial blood and its separa- 
tion from the venous blood of the 
mesosoma. Possibly the move- 
ment of the diaphragm may 
determine the passage of air into 
or out of the lung-sacs. Muscular 
fibres connected with the suctorial 
pharynx are in Limulus inserted 
into the entosternite, and the 
activity of the two organs may be 
correlated. 

5. The Blood and the Blood- , -. r r . 

vascular System.— The blood fluids e^ly embryo of Limulus longi- 
of Limulus and Scorpio are very s p? a .< showing seven transverse 
similar. Not only are the blood divisions in the region of the 
corpuscles of Limulus more like unsegmented anterior carapace, 
in form and granulation to those The seventh, VII, is anterior to 
of Scorpio than to those of any the genital operculum, op, and 
Crustacean, but the fluid is in ls the cav »ty of the praegenital 
both animals strongly impreg- somlt f ™ hlch ls moT ? . or le f s 
nated with the blue-coloured completely suppressed in sub- 
respiratory proteid, haemocyanin. sequent development, possibly 
This body occurs also in the blood ' nd T lcate d by the area marked 
of Crustacea and of Molluscs, but VH in £s- 7 and by the great 
its abundance in both Limulus entopophyses of the prosomatic 
and Scorpio is very marked, and cara P ace - 

gives to the freshly-shed blood a , fAtter Kishinouye J mm. Sri. Coll. 
°, - ,• 11 !• *. Japan, vol. v., 1802.) 

strong indigo-blue tint. * ' 

The great dorsal contractile vessel or " heart " of Limulus is 
closely similar to that of Scorpio; its ostia or incurrent orifices are 

Fig. 20. — View of the ventral surface 
of the mid-line of the prosomatic region 
si of Limulus polyphemus. The coxae of 
the five pairs of limbs following the cheli' 
cerae were arranged in a series on each 
side between the mouth, M, and the meta - 
sternites, mets. 

sf, The sub-frontal median sclerite. 
M Ch, The chelicerae. 

cam, The camerostome or upper lip. 
M, The mouth. 

pmst, The promesosternal sclerite 01 
chitinous plate, unpaired. 
mets mets, The right and left metasternites 
(corresponding to the similarly placed 
pentagonal sternite of Scorpio). Natural 
size. 

(After Lankester.) 

placed in the same somites as those of Scorpio, but there is one 
additional posterior pair. The origin of the paired arteries from the 




op gapp 

Fig. 19. — Section through 




pmst 



294 



ARACHNIDA 



heart differs in Limulus from the arrangement obtaining in Scorpio, 
in that a pair of lateral commissural arteries exist in Limulus (as 
described by Alphonse Milne-Edwards (6)) leading to a suppression 
of the more primitive direct connexion of the four pairs of posterior 




Fig. 21. — Development of the lateral eyes of a scorpion, h, Epi- 
dermic cell-layer; mes, mesoblastic connective tissue; n, nerves; 
II, III, IV, V, depressions of the epidermis in each of which a 
cuticular lens will be formed. 

(From Korscheit and Heider, after Laurie.) 

lateral arteries and of the great median posterior arteries with the 
heart itself (fig. 29). The arterial system is very completely developed 
in both Limulus and Scorpio, branching repeatedly until minute 
arterioles are formed, not to be distinguished from true capillaries; 



lens 




nerv.f 



Fig. 22. — Section 
through the lateral eye of 
Euscorpius italicus. 
lens, Cuticular lens. 
nerv.c, Retinal cells (nerve- 
end cells). 
rhabd, Rhabdomes. 
nerv.f, Nerve fibres of the 

optic nerve. 
int, Intermediate cells 
(lying between the bases 
of the retinal cells). 
(After Lankester and Bourne 
from Parker and Haswell's Text- 
book of Zoology, Macmillan& Co.) 



these open into irregular swollen vessels which are the veins or 
venous sinuses. A very remarkable feature in Limulus, first described 
by Owen, is the close accompaniment of the prosomatic nerve centres 
and nerves by arteries, so close indeed that the great ganglion mass 
and its out-running nerves are actually sunk in or invested by 




Fig. 23. — Section through a portion of the lateral eye of Limulus, 
showing three ommatidia — A, B and C. hyp, The epidermic cell-layer 
(so-called hypodermis), the cells of which increase in volume below 
each lens, /, and become nerve-end cells or retinula-cells, rt ; in A, 
the letters rh point to a rhabdomere secreted by the cell rt; c, the 
peculiar central spherical cell; n, nerve fibres; mes, mesoblastic 
skeletal tissue; ch, chitinous cuticle. 

(From Korscheit and Heider after Watase.) 

arteries. The connexion is not so intimate in Scorpio, but is never- 
theless a very close one, closer than we find in any other Arthropods 
in which the arterial system is well developed, e.g. the Myriapoda 
and some of the arthrostracous Crustacea. It seems that there is a 
primitive tendency in the Arthropoda for the arteries to accompany 
the nerve cords, and a " supra-spinal " artery — that is to say, an 



artery in close relation to the ventral nerve cords — has been described 
in several cases. On the other hand, in many Arthropods, especially 
those which possess tracheae, the arteries do not have a long course, 
but soon open into wide blood sinuses. Scorpio certainly comes 
nearer to Limulus in the high development of its arterial system, 
and the intimate relation of the anterior aorta and its branches 
to the nerve centres and great nerves, than does any other Arthropod. 
An arrangement of great functional importance in regard to the 
venous system must now be described, which was shown in 1883. by 
Lankester to be common to Limulus and Scorpio. This arrangement 
has not hitherto been detected in any other class than the Arachnida, 
and if it should ultimately prove to be peculiar to that group, would 
have considerable weight as a proof of the close genetic affinity of 
Limulus and Scorpio. 

A 




Fig. 24. — Diagrams of the development and adult structure of one 
of the paired central eyes of a scorpion. 

A, Early condition before the lens is deposited, showing the folding 
of the epidermic cell-layer into three. 

B, Diagram showing the nature of this infolding. 

C, Section through the fully formed eye. 
h, Epidermic cell-layer. 

r, The retinal portion of the same which, owing to the infolding, lies 

between gl, the corneagen or lens-forming portion, and pr, the 

post-retinal or capsular portion or fold. 
/, Cuticular lens. 
g, Line separating lens from the lens-forming or corneagen cells of 

the epidermis. 
n, Nerve fibres. 
rh, Rhabdomeres. 

[How the inversion of the nerve-end-cells and their connexion with 
the nerve-fibres is to be reconciled with the condition found in the 
adult, or with that of the monostichous eye, has not hitherto been 
explained.] 

(From Korscheit and Heider.) 

The great pericardial sinus is strongly developed in both animals. 
Its walls are fibrous and complete, and it holds a considerable volume 
of blood when the heart itself is contracted. Opening in pairs in 
each somite, right and left into the pericardial sinus are large veins, 
which bring the blood respectively from the gill-books and the lung- 
books to that chamber, whence it passes by the ostia into the heart. 
The blood is brought to the respiratory organs in both cases by a 
great venous collecting sinus having a ventral median position. In 
both animals the wall of the pericardial sinus is connected by vertical 
muscular bands to the wall of the ventral venous sinus (its lateral ex- 
pansions around the lung-books in Scorpio) in each somite through 
which the pericardium passes. There are seven pairs of these veno- 
pericardiac vertical muscles in Scorpio, and eight in Limulus (see 
figs. 30, 31, 32). It is obvious that the contraction of these muscles 



ARACHNIDA 



295 



must cause a depression of the floor of the pericardium and a rising 
of the roof of the ventral blood sinus, and a consequent increase of 
volume and flow of blood to each. Whether the pericardium and 
the ventral sinus are made to expand simultaneously or all the move- 
ment is made by one only of the surfaces concerned, must depend 
on conditions of tension. In any case it is clear that we have in 
these muscles an apparatus for causing the blood to flow differentially 
in increased volume into either the pericardium, through the veins 
leading from the respiratory organs, or from the body generally into 
the great sinuses which bring the blood to the respiratory organs. 
These muscles act so as to pump the blood through the respiratory 
organs. 

It is not surprising that with so highly developed an arterial 
system Limulus and Scorpio should have a highly developed mechan- 
ism for determining the flow of blood to the respiratory organs. 
That this is, so to speak, a need of animals with localized respiratory 




cen> iiss. 



FlG. 25. — Section through one of the central eyes of a young 
Limulus. 

-\. ..:_.. 1 1 j tj_ a ' ..1. li- 



lt, Cuticular or corneous lens. ret, Retinula cells. 

ky, Epidermic cell-layer. nf, Nerve fibres. 

corn. Its corneagen portion im- con. tiss, Connective tissue (meso- 
mediately underlying the lens. blastic skeletal tissue). 

(After Lankester and Bourne, Q. J. Mic. Set., 1883.) 

organs is seen by the existence of provisions serving a similar purpose 
in other animals, e.g. the branchial hearts of the Cephalopoda. 

The veno-pericardiac muscles of Scorpio were seen and figured by 
Newport but not described by him. Those of Limulus were described 
and figured by Alphonse Milne-Edwards, but he called them merely 
" transparent ligaments," and did not discover their muscular 
structure. They are figured and their importance for the first time 
recognized in the memoir on the muscular and skeletal systems of 
Limulus and Scorpio by Lankester, Beck and Bourne (4). 

6. Alimentary Canal and Gastric Glands. — The alimentary canal in 
Scorpio, as in Limulus, is provided with a powerful suctorial pharynx, 
in the working of which extrinsic muscles take a part. The mouth 
is relatively smaller in Scorpio than in Limulus — in fact is minute, 
as it is in all the terrestrial Arachnida which suck the juices of 
either animals or plants. In both, the alimentary canal takes a 
straight course from the pharynx (which bends under it downwards 
and backwards towards the mouth in Limulus) to the anus, and is 
a simple, narrow, cylindrical tube (fig. 33). The only point in which 
the gut of Limulus resembles that of Scorpio rather than that of 
any of the Crustacea, is in possessing more than a single pair of ducts 
or lateral outgrowths connected with ramified gastric glands or 
gastric caeca. Limulus has two pairs of these, Scorpio as many as 
six pairs. The Crustacea never have more than one pair. The 
minute microscopic structure of the gastric glands in the two animals 
is practically identical. The functions of these gastric diverticula 
have never been carefully investigated. It is very probable that in 
Scorpio they do not serve merely to secrete a digestive fluid (shown 
in other Arthropoda to resemble the pancreatic fluid), but that they 



also become distended by the juices of the prey sucked in by the 
scorpion—as certainly must occur in the case of the simple unbranched 
gastric caeca of the spiders. 

The most important difference which exists between the structure 
of Limulus and that of Scorpio is found in the hinder region of the 
alimentary canal. Scorpio is here provided with a single or double 
pair of renal excretory tubes, which have been identified by earlier 
authors with the Malpighian tubes of the Hexapod and Myriapod 
insects. Limulus is devoid of any such tubes. We shall revert to 
this subject below. 





rit/ 

rhab. D 



Fig. 26. 



A, Diagram of a retinula of the 
central eye of a scorpion con- 
sisting of five retina-cells {ret), 
with adherent branched pig- 
ment cells {pig). 

B, Rhabdom of the same, con- 
sisting of five confluent rhab- 
domeres. 

C, Transverse section of the 



rhabdom of a retinula of the* 
scorpion's central eye, showing 
its five constituent rhabdo- 
meres as rays of a star. 
D, Transverse section of a 
retinula of the lateral eye of 
Limulus, showing ten retinula 
cells {ret), each bearing a 
rhabdomere {rhab). 



(After Lankester.) ' 

7. Ovaries and Spermaries: Gonocoels and Gonoducts.- — The 
scorpion is remarkable for having the specialized portion of coelom 
from the walls of which egg-cells or sperm-cells are developed 
according to sex, in the form of a simple but extensive network. 
It is not a pair of simple tubes, nor of dendriform tubes, but a closed 
network. The same fact is true of Limulus, as was shown by Owen (7) 

Fig. 27. — Diagram showing 
the position of the cojeal glands 
of a scorpion, Buthus australis, 
Lin. , in relation to the legs, dia- 
phragm (entosternal flap), and 
the gastric caeca. 
I to 6, The bases of the six pro- 
somatic limbs. 

A, prosomatic gastric gland 
(sometimes called salivary). 

B, Coxal gland. 

C, Diaphragm of Newport = fib- 
rous flap of the entosternum. 

D, Mesosomatic gastric caeca 
(so-called liver). 

E, Alimentary canal. 

(From Lankester, Q. J. Mic. Set., vol. 
xxiv. N.S. p. 152.) 

in regard to the ovary, and by Benham (14) in regard to the testis. 
This is a very definite and remarkable agreement, since such a 
reticular gonocoel is not found in Crustacea (except in the male 
Apus). Moreover, there is a significant agreement in the character 
of the spermatozoa of Limulus and Scorpio. The Crustacea are — 
with the exception of the Cirrhipedia — remarkable for having stiff, 
motionless spermatozoids. In Limulus Lankester found (IS) the 
spermatozoa to possess active flagelliform " tails," and to resemble 
very closely those of Scorpio which, as are those of most terrestrial 
Arthropoda, are a.-tively motile. This is a microscopic point of 
agreement, but is none the less significant. 

In regard to the important structures concerned with the fertiliza- 
tion of the egg, Limulus and Scorpio differ entirely from one another. 




296 



ARACHNIDA 



The eggs of Limulus are fertilized in the sea after they have been 
laid. Scorpio, being a terrestrial animal, fertilizes by copulation. 
The male possesses elaborate copulatory structures of a chitinous 
nature, and the eggs are fertilized in the female without even quitting 
the place where they are formed on the wall of the reticular gonocoel. 
The female scorpion is viviparous, and the young are produced in a 
highly developed condition as fully formed scorpions. 

Differences between Limulus and Scorpio. — We have now passed in 
review the principal structural features in which Limulus agrees 
with Scorpio and differs from other Arthropoda. There remains for 
consideration the one important structural difference between the 
two animals. Limulus agrees with the majority of the Crustacea in 
being destitute of renal excretory caeca or tubes opening into the 
hinder part of the gut. Scorpio, on the other hand, in common 



Fig. 28. — The right coxal 
gland of Limulus polyphemus, 
Latr. 

a* to a 6 , Posterior borders of 
the chitinous bases of the 
coxae of the second, third, 
fourth and fifth prosomatic 
limbs. 

b, Longitudinal lobe or stolon 
of the coxal gland. 

c. Its four transverse lobes or 
outgrowths corresponding 
to the four coxae. 




(From Lankester, loc. cit , 
Packard.) 



after 



with all air-breathing Arthropoda except Peripatus, possesses these 
tubules, which are often called Malpighian tubes. A great deal has 
been made of this difference by some writers. It has been considered 
by them as proving that Limulus, in spite of all its special agreements 
with Scorpio (which, however, have scarcely been appreciated by the 
writers in question), really belongs to the Crustacean line of descent, 
whilst Scorpio, by possessing Malpighian tubes, is declared to be 
unmistakably tied together with the other Arachnida to the tracheate 
Arthropods, the Hexapods, Diplopods, and Chilopods, which all 
possess Malpighian tubes. 

It must be pointed out that the presence or absence of such renal 
excretory tubes opening into the intestine appears to be a question 



Fig. 29. — Diagram of the 
arterial system of A, Scorpio, 
and B, Limulus. The Roman 
numerals indicate the body 
somites and the two figures 
are adjusted for comparison. 
ce, Cerebral arteries; sp, 
supra - spinal or medullary 
artery; c, caudal artery; 
/, lateral anastomotic artery 
of Limulus. The figure B 
also shows the peculiar neural 
investiture formed by the 
cerebral arteries in Limulus 
and the derivation from this 
of the arteries to the limbs, 
III, IV, VI, whereas in 
Scorpio the latter have a 
separate origin from the 
anterior aorta. 




(From Lankester, 
Arachnid.) 



'Limulus an 



of adaptation to the changed physiological conditions of respiration, 
and not of morphological significance, since a pair of renal excretory 
tubes of this nature is found in certain Amphipod Crustacea (Talor- 
chestia, &c.) which have abandoned a purely aquatic life. This view 
has been accepted and supported by Professors Korschelt and Heider 
(16). An important fact in its favour was discovered by Laurie (17), 
who investigated the embryology of two species of Scorpio under 
Lankester's direction. It appears that the Malpighian tubes of 
Scorpio are developed from the mesenteron, viz. that portion of the 
gut which is formed by the hypoblast, whereas in Hexapod insects 
the similar caecal tubes are developed from the proctodaeum or 
in-pushed portion of the gut which is formed from epiblast. In fact 
it is not possible to maintain that the renal excretory tubes of the 
gut are of one common origin in the Arthropoda. They have 
appeared independently in connexion with a change in the excretion 
of nitrogenous waste in Arachnids, Crustacea, and the other classes 
of Arthropoda when aerial, as opposed to aquatic, respiration has 
been established— and they have been formed in some cases from 
the mesenteron, in other cases from the proctodaeum. Their 
appearance in the air-breathing Arachnids does not separate those 
forms from the water-breathing Arachnids which are devoid of them, 



any more than does their appearance in certain Amphipoda separate 
those Crustaceans from the other members of the class. 

Further, it is pointed out by Korschelt and Heider that the hinder 
portion of the gut frequently acts in Arthropoda as an organ of 
nitrogenous excretion in the absence of any special excretory tubules, 
and that the production of such caeca from its surface in separate 
lines of descent does not involve any elaborate or unlikely process of 
growth. In other words, the Malpighian tubes of the terrestrial 
Arachnida are homoplastic with those of Hexapoda and Myriapoda, 
and not homogenetic with them. We are compelled to take a similar 
view of the agreement between the tracheal air-tubes of Arachnida 
and other tracheate Arthropods. They are homoplasts (see 18) one 
of another, and do not owe their existence in the various classes 
compared to a common inheritance of an ancestral tracheal system. 

Conclusions arising from the Close Affinity of Limulus and 
Scorpio. — When we consider the relationships of the various 
classes of Arthropoda, having 
accepted and established the 
fact of the close genetic affinity 
of Limulus and Scorpio, we are 
led to important conclusions. 
In such a consideration we have 
to make use not only of the fact 
just mentioned, but of three im- 
portant generalizations which 
serve as it were as implements 
for the proper estimation of the 
relationships of any series of 
organic forms. First of all there 
is the generalization that the 
relationships of the various 
forms of animals (or of plants) 
to one another is that of the 
ultimate twigs of a much-branch- 
ing genealogical tree. Secondly, 
identity of structure in two or- 
ganisms does not necessarily 
indicate that the identical 
structure has been inherited from 
an ancestor common to the two 
organisms compared (homo- 
geny), but may be due to 
independent development of a 
like structure in two different 
lines of descent (homoplasy). 
Thirdly, those members of a 
group which, whilst exhibiting 
undoubted structural characters 
indicative of their proper assign- 
ment to that group, yet are 
simpler than and inferior in 
elaboration of their organization 
to other members of the group, 
are not necessarily representa- 
tives of the earlier and primitive 
phases in the development of 
the group — but are very often 
examples of retrogressive change 
or degeneration. The second 
and third implements of analysis 
above cited are of the nature of 
cautionsorchecks. Agreements 




Fig. 30. — View from below of 
a scorpion (Buthus occitanus) 
opened and dissected so as to 
show the pericardium with its 
muscles, the lateral arteries, and 
the tergo-sternal muscles. 
PRO, Prosoma. 
dpm, Dorso^plastral muscle. 
art, Lateral artery. 
tsm 1 , Tergo-sternal muscle (la- 
belled dv in fig. 31) of the 
second (pectiniferous) mesoso- 
matic somite ; this is the most 
anterior pair of the series of 
six, none are present in the 
genital somite. 
tsm*, Tergo-sternal muscle of 
the fifth mesosomatic somite. 
tsm 6 , Tergo-sternal muscle of 
the enlarged first metasomatic 
somite. 
Per, Pericardium. 
VPM 1 to VPM 7 , The series of 
seven pairs of veno-pericardiac 
muscles (labelled pv in fig. 31). 
There is some reason to admit 
the existence of another more 
anterior pair of these muscles in 
Scorpio; this would make the 
number exactly correspond with 
the number in Limulus. 

(After Lankester, Trans. Zool. Soc. 
vol. xi., IC83.) 



are not necessarily due to 

common inheritance; simplicity is not necessarily primitive and 

ancestral. 

On the other hand, we must not rashly set down agreements 
as due to " homoplasy " or " convergence of development " if 
we find two or three or more concurrent agreements. The prob- 
ability is against agreement being due to homoplasy when the 
agreement involves a number of really separate (not correlated) 
coincidences. Whilst the chances are in favour of some one 
homoplastic coincidence or structural agreement occurring 
between some member or other of a large group a and some 
member or other of a large group b, the matter is very different 



ARACHNIDA 



297 



when by such an initial coincidence the two members have been 
particularized. The chances against these two selected members 
exhibiting another really independent homoplastic agreement 
are enormous: let us say 10,000 to 1. The chances against yet 
another coincidence are a hundred million to one, and against 
yet one more " coincidence " they are the square of a hundred 
million to one. Homoplasy can only be assumed when the co- 
incidence is of a simple nature, and is such as may be reasonably 
supposed to have arisen by the action of like selective conditions 
upon like material in two separate lines of descent. 1 

So, too, degeneration is not to be lightly assumed as the ex- 
planation of a simplicity of structure. There is a very definite 
criterion of the simplicity due to degeneration, which can in 
most cases be applied. Degenerative simplicity is never uni- 
formly distributed over all the structures of the organism. It 
affects many or nearly all the structures of the body, but leaves 
some, it may be only one, at a high level of elaboration and 
complexity. Ancestral simplicity is more uniform, and does 
not co-exist with specialization and elaboration of a single organ. 
Further: degeneration cannot be inferred safely by the examina- 
tion of an isolated case; usually we obtain a series of forms 
indicating the steps of a change in structure — and what we have 
to decide is whether the movement has been from the simple 
to the more complex, or from the more complex to the simple. 
The feathers of a peacock afford a convenient example of primitive 
and degenerative simplicity. The highest point of elaboration 
in colour, pattern and form is shown by the great eye-painted 
tail feathers. From these we can pass by gradual transitions 
in two directions, viz. either to the simple lateral tail feathers 
with a few rami only, developed only on one side of the shaft 
and of uniform metallic coloration — or to the simple contour 
feathers of small size, with the usual symmetrical series of 
numerous rami right and left of the shaft and no remarkable 
colouring. The one-sided specialization and the peculiar metallic 
colouring of the lateral tail feathers mark them as the extreme 
terms of a degenerative series, whilst the symmetry, likeness of 
constituent parts inter se, and absence of specialized pigment, 
as well as the fact that they differ little from any average feather 
of birds in general, mark the contour feather as primitively 
simple, and as the starting-point from which the highly elabor- 
ated eye-painted tail feather has gradually evolved. 

Applying these principles to the consideration of the Arach- 
nida, we arrive at the conclusion that the smaller and simpler 
Arachnids are not the more primitive, but that the Acari or mites 
are, in fact, a degenerate group. This was maintained by 
Lankester in 1878 (19), again in 1881 (20); it was subsequently 
announced as a novelty by Claus in 1885 (21). Though the 
aquatic members of a class of animals are in some instances 
derived from terrestrial forms, the usual transition is from an 
aquatic ancestry to more recent land-living forms. There is no 
doubt, from a consideration of the facts of structure, that the 
aquatic water-breathing Arachnids, represented in the past by 
the Eurypterines and to-day by the sole survivor Limulus, have 
preceded the terrestrial air-breathing forms of that group. 
Hence we see at once that the better-known Arachnida form 
a series, leading from Limulus-like aquatic creatures through 
scorpions, spiders and harvest-men, to the degenerate Acari or 
mites. The spiders are specialized and reduced in apparent 
complexity, as compared with the scorpions, but they cannot be 
regarded as degenerate since the concentration of structure 
which occurs in them results in greater efficiency and power than 
are exhibited by the scorpion. The determination of the relative 
degree of perfection of organization attained by two animals 

1 A great deal of superfluous hypothesis has lately been put forward 
in the name of " the principle of convergence of characters " by a 
certain school of palaeontologists. The horse is supposed by these 
writers to have originated by separate lines of descent in the Old 
World and the New, from five-toed ancestors! And the important 
consequences following from the demonstration of the identity in 
structure of Limulus and Scorpio are evaded by arbitrary and 
even phantastic invocations of a mysterious transcendental force 
which brings about " convergence " irrespective of heredity and 
selection. Morphology becomes a farce when such assumptions are 
made. (E. R. L.) 



compared is difficult when we introduce, as seems inevitable, 
the question of efficiency and power, and do not confine the 
question to the perfection of morphological development. We 
have no measure of the degree of power manifested by various 
animals— though it would be possible to arrive at some con- 
clusions as to how that " power " should be estimated. It is not 
possible here to discuss that matter further. We must be content 
to point out that it seems that the spiders, the pedipalps, and 



aunt-. 



ad. ""< PV 



py* py.t py* 



pvt pv 9 



. pv' 




dv' ~ t& dv' s'ig' 

sUg- 

After Beck, Trans. Zool. Soc. vol. xi., 1883. 

Fig. 31. — Diagram of a lateral view of a longitudinal section of 
a scorpion. 

d, Chelicera. ad, Muscle from carapace to en- 

ch, Chela. tosternum. 

cam, Camerostome. md, Muscle from tergite of genital 

m. Mouth. somite to entosternum (same 

ent, Entosternum. as dpm in fig. 30). 

p, Pecten. dv 1 to dv 6 , Dorso- ventral muscles 

stig 1 , First pulmonary aperture. (same as the series labelled tsm 

stig 4 , Fourth pulmonary aper- in hg. 30). 

ture. pv 1 to pv 7 , The seven veno-peri- 

dam, Muscle from carapace to a cardiac muscles of the right 

praeoral entosclerite. side (labelled VPM in fig. 30). 

other large Arachnids have not been derived from the scorpions 
directly, but have independently developed from aquatic 
ancestors, and from one of these independent groups — probably 
through the harvest-men from the spiders — the Acari have finally 
resulted. 




After Benham, Trans. Zool. Soc. vol. si., 1883. 

Fig. 32. — Diagram of a lateral view of a longitudinal section of 



Limulus. 



Sue, Suctorial pharynx. 
al, Alimentary canal. 
Ph, Pharynx. 
M, Mouth. 
Est, Entosternum. 
VS, Ventral venous sinus. 
chi, Chilaria. 
go, Genital operculum. 
br l to 6r b , Branchial append- 
ages, 
met, Unsegmented metasoma. 



entapo- 



Entap 4 , Fourth dorsal 
physis of left side. 

tsm, Tergo-sternal muscles, six 
pairs as in Scorpio (labelled 
dv in fig. 31). 

VPM 1 to VPM*, The eight pairs 
of veno-pericardiac muscles 
(labelled pv in fig. 31). VPM 1 
is probably represented in 
Scorpio, though not marked 
in figs. 30 and 31. 



Leaving that question for consideration in connexion with 
the systematic statement of the characters of the various groups 
of Arachnida which follows on p. 299, it is well now to consider 
the following question, viz., seeing that Limulus and Scorpio are 
such highly developed and specialized forms, and that they seem 
to constitute as it were the first and second steps in the series of 
recognized Arachnida — what do we know, or what are we led to 
suppose with regard to the more primitive Arachnida from which 
the Eurypterines and Limulus and Scorpio have sprung ? Do 
we know in the recent or fossil condition any such primitive 
Arachnids? Such a question is not only legitimate, but 
prompted by the analogy of at least one other great class of 
Arthropods. The great Arthropod class, the Crustacea, presents 
to the zoologist at the present day an immense ranjje of forms, 



298 



ARACHNIDA 




comprising the primitive phyllopods, the minute copepods, the 
parasitic cirrhipedes and the powerful crabs and lobsters, and 
the highly elaborated sand-hoppers and slaters. It has been 
insisted, by those who accepted Lankester's original doctrine 
of the direct or genetic affinity of the Chaetopoda and Arthro- 
poda, that Apus and Branchipus really come very near to the 
ancestral forms which connected those two great branches of 
Appendiculate (Parapodiate) animals. On the other hand, the 
land crabs are at an immense distance from these simple forms. 

The record of the Crustacean family- 
tree is, in fact, a fairly complete 
,jf J\|;' w one — the lower primitive members 
" if-. °^ tne g rou P are still represented 

_ '..'•■ c' by living forms in great abundance, 
f A In the case of the Arachnida, if we 
[_ f s 2 have to start their genealogical 
~ "* history with Limulus and Scorpio, 
we are much in the same position 
as we should be in dealing with the 
Crustacea, were the whole of the 
Entomostraca and the whole of the 
Arthrostraca wiped out of existence 
and record. There is no possibility 
of doubt that the series of forms 
corresponding in the Arachnidan 
line of descent, to the forms dis- 
tinguished in the Crustacean line 
of descent as the lower grade — the 
Entomostraca — have . ceased to 
exist, and not only so, but have 
left little evidence in the form of 
fossils as to their former existence 
and nature. It must, however, be 
admitted as probable that we should 
find some evidence, in ancient rocks 
or in the deep sea, of the early more 
primitive Arachnids. And it must 
be remembered that such forms 
must be expected to exhibit, when 
found, differences from Limulus and 
Scorpio as great as those which 
separate Apus and Cancer. The 
existing Arachnida, like the higher 
Crustacea, are " nomomeristic," 
that is to say, have a fixed typical 
number of somites to the body. 
Further, they are like the higher 
Crustacea, " somatotagmic," that is 
to say, they have this limited set of 
somites grouped in three (or more) 
" tagmata " or regions of a fixed 
number of similarly modified somites 
— each tagma differing in the modi- 
fication of its fixed number of somites 
from that characterizing a neigh- 
bouring " tagma." The most 
primitive among the lower Crus- 
tacea, on the other hand, for 



From Lankester, "Limulu3 an 
Arachnid." 

Fig. 33. — The alimentary 

canal and gastric glands of 

a scorpion (A) and of 

Limulus (B). 

£y, Muscular suctorial en- 
largement of the pharynx. 

sal, Prosomatic pair of gas- 
tric caeca in Scorpio, 
called salivary glands by 
some writers. 

c 1 , and c 2 , The anterior two 
pairs of gastric caeca 
and ducts of the meso- 
somatic region. 

c', c* and c 6 , Caeca and ducts 
of Scorpio not represented 
in Limulus. 

M, The Malpighian or renal 
caecal diverticula of 
Scorpio. 

pro, The proctodaeum or 
portion of gut leading to 
anus and formed embryo- 
logically by an inversion 
of the epiblast at that 
orifice. 



example, the Phyllopoda, have 
not a fixed number of somites, some genera — even allied 
species — have more, some less, within wide limits; they 
are " anomomeristic." They also, as is generally the case 
with anomomeristic animals, do not exhibit any con- 
formity to a fixed plan of " tagmatism " or division of the 
somites of the body into regions sharply marked off from one 
another; the head or prosomatic tagma is followed by a trunk 
consisting of somites which either graduate in character as we 
pass along the series or exhibit a large variety in different genera, 
families and orders, of grouping of the somites. They are 
anomotagmic, as well as anomomeristic. 

When it is admitted — as seems to be reasonable — that the 
primitive Arachnida would, like the primitive Crustacea, be 



anomomeristic and anomotagmic, we shall not demand of 
claimants for the rank of primitive Arachnids agreement with 
Limulus and Scorpio in respect of the exact number of their 
somites and the exact grouping of those somites; and when 
we see how diverse are the modifications of the branches of the 
appendages both in Arachnida and in other classes of Arthropoda 
(?.».), we shall not over-estimate a difference in the form of this 
or that appendage exhibited by the claimant as compared with 
the higher Arachnids. With those considerations in mind, the 
claim of the extinct group of the trilobites to be considered as 
representatives of the lower and more primitive steps in the 
Arachnidan genealogy must, it seems, receive a favourable judg- 
ment. They differ from the Crustacea in that they have only 
a single pair of prae-oral appendages, the second pair being 
definitely developed as mandibles. This fact renders their 
association with the Crustacea impossible, if classification is 
to be the expression of genetic affinity inferred from structural 
coincidence. On the contrary, this particular point is one in 
which they agree with the higher Arachnida. But little is known 
of the structure of these extinct animals; we are therefore 
compelled to deal with such special points of resemblance and 
difference as their remains still exhibit. They had lateral eyes ' 
which resemble no known eyes so closely as the lateral eyes of 
Limulus. The general form and structure of their prosomatic 
carapace are in many striking features identical with that of 
Limulus. The trilobation of the head and body — due to the 
expansion and flattening of the sides or "pleura" of the tegu- 
mentary skeleton— is so closely repeated in the young of Limulus 
that the latter has been called " the trilobite stage " of Limulus 
(fig. 42 compared with fig. 41). No Crustacean exhibits this 
trilobite form. But most important of the evidences presented 
by the trilobites of affinity with Limulus, and therefore with the 
Arachnida, is the tendency less marked in some, strongly carried 
out in others, to form a pygidial or telsonic shield — a fusion of 
the posterior somites of the body, which is precisely identical 
in character with the metasomatic carapace of Limulus. When 
to this is added the fact that a post-anal spine is developed to 
a large size in some trilobites (fig. 38), like that of Limulus and 
Scorpio, and that lateral spines on the pleura of the somites are 
frequent as in Limulus, and that neither metasomatic fusion 
of somites nor post-anal spine, nor lateral pleural spines are 
found in any Crustacean, nor all three together in any Arthropod 
besides the trilobites and Limulus — the claim of the trilobites 
to be considered as representing one order of a lower grade 
of Arachnida, comparable to the grade Entomostraca of the 
Crustacea, seems to be established. 

The fact that the single pair of prae-oral appendages of 
trilobites, known only as yet in one genus, is in that particular 
case a pair of uni-ramose antennae — does not render the associa- 
tion of trilobites and Arachnids improbable. Although the 
prae-oral pair of appendages in the higher Arachnida is usually 
chelate, it is not always so ; in spiders it is not so ; nor in many Acari. 
The bi-ramose structure of the post-oral limbs, demonstrated by 
Beecher in the trilobite Triarthrus, is no more inconsistent with 
its claim to be a primitive Arachnid than is the foliaceous 
modification of the limbs in Phyllopods inconsistent with 
their relationship to the Arthrostracous Crustaceans such as 
Gammarus and Oniscus. 

Thus, then, it seems that we have in the trilobites the repre- 
sentatives of the lower phases of the Arachnidan pedigree. The 
simple anomomeristic trilobite, with its equi-formal somites 
and equi-formal appendages, is one term of the series which 
ends in the even more simple but degenerate Acari. Between the 
two and at the highest point of the arc, so far as morphological 
differentiation is concerned, stands the scorpion; near to it in 
the trilobite's direction (that is, on the ascending side) are 
Limulus and the Eurypterines— with a long gap, due to oblitera- 
tion of the record, separating them from the trilobite. On the 

1 A pair of round tubercles on the lab'-am (camerostome or hypo- 
stoma) of several species of Trilobites has been described and held to 
be a pair of eyes (22). Sense-organs in a similar position were 
discovered in Limulus by Patten (42) in 1894. 



ARACHNIDA 



299 



other side — tending downwards from the scorpion towards the 
Acari — are the Pedipalpi, the spiders, the book-scorpions, the 
harvest-men and the water-mites. 

The strange nobody-crabs or Pycnogonids occupy a place on 
the ascending half of the arc below the Eurypterines and Limulus. 
They are strangely modified and degenerate, but seem to be (as 
explained in the systematic review) the remnant of an Arach- 
nidan group holding the same relation to the scorpions which the 
Laemodipoda hold to the Podophthalmate Crustacea. 



We have now to offer a classification of the Arachnida and 
to pass in review the larger groups, with a brief statement of 
their structural characteristic^. 

In the bibliography at the close of this article (referred to by 
leaded arabic numerals in brackets throughout these 'pages), 
the titles of works are given which contain detailed information 
as to the genera and species of each order or sub-order, their 
geographical distribution and their habits and economy so far 
as they have been ascertained. The limits of space do not permit 
of a fuller treatment of those matters here. 

Tabular Classification 1 of the Arachnida. 

Class. ARACHNIDA. 
Grade A. ANOMOMERISTICA. 
Sub-Class. TRILOBITAE. 

Orders. Not satisfactorily determined. 

Grade B. NOMOMERISTICA. 

Sub-Class I. PANTOPODA. 
Order 1. Nymphonomorpha. 
„ 2. Ascorhynchomorpha. 
„ 3. Pycnogonomorpha. 
Sub-Class H. EU-ARACHNIDA. 

Grade a. delobranchia, Lankester [vel hydro- 

PNEUSTEA, Pocock). 

Order 1. Xiphosura. 
„ 2. Gigantostraca. 

Grade b. embolobranchia, Lankester (vel aero- 

PNEUSTEA, Pocock). 

Section a. Pectinifera. 
Order 1. Scorpionidea. 

Sub-order a. Apoxypoda. 
,, b. Dionychopoda. 

Section /3. Epectinata. 
Order 2. Pedipalpi. 

Sub-order a. Uropygi. 

Tribe 1. Urotricha. 
2. Tartarides. 
Sub-order b. Amblypygi. 
Order 3. Araneae. 

Sub-order a. Mesothelae. 
„ b. Opisthothelae. 

Tribe 1. Mygalomorphae. 
2. Arachnomorphae. 
Order 4. Palpigradi ( = Microthelyphonidae). 
Order 5. Solifugae (=Mycetophorae). 
Order 6. Pseudoscorpiones ( =Chelonethi). 
Sub-order a. Panctenodactyli. 
,, b. Hemictenodactyli. 
Order 7. Podogona ( =Ricinulei). 
Order 8. Opiliones. 

Sub-order a. Laniatores. 
„ b. Palpatores. 
„ c. Anepignathi. 
Order 9. Rhynchostomi ( = Acari). 
Sub-order a. Notostigmata. 
„ b. Cryptostigmata. 
„ c. Metastigmata. 
„ d. Prostigmata. 
„ e. Astigmata. 
,, /. Vermiformia. 
„ g. Tetrapoda. 

Class. ARACHNIDA. — Euarthropoda having two prosthomeres 
(somites which have passed from a post-oral to a prae-oral position), 
the appendages of the first represented by eyes, of the second by 
solitary rami which are rarely antenniform, more usually chelate. 
A tendency is exhibited to the formation of a metasomatic as well 
as a prosomatic carapace by fusion of the tergal surfaces of the 
somites. Intermediate somites forming a mesosoma occur, but tend 
to fuse superficially with the metasomatic carapace or to become 
co-ordinated with the somites of the metasoma, whether fused or 
distinct to form one region, the opisthosoma (abdomen of authors). 
In the most highly developed forms the two anterior divisions 



(tagmata) of the body, prosoma and mesosoma, each exhibit six 
pairs of limbs, pediform and plate-like respectively, whilst the 
metasoma consists of six limbless somites and a post-anal spine. 
The genital apertures are placed in the first somite following the 
prosoma, excepting where a praegenital somite, usually suppressed, 
is retained. Little is known of the form of the appendages in the 
lowest archaic Arachnida, but the tendency of those of the proso- 
matic somites has been (as in the Crustacea) to pass from a 
generalized bi-ramose or multi-ramose form to that of uni-ramose 
antennae, chelae and walking legs. 

The Arachnida are divisible into two grades of structure — accord- 
ing to the fixity or non-fixity of the number of somites building up 
the body : — 

Grade A {of the Arachnida). ANOMOMERISTICA.— Extinct 
archaic Arachnida, in which (as in the EntomostracOus Crustacea) 
the number of well-developed somites may be more or less than 
eighteen and may be grouped only as head (prosoma) and trunk or 
may be further differentiated. A telsonic tergal shield of greater 
or less size is always present, which may be imperfectly divided into 
well-marked but immovable tergites indicating incompletely differ- 
entiated somites. The single pair of palpiform appendages in front 
of the mouth has been found in one instance to be antenniform, 
whilst the numerous post-oral appendages in the same genus were 
bi-ramose. The position of the genital apertures is not known. 
Compound lateral eyes present ; median eyes wanting. The body 
and head have the two pleural regions of each somite flattened and 
expanded on either side of the true gut-holding body-axis. Hence 
the name of the sub-class signifying tri-lobed, a condition realized 
also in the Xiphosurous Arachnids. The members of this group, 
whilst resembling the lower Crustacea (as all lower groups of a 
branching genealogical tree must do), differ from them essentially 
in that the head exhibits only one prosthomere (in addition to the 
eye-bearing prosthomere) with palpiform appendages (as in all 
Arachnida) instead of two. The Anomomeristic Arachnida form a 
single sub-class, of which only imperfect fossil remains are known. 

Sub-class (of the Andmomeristica) . TRILOBITAE. — The single 
sub-class Trilobitae constitutes the grade Anomomeristica. It has 
been variously divided into orders by a number of writers. The 
greater or less evolution and specialization of the metasomatic 
carapace appears to be the most important basis for classification — 
but this has not been made use of in the latest attempts at drawing 
up a system of the Trilobites. The form of the middle and lateral 
regions of the prosomatic shield has been used, and an excessive 
importance attached to the demarcation of certain areas in that 
structure. Sutures are stated to mark off some of these pieces, but 
in the proper sense of that term as applied to the skeletal structures 
of the Vertebrata, no sutures exist in the chitinous cuticle of Arthro- 
poda. That any partial fusion of originally distinct chitinous 
plates takes place in the cephalic shield of Trilobites, comparable 
to the partial fusion of bony pieces by suture in Vertebrata, is a 
suggestion contrary to fact. 

The Trilobites are known only as fossils, mostly Silurian and 
prae-Silurian ; a few are found in Carboniferous and Permian strata. 
As many as two thousand species are known. Genera with small 
metasomatic carapace, consisting of three to six fused segments 
distinctly marked though not separated by soft membrane, are 
Harpes, Paradoxid.es and Triarthrus (fig. 34). In Calymene, Homa- 
lonotus and Phacops (fig. 38) from six to sixteen segments are clearly 
marked by ridges and grooves in the metasomatic tagma, whilst in 
Illaenus the shield so formed is large but no somites are marked out 
on its surface. In this genus ten free somites (mesosoma) occur 
between the prosomatic and metasomatic carapaces. Asaphus 
and Megalaspis (fig. 39) are similarly constituted. In Agnostus 
(hg; 4°) the anterior and posterior carapaces constitute almost the 
entire body, the two carapaces being connected by a mid-region of 
only two free somites. It has been held that the forms with a small 
number of somites marked in the posterior carapace and numerous 
free somites between the anterior and posterior carapace, must be 
considered as anterior to those in which a great number of posterior 
somites are traceable in the metasomatic carapace, and that those 
in which the traces of distinct somites in the posterior or meta- 
somatic carapace are most completely absent must be regarded as 
derived from those in which somites are well marked in the posterior 

1 The writer is indebted to R. I. Pocock, assistant in the Natural 
History departments of the British Museum, for valuable assistance 
in the preparation of this article and for the classification and de- 
finition of the groups of Eu-arachnida here given. The general 
scheme and some of the details have been brought by the writer into 
agreement with the views maintained in this article. Pocock accepts 
those views in all essential points and has, as a special student of 
the Arachnida, given to them valuable expansion and confirmation. 
The writer also desires to express his thanks to Messrs. Macmillan 
& Co. for permission to use figs.22,43,44 and 45, which are taken from 
Parker and Haswell's Text-book of Zoology ; and to Messrs. Swan 
Sonnenschein & Co. for the loan of several figures from the trans- 
lations published by them of the admirable treatise on Embryology 
by Professors Korschelt and Heider; also to the publishers of the 
treatise on Palaeontology by Professor Zittel, Herr Oldenbourg and 
The Macmillan Co., New York, for several cuts of extinct forms. 



3°° 



ARACHNIDA 



carapace and similar in appearance to the free somites. The genus 
Agnostus, which belongs to the last category, occurs abundantly in 

Cambrian strata and is 
one of the earliest forms 
known. This would 
lead to the supposition 
that the great develop- 
ment of metasomatic 
carapace is a primitive 
and not a late character, 
were it not for the fact 
that Paradoxides and 
A tops, with an incon- 
spicuous telsonic cara- 
pace and numerous free 
somites, are also Cam- 
brian in age, the latter 
indeed anterior in 
horizon to Agnostus. 

On the other hand, 
it may well be doubted 
whether the pygidial or 
posterior carapace is 
primarily due to a fusion 
of the tergites of somites 
which were previously 
movable and well de- 
veloped. The posterior 
carapace of the Trilo- 
bites and of Limulus is 
probably enough in 
origin a telsonic cara- 
pace — that is to say, is 
the tergum of the last 
segment of the body 
which carries the anus. 
From the front of this 
region new segments are 
produced in the first 
instance, and are added 
during growth to the 
existing series. This 
telson may enlarge, it 
may possibly even be- 
come internally and 
sternally developed as 
partially separate som- 
ites, and the tergum 
may remain without 
trace of somite forma- 
tion, or, as appears to 
be the case in Limulus, 
the telson gives rise to 
a few well-marked som- 
ites (mesosoma and two 
others) and then en- 
larges without further 
trace of segmentation, 
whilst the chitinous 
integument which de- 
velops in increasing 
thickness on the terga 
as growth advances 
welds together the un- 
segmented telson and 
the somites in front of 
it, which were previ- 
ously marked by 
separate tergal thicken- 
ings. It must always be 
Fig. 34. — Restoration of Triarthrus remembered that we are 
Becki, Green, as determined by Beecher "able (especially in the 
from specimens obtained from the Utica case of fossilized mtegu- 
Slates (Ordovician), New York. A, dorsal; ments) to attach an 
B, ventral surface. In the latter the single unwarranted mterpre- 
pair of antennae springing up from each tation to the mere 
side of the camerostome or hypostome or discontinuity or con- 
upper lip-lobe are seen. Four pairs of tinuity of the thickened 
appendages besides these are seen to belong plates of chitinous 
to the cephalic tergum. All the append- cuticle on the back of 
ages are pediform and bi-ramose ; all have an Arthropod. These 
a prominent gnathobase, and in all the plates may fuse, and yet 
exopodite carries a comb-like series of the somites to which 
secondary processes. they belong may remain 

(After Beecher, from Zittel.) distinct, and each have 

its pair of appendages 
well developed. On the other hand, an unusually large tergal plate, 
whether terminal or in the series, is not always due to fusion 
of the dorsal plates of once-separate somites, but is often a case 
of growth and enlargement of a single somite without formation 




of any trace of a new somite. For the literature of Trilobites see 
(22*). 

Grade B {of the Arachnida) NOMOMERISTICA.—Arachmda 
in which, excluding from consideration the eye-bearing prostho- 
mere, the somites are primarily (that is to say, in the common 

Q 




Fig. 35-— Triarthrus Becki, Green, a, Restored thoracic limbs in 
transverse section of the animal; b, section across a posterior 
somite ; c, section across one of the sub-terminal somites. 

(After Beecher.) 
ancestor of the grade) grouped in three regions of six — (a) the 
" prosoma " with palpiform appendages, (b) the " mesosoma " with 
plate-like appendages, and (c) the " metasoma " with suppressed 





Fig. 36. — Triarthrus Becki, Green. Fig. 37. — Deiphon Forbesii, 

Dorsal view of second thoracic leg Barr. One of the Cheiru- 

with and without setae, en, Inner ridae. Silurian Bohemia, 

ramus ; ex, Outer ramus. (From Zittel's Palaeontology.) 
(After Beecher.) 

appendages. A somite placed between the prosoma and mesosoma 
— the prae-genital somite — appears to have belonged originally to 
the prosomatic series (which with its ocular prosthomere and palpi- 





Fig. 38. — Dalmanites 
limulurus, Green. One of 
the Phacopidae, from the 
Silurian, New York. 
(From Zittel.) 



Fig. 39. — Megalaspis extenuatus. 
One of the Asaphidae allied to 
Illaenus, from the Ordovician of 
East Gothland, Sweden. 
(From Zittel). 



form limbs [Pantopoda], would thus consist of eight somites), but 
to have been gradually reduced. In living Arachnids, excepting 
the Pantopoda, it is either fused (with loss of its appendages) with 
the prosoma (Limulus, 1 Scorpio), after embryonic appearance, or is 



1 Pocock suggests that the area marked vii. in the outline figure 
of the dorsal view of Limulus (fig. 7) may be the tergum of the 
suppressed prae-genital somite. Embryological evidence must settle 
whether this is so or not. 



ARACHNIDA 



301 





retained as a rudimentary, separate, detached somite in front of the 
mesosoma, or disappears altogether (excalation). The atrophy 
and total disappearance of ancestrally well-marked somites fre- 

FiG.40. — Fourstagesin 
B CD /r-'^K tne development of the 

trilobite Agnostus nudus. 
A, Youngest stage with 
no mesosomatic somites ; 
B and C, stages with two 
mesosomatic somites be- 
tween the prosomatic and 
telsonic carapaces ; D, 
adult condition, still with 
only two free mesosoma tic 
somites. 
(From Korschelt and Heider.) 

quently take place (as in all Arthropoda) at the posterior extremity 

of the body, whilst excalation of somites may occur at the constricted 

areas which often separate adjacent " regions," though there are 

A B C very few instances in 

which it has been recog- 
nized. Concentration of 
the cfrgan-systems by 
fusion of neighbouring 
regions (prosoma, meso- 
soma, metasoma), pre- 
viously distinct, has 
frequently occurred, 
together with oblitera- 
tion of the muscular 
and chitinous structures 
indicative of distinct 
somites. This concentra- 
tion and obliteration of 
somites, often accom- 
panied by dislocation 
of important segmental 
structures (such as ap- 
pendages and nerve- 
ganglia), may lead to 
highly developed speci- 
alization (individuation, 
H. Spencer), as in the 
Araneae and Opiliones, 
and, on the other hand, 
may terminate in simpli- 
fication and degenera- 
tion, as in the Acari. 

The most important 
general change which 
has affected the struc- 
ture of the nomomeristic 
Arachnida in the course 
of their historic develop- 
ment is the transition 
from an aquatic to a 
terrestrial life. This has 
been accompanied by 
the conversion of the 
lamelliform gill-plates into lamelliform lung-plates, and later the 
development from the lung-chambers, and at independent sites, 
of tracheae or air-tubes (by adaptation of the vasifactive tissue of 
the blood-vessels) similar to those independently developed in 
A B 



Fig. 42. — So-called 
" trilobite stage " of 
Limulus polyphemus. 
A, Dorsal; B, ventral 
view. 

(From Korschelt and Heider, 
after Leuckart.) 



Peripatus, Diplopoda, Hexapoda and Chilopoda. Probably tracheae 
have developed independently by the same process in several groups 
of tracheate Arachnids. The nomomeristic Arachnids comprise two 
sub-classes — one a very small degenerate offshoot from early ances- 
tors; the other, the great bulk of the class. 

Sub- Class I. (of the Nomomeristica). PANTOPODA.— Nomo- 
meristic Arachnids, in which the somites corresponding to mesosoma 
and metasoma have entirely aborted. The seventh, and sometimes 
the eighth, leg-bearing somite is present and has its leg-like append- 
ages fully developed. Monomeniscous eyes with a double (really 
triple) cell-layer formed by invagination, as in the Eu-arachnida, 
are present. The Pantopcda stand in the same relation to Limulus 
and Scorpio that Cyamw: holds to the thoracostracous Crustacea. 



From Korschelt and Heider, after Barrande. 
Fig. 41. — Five stages in the develop- 
ment of the trilobite Sao hirsuta. 

A, Youngest stage. 

B, Older stage with distinct pygidial 
carapace. 

C, Stage with two free mesosomatic 
somites between the prosomatic and 
telsonic carapaces. 

D, Stage with seven free intermediate 
somites. 

E, Stage with twelve free somites; the 
telsonic carapace has not increased in 
size. 

a, Lateral eye. 

g, So-called facial "suture" (not really a 

suture). 
p, Telsonic carapace. 




The reduction of the organism to seven leg-bearing somites, of which 
the first pair, as in so many Eu-arachnida, are chelate, is a form of 
degeneration connected with a peculiar quasi-parasitic habit re- 
sembling that of the crustacean Laemodipoda. The genital pores 
are situate at the base of the 7th pair of limbs, and may be repeated 




From Parker and Harwell's Texi-book oj Zoology, after Hoek. 
Fig. 43. — One of the Nymphonomorphous Pantopoda, Nymphon 
hispidum, showing the seven pairs of appendages 1 to 7; ab, the 
rudimentary opisthosoma ; s, the mouth-bearing proboscis. 

on the 4th, 5th, and 6th. In all known Pantopoda the size of the 
body is quite minute as compared with that of the limbs : the ali- 
mentary canal sends a long caecum into each leg (cf. the Araneae) 
and the genital products are developed in gonocoels also placed in 
the legs. 

The Pantopoda are divided into three orders, the characters of 
which are dependent on variation in the presence of the full number 
of legs. 

Order 1 (of the Pantopoda). Nymphonomorpha, Pocock (nov.) 
(fig- 43)- — In primitive forms belonging to the family Nymphonidae 
the full complement of appendages is retained — the 1st (mandibular), 
the 2nd (palpiform), and the 3rd (ovigerous) pairs being well de- 
veloped in both sexes. In certain derivative forms constituting 
the family Pallenidae, however, the appendages of the 2nd pair 
are either rudimentary or atrophied altogether. 

Two families: 1. Nymphonidae (genus Nymphon), and 2. Palleni- 
dae (genus Pallene). 

Order 2. Ascorhynchomorpha, Pocock (nov.).— Appendages of 
the 2nd and 3rd pairs retained and developed, as in the more primi- 
tive types ot Nymphonomorpha ; but those of the 1st pair are either 
rudimentary, as in the Ascorhynchidae, or atrophied, as in the 
Colossendeidae. In the latter a further specialization is shown in 
the fusion of the body segments. 

Two families: 1. Ascorhynchidae (genera Ascorhynchus and 
Ammolkea); 2. Colossendeidae (genera Colossendeis' and Disco- 
arachne). 

Order 3. Pycnogonomorpha, Pocock (nov.). — Derivative forms in 
which the reduction in number of the anterior appendages is carried 
farther than in the other orders, reaching its extreme in the Pycno- 
gonidae, where the 1st and 2nd pairs are absent in both sexes, and 
the 3rd pair also are absent in the female. In the Hannoniidae, 
however^ which resemble the Pycnogonidae in the absence of the 
3rd pair in the female and of the 2nd pair in both sexes, the 1st pair 
are retained in both sexes. 

Two families: 1. Hannoniidae (genus Hannonia) ; 2. Pycno- 
gonidae (genera Pycnogonum and Phoxichilus). 

Remarks. — The Pantopoda are not known in the fossil condition. 
They are entirely marine, and are not uncommon in tne coralline 
zone of the sea-coast. The species are few, not more than fifty (23). 
Some large species of peculiar genera are taken at great depths. 
Their movements are extremely sluggish. They are especially 
remarkable for the small size o"f the body and the extension of 
viscera into the legs. Their structure is eminently that of degenerate 
forms. Many frequent growths of coralline Algae and hydroid 
polyps, upon the juices of which they feed, and in some cases a species 
of gall is produced in hydroids by the penetration of the larval 
Pantopod into the tissues of the polyp. 

Sub-Class II. (of the Nomomeristic Arachnida). EU-ARACH- 
NIDA.— These start from highly developed and specialized aquatic 
branchiferous forms, exhibiting a prosoma with six pediform pairs of 
appendages, an intermediate prae-genital somite, a mesosoma of six 
somites bearing lamelliform pairs of appendages, and a metasoma 
of six somites devoid of appendages, and the last provided with 
a post-anal spine. Median eyes are present, which are mono- 
meniscous, with distinct retinal and corneagenous cell-layers, and 
placed centrally on the prosoma. Lateral eyes also may be 
present, arranged in lateral groups, and having a single or double 
cell-layer beneath the lens. The first pair of limbs is often 
chelate or prehensile, rarely antenniform ; whilst the second, third 
and fourth may also be chelate, or may be simple palps or walking 
legs. 



302 



ARACHNIDA 



An internal skeletal plate, the so-called " entosternite " of fibro- 
cartilaginous tissue, to which many muscles are attached, is placed 
between the nerve-cords and the alimentary tract in the prosoma 
of the larger forms (Limulus, Scorpio, Mygale). In the same and 
other leading forms a pair of much-coiled glandular tubes, the coxal 
glands (coelomocoels in origin), is found with a duct opening on the 
coxa of the fifth pair of appendages of the prosoma. The vascular 
system is highly developed (in the non-degenerate forms) ; large 
arterial branches closely accompany or envelop the chief nerves; 
capillaries are well developed. The blood-corpuscles are large amoe- 
biform cells, and the blood-plasma is coloured blue by haemocyanin. 

The alimentary canal is uncoiled and cylindrical, and gives rise 
laterally to large gastric glands, which are more than a single pair 
in number (two to six pairs), and may assume the form of simple 
caeca. The mouth is minute and the pharynx is always suctorial, 
never gizzard-like. The gonadial tubes (gonocoels or gonadial 
coelom) are originally reticular and paired, though they may be 
reduced to a simpler condition. They open on the first somite of 
the mesosoma. In the numerous degenerate forms simplification 
occurs by obliteration of the demarcations of somites and the 
fusion of body-regions, together with a gradual suppression of the 
lamelliferous respiratory organs and the substitution for them of 
tracheae, which, in their turn, in the smaller and most reduced 
members of the group, may also disappear. 

The Eu-arachnida are divided into two grades with reference to 
the condition of the respiratory organs as adapted to aquatic or 
terrestrial life. 

Grade a (of the Eu-arachnida). delobranchia 
(Hydropheustea) . 

Mesosomatic segments furnished with large plate-like appendages, 
the 1st pair acting as the genital operculum, the remaining pairs 
being provided with branchial lamellae fitted for breathing oxygen 
dissolved in water. The prae-genital somite partially or wholly 
obliterated in the adult. The mouth lying far back, so that the 
basal segments of all the prosomatic appendages, excepting those 
of the 1st pair, are capable of acting as masticatory organs. Lateral 
eyes consisting of a densely packed group of eye-units (" compound " 
eyes). 

Order 1. Xiphosura. — The prae-genital somite fuses in the 
embryo with the prosoma and disappears (see fig. 19). Not free- 
swimming, none of the prosomatic appendages modified to act as 
paddles ; segments of the mesosoma and metasoma ( = opisthosoma) 
not more than ten in number, distinct or coalesced. 
Family — Limulidae (Limulus). 
,, *Belinuridae {Beiinurus, Aglaspis, Prestwichia) . 
,, "Hemiaspidae (Hemiaspis, Bunodes). 

Remarks. — The Xiphosura are marine in habit, frequenting the 
shore. They are represented at the present day by the single genus 
Limulus (figs. 44 and 45; also figs. 7, 9, 11, to 15 and 26), often 
termed the king-crab, which occurs on the American coast of the 




Fig. 44. — Dorsal view 
of Limulus polyphemus, 
Latr. 



(From Parker and Haswell, 
Text-book of Zoology, after 
Leuckart.) 



Atlantic Ocean, but not on its eastern coasts, and on the Asiatic coast 
of the Pacific. The Atlantic species (L, polyphemus) is common on 
the coasts of the United States, and is known as the king-crab or 
horse-shoe crab. A single specimen was found in the harbour of 



Copenhagen in the 18th century, having presumably been carried 
over by a ship to which it clung. 

A species of Limulus is found in the Buntersandstein of the 
Vosges ; L. Walchi is abundant in the Oolitic lithographic slates of 
Bavaria. 

The genera Beiinurus, Aglaspis, Prestwichia, Hemiaspis and 
Bunodes consist of small forms which occur in Palaeozoic rocks. 



ceph 




Fig. 45. — Ventral 
view of Limulus poly- 
phemus. 

1' to 6, The six proso- 
matic pairs of appen- 
dages. 

abd, the solid opistho- 
... — opcrc somatic carapace. 

tels, the post-anal spine 
(not the telson as the 
lettering would seem 
to imply, but only 



.abd 



its post-anal por- 
._- teh tion). 

operc, the fused first 
pair of mesosomatic 
appendages forming 
the genital oper- 
culum. 

(From Parker and Haswell, 
Text-book of Zoology, after 
Leuckart.) 



In none of them are the appendages known, but in the form of the 
two carapaces and the presence of free somites they are distinctly 
intermediate between Limulus and the Trilobitae. The young form 
of Limulus itself (fig. 40) is also similar to a Trilobite so far as its 
segmentation and trilobation are concerned. The lateral eyes of 
Limulus appear to be identical in structure and position with those 
of certain Trilobitae. 

Order2. Gigantostraca (figs. 46, 47). — Free-swimming forms, with 
the appendages of the 6th or 5th and 6th pairs flattened or lengthened 




Fig. 46. — Eury- 
pterus Fischeri, 
Eichwald. Silu- 
rian of Rootzikil. 
Restoration after 
Schmidt. The 

dorsal aspect is 
presented show- 
ing the prosomatic 
shield with paired 
compound eyes 
and the proso- 
matic appendages 
II. to VI. The 
small first pair of 
appendages is con- 
cealed from view 
by the carapace. 
1 to 12 are the 
somites of the 
opisthosoma ; 13, 
the post-anal 
spine. 

(From Zittel's Text- 
book of Palaeontology, 
The Macmillan Co., 
New York, 1896.) 



to act as oars; segments of mesosoma and metasoma (= opistho- 
soma), twelve in number. 



ARACHNIDA 



303 



Appendages of anterior pair very large and chelate. 

Sub-order Pterygotomorpha, Pterygotidae {Pterygotus). 
Appendages of anterior pair minute and chelate. 

( Stylonuridae (Stylonurus) . 
Sub-order Eurypteromorpha ■] Eurypteridae {Eurypterus, 
( Slimonia). 

Remarks. — The Gigantostraca are frequently spoken of as " the 
Eurypterines." Not more than thirty species are known. They 
became extinct in Palaeozoic times, and are chiefly found in the 
Upper Silurian, though extending upwards as far as the Carbon- 
iferous. They may be regarded as " macrourous " Xiphosura ; that 
is to say, Xiphosura in which the nomomeristic number of eighteen 




From Zittel's Palaeontology. 

Fig. 47. — Pterygotus osiliensis, Schmidt. Silurian of Rooteikil. 
Restoration of the ventral surface, about a third natural size, after 
Schmidt. 



Camerostome or epistoma. 
m, Chilarium or metasternite of 

the prosoma (so-called meta- 

stoma). 
oc, The compound eyes. 



I to 8, Segments of the sixth 
prosomatic appendage. 

I' to V, First five opisthosomatic 

somites. 
7', Sixth opisthosomatic somite. 



[Observe the powerful gnathobases of the sixth pair of prosomatic 
limbs and the median plates behind m. The dotted line on somite I 
indicates the position of the genital operculum which was probably 
provided with branchial lamellae.] 

well-developed somites is present and the posterior ones form a long 
tail-like region of the body. There still appears to be some doubt 
whether in the sub-order Eurypteromorpha the first pair of proso- 
matic appendages (fig. 46) is atrophied, or whether, if present, it has 
the form of a pair of tactile palps or of minute chelae. Though there 
are indications of lamelliform respiratory appendages on mesoso- 
matic somites following that bearing the genital operculum, we 
cannot be said to have any proper knowledge as to such appendages, 
and further evidence with regard to them is much to be desired. 
(For literature see Zittel, 22*.) 

Grade b (of the Eu-arachnida). embolobranchia 
(Aeropneustea). 

In primitive forms the respiratory lamellae of the appendages of 
the 3rd, 4th, 5th and 6th, or of the 1st and 2nd mesosomatic somites 
are sunk beneath the surface of the body, and become adapted to 
breathe atmospheric oxygen, forming the leaves of the so-called 
lung-books. In specialized forms these pulmonary sacs are wholly 
or partly replaced by tracheal tubes. The appendages of the meso- 
soma generally suppressed ; in the more primitive forms one or two 
pairs may be retained as organs subservient to reproduction or silk- 
spinning. Mouth situated more forwards than in Delobranchia, no 
share in mastication being taken by the basal segments of the 5th 
and 6th pairs of prosomatic appendages. Lateral eyes, when present, 
represented by separate ocelli. 

The prae-genital somite, after appearing in the embryo, either is 
obliterated (Scorpio, Galeodes, Opilio and others) or is retained as 
a reduced narrow region of the body, the " waist," between prosoma 
and mesosoma. It is represented by a full-sized tergal plate in the 
Pseudo-scorpiones. 

Section a. Pectinifera. — The primitive distinction between the 
mesosoma and the metasoma retained, the latter consisting of six 
somites and the former of six somites in the adult, each of which 
is furnished during growth with a pair of appendages. Including 
the prae-genital somite (fig. 16), which is suppressed in the adult, 



there are thirteen somites behind the prosoma. The appendages of 
the 1st and 2nd mesosomatic somites persisting as the genital oper- 
culum and pectones respectively, those of the 3rd, 4th, 5th and 
6th somites (? in Palaeophonus) sinking below the surface during 
growth in connexion with the forma- 
tion of the four pairs of pulmonary 
sacs (see fig. 17). Lateral eyes 
monostichous. 

Order 1. Scorpiones. — Prosoma 
covered by a single dorsal shield, 
bearing typically median and lateral 
eyes; its sternal elements reduced 
to a single plate lodged between or 
behind the basal segments of the 
5th and 6th pairs of appendages. 
Appendages of 1st pairjtri-segmented, 
chelate; of 2nd pair chelate, with 
their basal segments subserving 
mastication; of 3rd, 4th, 5th and 6th 
pairs similar in form and function, 
except that in recent and Carbon- 
iferous forms the basal segments of 
the 3rd and 4th are provided with 
sterno-coxal (maxillary) lobes, those 
of the 4th pair meeting in the middle 
line and underlying the mouth. The 
five posterior somites of the meta- 
soma constricted to form a " tail," 
the post-anal sclerite persisting as a 
weapon of offence and provided with 
a pair of poison glands (see figs. 8, 
10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 21 and 22). 

Sub-order Apoxypoda. — The 3rd, 
4th, 5th and 6th pairs of append- 
ages short, stout, tapering, the 
segments about as wide as long, 
except the apical, which is distally 
slender, pointed, slightly curved, 
and without distinct movable claws. 

Family — Palaeophonidae, Palaeo- 
phonus (figs. 48 and 49). 

Sub-order Dionychopoda. — The 3rd 




Restored after Thorell's indications 
by R. I. Pocock. 

Fig. 48. — Dorsal view of a 
restoration of Palaeophonus 
nuncius, Thorell. The Silu- 
rian scorpion from Gothland. 



4th, 5th and 6th pairs of 
appendages slender, not evenly tapering, the segments longer than 
wide ; the apical segment short, distally truncate, and provided with 
a pair of movable claws. Basal segments of the 5th and 6th pairs 
of appendages abutting against the sternum of the prosoma (see 
fig. 10 and figs. 51, 52 and 53). 

Family — Pandinidae (Pandinus, Opisthophthalmus, Urodacus). 
Vejovidae (Vaejovis, Jurus, Euscorpius, Broteas). 
Bothriuridae (Boihriurus, Cercophonius) . 
Buthidae (Buthus, Centrums). 

*Cyclophthalmidae (Cyclophthalmus) ( Carbon- 

*Eoscorpiidae {Eoscorpius, Centromachus) ( iferous. 
Remarks on the Order Scorpiones. — The Scorpion is one of the 
great animals of ancient lore and tradition. It and the crab are 



Fig. 49. — Ventral view of 
a restoration of Palaeophonus 
Hunteri, Pocock, the Silurian 
scorpion from Lesmahagow, 
Scotland. Restored by R. I. 
Pocock. The meeting of the 
coxae of all the prosomatic 
limbs in front of the penta- 
gonal sternum; the space for 
a genital operculum; the pair 
of pectens, and the absence 
of any evidence of pulmonary 
stigmata are noticeable in this 
specimen. • 

(See Pocock, Quart. Jour. Micr. 
Sci., 1901.) 




the only two invertebrates which had impressed the minds of early 
men sufficiently to be raised to the dignity of astronomical represen- 
tation. It is all the more remarkable that the scorpion proves to be 
the oldest animal form of high elaboration which has persisted to 
the present day. In the Upper Silurian two specimens of a scorpion 
have been found (figs. 48, 49), one in Gothland and one in Scotland, 



304 



ARACHNIDA 



which would be recognized at once as true scorpions by a child or a 
savage. The Silurian scorpion Palaeophonus, differs, so far as obvious 
points are concerned, from a modern scorpion only in the thickness 
of its legs and in their terminating in strong spike-like joints, instead 
of being slight and provided with a pair of terminal claws. The legs 
of the modern scorpion (fig. 10 : fig. 51) are those of a terrestrial 
Arthropod, such as a beetle; whilst those of the Silurian scorpion 
are the legs of an aquatic Arthropod, such as a crab or lobster. It 
is probable that the Silurian scorpion was an aquatic animal, and 
that its respiratory lamellae were still projecting from the surface 
of the body to serve as branchiae. No trace of "stigmata," the 

Fig. 50. — Comparison of 
the sixth prosomatic limb 
of a recent scorpion (B), of 
Palaeophonus (C), and of 
CI Limulus (A), showing their 
agreement in the number 
of segments; in the exist- 
ence of a movable spine, 
Sp, at the distal border of 
the fifth segment ; in the 
correspondence of the two 
claws at the free end of the 
# limb of Scorpio with two 
/ spines similarly placed in 
Limulus; and, lastly, in 
the correspondence of the 
three talon-like spines car- 
ried on the distal margin 
of segment six of recent 
scorpions with the four 
larger but similarly situated 
spines on the leg of Limulus; 
s, groove dividing the anky- 
ci losed segments 4 and 5 of 
the Limulus leg into two. 
(After Pocock, Q.J . Mic. Set., 1901.) 

orifices of the lung-chambers of modern scorpions, can be found in 
the Scottish specimen of Palaeophonus, which presents the ventral 
surface of the animal to view. On the other hand, no trace of re- 
spiratory appendages excepting the pectens can be detected in the 
specimen (see fig. 49). 

Fossil scorpions of the modern type are found in the Coal Measures. 
At the present day scorpions of various genera are found in all the 
warm regions of the world. In Europe they occur as far north as 
Bavaria and the south of France. The largest species measure 9 in. 
from the front of the head to the end of the sting, and occur in 
tropical India and Africa. Between 200 and 300 species are known. 





'* t,,s 2S5S 



From Lankester, Journ. Linn. Soc. Zool. vol. xvi., 1881. 

Fig. 51. — Drawing from life of the desert scorpion, Buthusaustralis, 
Lin., from Biskra, N. Africa. 

The scorpions use their large chelae for seizing prey and for fighting 
with one another. They never use the sting when (as frequently 
happens) they attack another scorpion, because, as was ascertained 
by A. G. Bourne (24), the poison exuded by the sting has no in- 
jurious effect on another scorpion nor on the scorpion itself. The 
stories of a scorpion stinging itself to death when placed in a circle 
of burning coals are due to erroneous observation. When placed in 
such a position the scorpion faints and becomes inert. It is found 
(Bourne, 24) that some species of scorpion faint at a temperature 
of 40 Cent. They recover on being removed to cooler conditions. 
A scorpion having seized its prey (usually a large insect, or small 
reptile or mammal) with the large chelae brings its tailover its head, 
and deliberately punctures the struggling victim twice with its sting 
(fig. 52). The poison of the sting is similar to snake-poison 



juices 



(Calmette), and rapidly paralyses animals which are not immune 
to it. It is probably only sickly adults or young children of the 
human race who can be actually killed by a scorpion's sting. When 
the scorpion has paralysed its prey in this way, the two short cheli- 
cerae are brought into play (fig. 53). By the crushing action of their 

Cincers, and an alternate backward and forward movement, they 
ring the soft blood-holding tissues of the victim close to the 
minute pin-hole aperture which is the scorpion's mouth. The 
muscles acting on the bulb-like pharynx now set up a pump- 
ing action (see Huxley, 26) ; and the 
matter, excepting such as is reduced to 
powder — are sucked into the scorpion's 
alimentary canal. A scorpion appears to 
prefer for its food another scorpion, and 
will suck out the juices of an individual as 
large as itself. When this has taken 
place, the gorged scorpion becomes 
distended and tense in the mesosomatic 
region. It is certain that the absorbed 
juices do not occupy the alimentary 
canal alone, but pass also into its caecal 
off-sets which are the ducts of the 
gastric glands (see fig. 33). 





From Lankester, Journ. 
Linn. Soc. 

Fig. 53. — The same 
scorpion carrying the 
now paralysed fly held 
in its chelicerae, the 
chelae liberated for 
attack and defence. 
Drawn from life. 



From Lankester, Journ. Linn. Soc. 

Fig. 52. — Drawing from life of the 
Italian scorpion Euscorpius italicus, 
Herbst, holding a blue-bottle fly with its 
left chela, and carefully piercing it be- 
tween head and thorax with its sting. 
Two insertions of the sting are effected 
and the fly is instantly paralysed by the 
poison so introduced into its body. 

All Arachnida, including Limulus, feed by suctorial action in 
essentially the same way as Scorpio. 

Scorpions of various species have been observed to make a hissing 
noise when disturbed, or even when not disturbed. The sound is 
produced by stridulating organs developed on the basal joints of 
the limbs, which differ in position and character in different genera 
(see Pocock, 27). Scorpions copulate with the ventral surfaces in 
contact. The eggs are fertilized, practically in the ovary, and de- 
velop in situ. The young are born fully formed and are carried by 
the mother on her back. As many as thirty have been counted in 
a brood. For information as to the embryology of scorpions, the 
reader is referred to the works named in the bibliography below. 
Scorpions do not possess spinning organs nor form either snares or 
nests, so far as is known. But some species inhabiting sandy deserts 
form extensive burrows. The fifth pair of prosomatic appendages 
is used by these scorpions when burrowing, to kick back the sand as 
the burrow is excavated by the great chelae. 

References to works dealing with the taxonomy and geographical 
distribution of scorpions are given at the end of this article (28). 

Section 0. Epectinata. — The primitive distinction between the 
mesosoma and the metasoma wholly or almost wholly obliterated, 
the two regions uniting to form an opisthosoma, which never consists 
of more than twelve somites and never bears appendages or breath- 
ing-organs behind the 4th somite. The breathing-organs of the 
opisthosoma, when present, represented by two pairs of stigmata, 
opening either upon the 1st and 2nd (Pedipalpi) or the 2nd and 3rd 
somites (Solifugae, Pseudo-scorpiones), or by a single pair Upon the 
3rd (? 2nd) somite (Opiliones) of the opisthosoma, there being rarely 
an additional stigma on the 4th (some Solifugae). The appendages 
of the 2nd somite of the opisthosoma absent, rarely minute and bud- 
like (some Amblypygi), never pectiniform. A prae-genital somite 
is often present either in a reduced condition forming a waist (Pedi- 
palpi, Araneae, Palpigradi) or as a full-sized tergal plate (Pseudo- 
scorpiones) ; in some it is entirely atrophied (Solifugae, Holosomata, 
and Rhynchostomi). Lateral eyes when present diplostichous. 

Remarks. — The Epectinate Arachnids do not stand so close to. the 
aquatic ancestors of the Embolobranchia as do the Pectiniferous 
scorpions. At the same time we are not justified in supposing that 
the scorpions stand in any way as an intermediate grade between 
any of the existing Epectinata and the Delobranchia. It is probable 
that the Pedipalpi, Araneae, and Podogona have been separately 
evolved as distinct lines of descent from the ancient aquatic Arach- 
nida. The Holosomata and Rhynchostomi are probably offshoots 
from the stem of the Araneae, and it is not unlikely (in view of the 
structure of the prosomatic somites of the Tartarides) that the 
Solifugae are connected in origin with the Pedipalpi. The appear 
ance of tracheae in place of lung-sacs cannot be regarded as a start- 
ing-point for a new line of descent comprising all the tracheate forms ; 



ARACHNIDA 



305 



tracheae seem to have developed independently in different lines of 
descent. On the whole, the Epectinata are highly specialized and 
degenerate forms, though there are few, if any, animals which 
surpass the spiders in rapidity of movement, deadliness of attack 
and constructive instincts. 

Order 2. Pedipalpi (figs. 54 to 59). — Appendages of 1st pair 
bisegmented, without poison gland; of 2nd pair prehensile, their 
basal segments underlying the proboscis, and furnished with sterno- 




From Lankester, Q. J. Mic. Sci. N.S. vol. xxi., 1S81. 

Fig. 54. — Thelyphonus, one of the Pedipalpi. 



A, Ventral view. 

I, Chelicera (detached). 

II, Chelae. 

III, Palpiform limb. 

IV to VI, The walking legs. 

stc, Sterno-coxal process (gnatho- 
base) of the chelae. 

rf 1 , Anterior sternal plate of the 
prosoma. 

sV-, Posterior sternal plate of the 
prosoma. 

pregen, Position of the prae- 
genital somite (not seen). 

/, /, Position of the two pul- 
monary sacs of the right side. 



I to 11, Somites of the opistho- 

soma (mesosoma plus meta- 

soma). 
msg, Stigmata of the tergo- 

sternal muscles. 
an, Anus. 
B, Dorsal view of the opistho- 

soma of the same. 
pregen, The prae-genital somite. 
p, The tergal stigmata of the 

tergo-sternal muscles. 
paf, Post-anal segmented fila- 
ment corresponding to the 
post-anal spine of Limulus. 



coxal (maxillary) process, the apical segment tipped with a single 
movable or immovable claw ; appendages of 3rd pair different from 
the remainder, tactile in function, with at least the apical segment 
many-jointed and clawless. The ventral surface of the prosoma 
bears prosternal, metasternal and usually mesosternal chitine- 
plates (fig. 55). A narrow prae-genital somite is present between 
opisthosoma and prosoma (figs. 55, 57). Opisthosoma consisting 
of eleven somites, almost wholly without visible appendages. Intro- 
mittent organ of male beneath the genital operculum ( = sternum 
of the 1st somite of opisthosoma). 



Fig. 55. — Thelyphonus 
sp. Ventral view of the 
anterior portion of the 
body to show the three 
prosomatic sternal plates 
a, b, c, and the rudimentary 
sternal element of the prae- 
genital somite ; opisth 1 , 
first somite of the opistho- 
soma. 

(From a drawing made by 
Pickard - Cambridge, tinder the 
direction of R. I. Pocock.) 



Note. — The possibility of another interpretation of the anterior 
somites of the mesosoma and the prae-genital somite must be borne 
in mind. Possibly, though not probably, the somites carrying the 
two lung-sacs correspond to the first two lung-bearing somites of 
Scorpio, and it is the genital opening which has shifted. The same 
caution applies in the case of the Araneae. Excalation of one or of 




opistho 1 



opistho 2 




m 



two anterior mesosomatic somites, besides the prae-genital somite, 
would then have to be supposed to have occurred also. 

Sub-order a. Uropygi. — Prosoma longer than wide, its sternal 
area very narrow, furnished with a large prosternal and metasternal 
plate, and often with a small mesosternal sclerite. Appendages of 
2nd pair with their basal segments united in the middle line and 
incapable of lateral a 

movement; append- .•'" 

ages of 3rd pair with 
only the apical seg- 
ment many-jointed. 
Opisthosoma with- 
out trace of append- 
ages ; its posterior 
somites narrowed to 
form a movable tail 
for the support of 
the post - anal 
sclerite, which has 
no poison glands. 

tricha.— Do'rsal area FlG.56— Thelyphonus assamensis^ Ventral 
of prosoma covered surfaceoftheanteriorregionoftheopisthosoma, 
with a single shield the somite being pushed upwards and for- 

( ? two in Geralin war d s so as to expose the subjacent structures. 
ura), bearing median °^° x - First somite of the opisthosoma; 
and lateral eyes. °P*f» 2, second do. ; g genital aperture ; 
Post anal sclerite '• ed S es of the lamellae of the lung-books ; m, 
modified as a long, stigmata of tergo-sternal muscles, 
many-jointed feeler. _ (Original drawing by Pocock.) 

Appendages of 2nd pair folding in a horizontal plane, completely 
chelate, the claw immovably united to the sixth segment. 
Respiratory organs present in the form of pulmonary sacs. 

Family — Thelyphonidae {Thelyphonus (fig. 54), Hypoctonus, 
*Geralinura). 

Tribe 2. Tartarides. — Small degenerate forms with the dorsal 
area of the prosoma furnished with two shields, a larger in front 
covering the anterior four somites, and a smaller behind covering 
the 5th and 6th somites; the latter generally subdivided into a 
right and left portion. There is also a pair of narrow tergal sclerites 
interposed between the anterior and posterior shields. Eyes evan- 
escent or absent. Appendages of 2nd pair folding in a vertical plane, 
not chelate, the claw long and movable. Post-anal sclerite short 
and undivided. No distinct respiratory stigmata behind the sterna 
of the 1st and 2nd somites of the opisthosoma. 

Family — Hubbardiidae {Schizomus, Hubbardia) (figs. 57-59). 

A 




- prae-gen 



n opisth 



pa • 




Fig. 57. — Schizomus crassi- 
caudatus, one of the Tartarid 
Pedipalpi. Ventral view of a 
female with the appendages cut 
short near the base. 

a, Prosternum of prosoma. 

b, Metasternum of prosoma. 
prae-gen, The prae-genital 

somite. 

I opisth, First somite of the 
opisthosoma. 

II opisth, Eleventh somite of 
the opisthosoma. 

pa, Post-anal lobe of the female 

(compare the jointed filament 

in Thelyphonus, fig. 54). 

(Original drawing by Pickard-Cam- 
bridge, directed by Pocock.) 

Sub-order b. Amblypygi. — Prosoma wider than long, covered 
above by a single shield bearing median and lateral eyes, which 
have diplostichous ommatea. Sternal area broad, with prosternal, 
two mesosternal, and metasternal plates, the prosternum projecting 
forwards beneath the coxae of the 2nd pair of appendages. Append- 
ages of 2nd pair folding in a horizontal plane ; their basal segments 



Fig. 58. — Schizomus crassi- 
caudatus, a Tartarid Pedipalp. 
Dorsal view of a male with the 
appendages cut short. 
I to VI. The prosomatic ap- 
pendages. 

a, Anterior plate. 

b, Posterior plate of the proso- 
matic carapace. 

prae-gen, Tergum of the prae- 
genital somite. 
II, The eleventh somite of the 

opisthosoma. 
pa, Post-anal lobe of the male — 
a conical body with narrow 
basal stalk. 

(Original as preceding.) 



306 



ARACHNIDA 



freely movable; claw free or fused ; basal segments of 4th and 5th 
pairs widely separated by the sternal area ; appendages of 3rd pair 
with all the segments except the proximal three, forming a many- 
jointed flagellum. Opisthosoma without post-anal sclerite and 
posterior caudal elongation : with frequently a pair of small lobate 
II III IV V VI 




Fig. 59. — Schizomus crassicaudatus, one of the Pedipalpi. Lateral 
view of a male. II to VI, the prosomatic appendages, the first being 
concealed (see fig. 58); 5, the fifth, and 11, the eleventh tergites of 
the opisthosoma ; pa, the conical post-anal lobe. 

(Original as preceding.) 

appendages on the sternum of the 3rd somite. Respiratory organs, 
as in Urotricha. 

Family — Phrynichidae (Phrynichus, Damon). 
,, Admetidae (Admetus, Heterophrynus) . 

,, Charontidae (Charon, Sarax). 

(Family ?) — *Graeophonus. 
Remarks. — The Pedipalpi are confined to the tropics and warmer 
temperate regions of both hemispheres. Fossil forms occur in the 
Carboniferous. The small forms known as Schizomus and Hub- 
bardia are of special interest from a morphological point of view. 
The Pedipalpi have no poison glands. (Reference to literature 
(29).) 

Order 3. Araneae (figs. 60 to 64). — Prosoma covered with a single 
shield and typically furnished with median and lateral eyes of 
diplostichous structure, as in the Amblypygi. The sternal surface 
wide, continuously chitinized, but with prosternal and metasternal 




Fig. 60. — Liphistius desultor, Schiodte, one of the Araneae Meso- 
thelae. Dorsal view. I to VI, the prosomatic appendages; 4,5,6, 
the fourth, fifth and sixth tergites of the opisthosoma. Between 
the bases of the sixth pair cf limbs and behind the prosomatic cara- 
pace is seen the tergite of the small prae-genital somite. 
(Original by Pickard-Cambridge and Pocock.) 

elements generally distinguishable at the anterior and posterior 
ends respectively of the large mesosternurn. Presternum underlying 
the proboscis. Appendages of 1st pair have two segments, as in 
Pedipalpi, but are furnished with poison gland, and are retroverts. 
Appendages of 2nd pair not underlying the mouth, but freely movable 
and, except in primitive forms, furnished with a maxillary lobe ; the 
rest of the limb like the legs, tipped with a single claw and quite un- 
modified (except in $). Remaining pairs of appendages similar in 
form and function, each tipped with two or three claws. Opistho- 
soma when segmented showing the same number of somites as in the 
Pedipalpi ; usually unsegmented, the prae-genital somite constricted 
to form the waist ; the appendages of its 3rd and 4th somites re- 
tained as spinning mammillae. Respiratory organs (see fig. 63,$ tg) , as 




in the Amblypygi, or with the posterior pair, rarely the anterior pair 
as well, replaced by tracheal tubes. Intromittent organ of male in 
the apical segment of the 2nd prosomatic appendage. 

Sub-order a. Mesothelae (see figs. 60 to 62). — Opisthosoma dis- 
tinctly segmented, furnished with 1 1 tergal plates, as in the Ambly- 
pygi; the ventral surface of the 1st and 2nd somites with large 
sternal plates, covering the genital aperture and the two pairs of 
Fig. 61. — Liphistius desultor. Ventral 
view with the prosomatic appendages cut 
short excepting the chelicerae (1) whose 
sharp retroverts are seen. Between the 
bases of the prosomatic limbs an anterior 
and a posterior sternal plate (black) are 
seen. I, The sternum of the first opis- 
thosomatic or genital somite covering the 
genital aperture and the first pair of lung- 
sacs. In front of it the narrow waist is 
formed by the soft sternal area of the 
praegenital somite; 2, the sternite of the 
second opisthosomatic somite covering 
the posterior pair of lung-sacs; 3 and 4, 
the spinning appendages (limbs) of the 
opisthosoma; a, inner, b, outer ramus of 
the appendage ; 1 1 , sternite of the eleventh 
11 somite of the opisthosoma: in front of it 
other rudimentary sternites; an, anus. 

(Original as above.) 

pulmonary sacs, the sternal plates from the 6th to the nth somites 
represented by integumental ridges, weakly chitinized in the middle. 
The two pairs of spinning appendages retain their primitive position 
in the middle of the lower surface of the opisthosoma far in advance 
of the anus on the 3rd and 4th somites, each appendage consisting 
of a stout, many-jointed outer branch and a slender, unsegmented 
inner branch. Prosoma as in the Mygalomorphae, except that the 
mesosternal area is long and narrow. 

Family — Liphistiidae (Liphistius, *Arthrolycosa). 

Sub-order b. Opisthothelae (see fig. 63). — Opisthosoma without 
trace of separate terga and sterna, the segmentation merely repre- 
sented posteriorly by slight integumental folds and the sterna of the 
1st and 2nd somites by the opercular plates of the pulmonary sacs. 
The spinning appendages migrate to the posterior end of the opis- 
thosoma and take up a position close to the anus; the inner branches 
of the anterior pair either atrophy or are represented homogenetically 
by a plate, the cribellum, or by an undivided membranous lobe, the 
colulus. 

Tribe I. Mygalomorphae. — The plane of the articulation of the 
appendages of the 1st pair to the prosoma (the retrovert) vertical, 
the basal segment pro- 
jecting straight forwards 
at its proximal end, the 
distal segment or fang 
closing backwards in a 
direction subparallel to 
the long axis of the body. 
Two pairs of pulmonary 
sacs. 

Families — Thera- 
phosidae (Avicularia, 
Poecilotheria). Bary- 
chelidae (Barychelus, 
Plagiobothrus). Dipluri- 
dae (Diplura, Macro- 
thele). Ctenizidae 
(Cteniza, Nemesia). 
Atypidae (Atypus, 
Calommata). 

Tribe 2. Arachno- 




I II III IV 
Prosoma 



praegen 1234 11 



Fig. 62. -^Liphistius desultor. Lateral 
view. 
I to VI, Appendages of the prosoma cut 

off at the base. 
0, Ocular tubercle. 
praegen, The prae-genital somite. 
I and 2, Sternites of the first and second 
opisthosomatic somites. 
morpna C e.~Theirane'of 3 and 4, Appendages of the third and fourth 
the articulation of the °P?sthosomatic somites which are the 
spinning organs, and in this genus occupy 
their primitive position instead of mi- 
grating to the anal region as in other 
spiders. 
5, Tergite of the fifth opisthosomatic 

somite. 
11, Eleventh opisthosomatic somite; an, 
Anus. 

(Original.) 



appendages of the 1st 
pair to the prosoma 
horizontal, the basal 
segment projecting ver- 
tically downwards, at 
least at its proximal 
end, the distal segment 
or fang closing inwards 
nearly or quite at right 
angles to the long axis of the body. The posterior pulmonary sacs 
(except in Hypochilus) replaced by tracheal tubes ; the anterior and 
posterior pairs replaced by tracheal tubes in the Caponiidae. 

Principal families — Hypochilidae (Hypochilus). Dysderidae (Dys- 
dera, Segestria). Caponiidae (Caponia, Nops). Filistatidae (Fihs- 
tata). Uloboridae (Uloborus, Dinopis). Argiapidae (Nephila, 
Gasteracantha). Pholcidae (Pholcus , . Artema) . Agelenidae (Tegen- 
aria). Lycosidae (Lycosa). Clubionidae (Clubiona, Olios, Sparassus) 
Gnaphosidae (Gnaphosa, Hemiclaea). Thomisidae (Thomisus). 
Attidae (Salticus). Urocteidae (Uroctea). Eresidae (Eresus). 

Remarks on the Araneae. — The Spiders are the most numerous 



ARACHNIDA 



307 



and diversified group of the Arachnida; about 2000 species are 
known. No noteworthy fossil spiders are known; the best-pre- 
served are in amber of Oligocene age. Protolycosa and Arthrolycosa 
occur in the Carboniferous. Morphologically, the spiders are re- 
markable for the concentration and specialization of their structure, 
which is accompanied with high physiological efficiency. The larger 
species of Bird's Nest Spiders {Avicularia) , the opisthosoma of which 
is as large as a bantam's egg, undoubtedly attack young birds, and 
M'Cook gives an account of the capture in its web by an ordinary 
house spider of a small mouse. The " retrovert " or bent-back 




— Ventral view of 
mygalomorphous 



of 



Fig. 63 
a male 
spider. 
I to VI, The six pairs 

prosomatic appendages. 

a, Copulatory apparatus of 
the second appendage. 

b, Process of the fifth joint of 
the third appendage. 

M, Mouth. 

pro, Prosternite of the pro- 
soma. 

mes, Mesosternite of the pro- 
soma : observe the contact 
of the coxae of the sixth 
pair of limbs behind it; 
compare Liphistius (fig. 61) 
where this does not occur. 

stg, Lung aperture. 

gn, Genital aperture. 

a, Anus with a pair of back- 
wardly migrated spinning 
appendages on each side 
of it ; compare the posi- 
tion of these appendages in 
Liphistius (fig. 61). 

(From Lankester, "Limulus an 
Arachnid.") 



first pair of appendages is provided with a poison gland opening on 
the fang or terminal segment. Spiders form at least two kinds of 
constructions — snares for the capture of prey and nests for the 
preservation of the young. The latter are only formed by the female, 
which is a larger and more powerful animal than the male. Like 
the scorpions the spiders have a special tendency to cannibalism, 
and accordingly the male, in approaching the female for the purpose 
of fertilizing her, is liable to be fallen upon and sucked dry by the 
object of his attentions. The sperm is removed by the male from 
the genital aperture into a special receptacle on the terminal segment 




Fig. 64. — Liphistius desultor. Under side of the uplifted genital 
or first opisthosomatic somite of the female; g, genital aperture; 
p, pitted plate, probably a gland for the secretion of adhesive material 
for the eggs; /, the edges of the lamellae of the lung-books of the 
first pair. 

(Original drawing by Pocock.) 

of the 2nd prosomatic appendage. Thus held out at some distance 
from the body, it is cautiously advanced by the male spider to the 
genital aperture of the female. 

For an account of the courtship and dancing of spiders, of their 
webs and floating lines, the reader is referred to the works of 
M'Cook (30) and the Peckhams (31), whilst an excellent account of 
the nests of trap-door spiders is given by Moggridge (32). References 
to systematic works will also be found at the end of this article (33). 

Order 4. Palpigradi = Microthelyqhonidae (see fig. 65). — Prosoma 
covered above by three oiates, a larger representing the dorsal ele- 
ments of the first four somites, and two smaller representing the 
dorsal elements of the 5th and 6th. 

Its ventral surface provided with one prosternal, two mesosternal 
and one metasternal plate. Appendages of 1st pair consisting of 
three segments, completely chelate, without poison gland; of 2nd 
pair slender : leg-like, tipped with three claws, the faasal segment 
without sterno-coxal process taking no share in mastication, and 



widely separated from its fellow of the opposite side; 3rd, 4th, 5th 
and 6th appendages similar in form to the 2nd and to each other. 

Proboscis free, not supported from below by either the presternum 
or the basal segments of the appendages of the 2nd pair. 

Opisthosoma consisting of only ten somites, which have no tergal 
and sternal elements, the prae-genital somite contracted to form a 
" waist," as in the Pedipalpi; the last three narrowed to form a 




II 



i Ml 

3 4 56789 10 

Opisthosoma 



{ \ J prae-i 2 
I IIlIIIVVVIgcK 
Prosoma 

Fig. 65. — Koenenia mirabilis, Grassi, one of the Palpigradi. 
A, Ventral view of prosoma and B, Dorsal view. I to VI, pro- 
of anterior region of opistho- somatic appendages; I opisth, 
soma with the appendages cut genital somite (first opisthoso- 
matic somite). 



off near the base ; a and b, 
prosternites ; c, mesosternite; 
and d, metasternite of the 
prosoma; /, ventral surface 
of the prae-genital somite; 
g, sternite of the genital 
somite (first opisthosomatic 
somite). 



C, Lateral view, I to VI, pro- 
somatic appendages ; a,b,c, 
the three tergal plates of the 
prosoma; prae-gen, the prae- 
genital somite; 1 to 10, the 
ten somites of the opisthosoma. 

D, Chelicera. 



(Original drawing by Pocock and Pickard-Cambridge, after Hansen and S6rensen.) 

caudal support for the many-jointed flagelliform telson, as in the 
Urotricha. Respiratory organs atrophied. 

Family — Koeneniidae {Koenenia). 

Remarks. — An extremely remarkable minute form originally 
described by Grassi (34) from Sicily, and since further described by 
Hansen (35). Recently the genus has been found in Texas, U.S.A. 
Only one genus of the order is known. 

Order 5. Solifugae = Mycetophorae (see figs. 66 to 69). — Dorsal 
area of prosoma covered with three distinct plates, two smaller 
representing the terga of the 5th and 6th somites, and a larger 
representing those of the anterior four somites, although the reduced 
terga of the 3rd and 4th are traceable behind the larger plate. The 
latter bears a pair of median eyes and obsolete lateral eyes on each 
side. Sternal elements of prosoma almost entirely absent, traces 
of a presternum and metasternum alone remaining. Rostrum free, 
not supported by either the presternum or the basal segments of the 
appendages. Appendages of 1st pair large, chelate, bisegmented, 
articulated to the sides of the head-shield ; appendages of 2nd pair 
simple, pediform, with protrusible (? suctorial) organ, and no claws 
at the tip ; their basal segments united in the middle line and fur- 
nished with sterno-coxal process. Remaining pairs of appendages 
with their basal segments immovably fixed to the sternal surface, 
similar in form, the posterior three pairs furnished with two claws 
supported on long stalks; the basal segments of the 6th pair bearing 
five pairs of tactile sensory organs or malleoli. The prae-genital 
somite is suppressed. Opisthosoma composed of ten somites. 
Respiratory organs tracheal, opening upon the ventral surface of 
the 2nd and 3rd, and sometimes also of the 4th somite of the opistho- 
soma. A supplementary pair of tracheae opening behind the basal 
segment of the 4th appendage of the prosoma. 

(? Intromittent organ of male lodged on the dorsal side of the 
1st pair of prosomatic appendages.) 

Families — Hexisopodidae (Hexisopus). Solpugidae {Solpuga, 
Rhagodes). Galeodidae (Galeodes). 



3°8 



ARACHNIDA 



Remarks. — These most strange-looking Arachnids occur in warmer 
temperate, and tropical regions of Asia, Africa and America. Their 
anatomy has not been studied, as yet, by means of freshly-killed 
material, and is imperfectly known, though the presence of the coxal 



Fig. 66. — Galeodes sp., 
one of the Solifugae. Ven- 
tral view to show legs and 
somites. 
I to VI, The six leg-bearing 

somites of the prosoma. 
opisth I, First or genital 
somite of the opistho- 
soma. 
ge, Site of the genital 

aperture. 
st, Thoracic tracheal 

aperture. 
P, Anterior tracheal aper- 
ture of the opisthosoma 
in somite 2 of the opistho- 
soma. 
I 3 , Tracheal aperture in 
somite 3 of the opistho- 
soma. 
a, Anus. 

(From Lankester, " Limulus and 
Arachnid.") 




opisth 




at the base 

I to VI, Prosomatic append- 
ages. 

s, Prosomatic stigma or aper 
ture of the tracheal system 



aperture g. 
2, Second opisthosomatic ster- 

nite covering the second 

pair of tracheal apertures 

spi. 
sp2, The third pair of tracheal 

apertures. 
10, The tenth opisthosomatic 

somite. 
an, The anal aperture. 



Fig. 67. — Galeodes sp., one Fig. 68. — Galeodes sp., one of the 
of the Solifugae. Ventral view Solifugae. Dorsal view, 
with the appendages cut off r to V I, Bases of the prosomatic 

appendages. 

0, Eyes. 
a, Lateral region of the cephalic plate 

to which the first pair of append- 
ages are articulated. 
I, First opisthosomatic ster- b, Cephalic plate with median eye. 
nite covering the genital c, Dorsal element of somites bearing 

third and fourth pairs of append- 
ages. 

d, Second plate of the prosoma with 
fifth pair of appendages. 

e, Third or hindermost plate of the 
prosoma beneath which the sixth 
pair of legs is articulated. 

1, 2, 9, 10, First, second, ninth and 
tenth somites of the opisthosoma. 

an, Anus. 

(Original.) 



(Original by Pickard-Cambridge and 
Pocock.) 

glands was determined by Macleod in 1884. The proportionately 
enormous chelae (chelicerae) of the first pair of appendages are not 
provided with poison glands ; their bite is not venomous. 



Galeodes has been made the means of a comparison between the 
structure of the Arachnida and Hexapod insects by Haeckel and 
other writers, and it was at one time suggested that there was a 
genetic affinity between the two groups — through Galeodes, or 
extinct forms similar to it. The segmentation of the prosoma and 
the form of the appendages bear a homoplastic similarity to the 
head, pro-, meso-, and meta-thorax of a Hexapod with mandibles, 
maxillary palps and three pairs of walking legs ; while the opistho- 




S' 5" 2 1 VI V S IV III II I 

Opisthosoma Prosoma 

Fig. 69. — Galeodes sp., one of the Solifugae. 
I to VI, The six prosomatic limbs carrying appendage VI. The 

cut short. prae-genital somite is absent. 

0, The eyes. 1, First somite of the opistho- 

b, c, Demarcated areae of the soma. 

cephalic or first prosomatic 2, Second do. 

platecorrespondingrespectively S, Prosomatic tracheal aperture 



to appendages I, II, III, and 
to appendage IV (see fig. 68). 

, Second plate of the prosoma- 
carrying appendage V. 

1 Third plate of the prosoma- 



between legs IV and V. 
S' and S",Opisthosomatic tracheal 

apertures. 
10, Tenth opisthosomatic somite. 
an, Anus. 



(Original.) 

soma agrees in form and number of somites with the abdomen of 
a Hexapod, and the tracheal stigmata present certain agreements 
in the two cases. Reference to literature (36). 

Order 6. Pseudoscorpiones = Chelonethi, also called Chernetidia 
(see figs. 70, 71, 72). — Prosoma covered by a single dorsal shield, at 
most furnished with one or two diplostichous lateral eyes; sternal 
elements obliterated or almost obliterated. Appendages of the 1st 




prae-gen^.. 




Fig. 70. — Garypus litoralis, one 
of the Pseudoscorpiones. Ventral 
view. 

1 to VI, Prosomatic appendages. 

0, Sterno-coxal process of the basal 
segment of the second appendage. 

1 , Sternite of the genital or first opis- 
thosomatic somite ; the prae-geni- 
tal somite, though represented by 
a tergum, has no separate sternal 
plate. 

2 and 3, Sternites of the second and 
third somites of the opisthosoma, 
each showing a tracheal stigma. 

10 and 1 1 , Sternites of the tenth and 
eleventh somites of the opistho- 
soma. 

an, Anus. 

(Original by Pocock and Pickard-Cambridge.) 

pair bisegmented completely chelate, furnished with peculiar organs, 
the serrula and the lamina. Appendages of 2nd pair very large and 
completely chelate, their basal segments meeting in the middle line, 
as in the Uropygi, and provided in front with membranous lip-like 
processes underlying the proboscis. Appendages of the 3rd, 4th, 
5th and 6th pairs similar in form and function, tipped with two 
claws, their basal segments in contact in the median ventral line. 
The prae-genital somite wide, not constricted, with large tergal plate, 
but with its sternal plate small or inconspicuous. Opisthosoma 



Fig. 71. — Garypus litoralis, 
one of the Pseudoscorpiones. 
Dorsal view. 

I to VI, The prosomatic ap- 
pendages. 

0, Eyes. 

prae-gen, Prae-genital somite. 

1, Tergite of the genital or 
first opisthosomatic somite. 

10, Tergite of the tenth 
somite of the opistho- 
soma. 

11, The evanescent eleventh 
somite of the opisthosoma. 

an, Anus. 

(Original.) 



ARACHNIDA 



309 



composed, at least in many cases, of eleven somites, the nth 
somite very small, often hidden within the 10th. Respiratory 
organs in the form of tracheal tubes opening by a pair of stigmata 
in the 2nd and 3rd somites of the opisthosoma. Intromittent organ 
of male beneath sternum of the 1st somite of the opisthosoma. 

Sub-order a. Panctenodactyli. — Dorsal plate of prosoma (carapace) 
narrowed in front; the appendages of the 1st pair small, much 
narrower, taken together, than the posterior border of the carapace. 
Serrula on movable digit of appendages of 1st pair fixed throughout 
its length, and broader at its proximal than at its distal end; the 
immovable digit with an external process. 

Family — Cheliferidae (Chelifer (figs. 70, 71, 72), Chiridium). 
,, Garypidae (Gary pus). 

Sub-order b. Hemictenodactyli. — Dorsal plate of prosoma scarcely 
narrowed in front; the appendages of the 1st pair large, not much 
narrower, taken together, than the posterior border of the carapace. 

o prac-gm 123 
! : : : ! 




I II III IV V VI! 



Prosoma 



Opisthosoma 



Fig. 72. — Garypus litoralis, one of the Pseudoscorpiones. 
Lateral view. 
I to VI, Basal segments of the 2, 3, 10, The second, third and 
six prosomatic appendages. . tenth somites of the opistho- 

0, Eyes. soma. 

prae-gen, Tergite of the prae- n, The minute eleventh somite ; 
genital somite. [somite, an, The anus. 

1, Genital or first opisthosomatic 

(Original.) 

The serrula or the movable digit free at its distal end, narrowed at 
the base ; no external lamina on the immovable digit. 
Family — Obisiidae (Obisium, Pseudobisium). 

„ Chthoniidae (Chthonius, Tridenckthonius) . 

Remarks. — The book-scorpions — so called because they were, in 
old times, found not unfrequently in libraries — are found in rotten 
wood and under stones. The similarity of the form of their append- 
ages to those of the scorpions suggests that they are a degenerate 
group derived from the latter, but the large size of the prae-genital 
somite in them would indicate a connexion with forms preceding the 
scorpions. Reference to literature (37). 

Order 7. Podogona = Ricinulei (see figs. 73 to 76). — Dorsal area 
of prosoma furnished with two shields, a larger behind represent- 
ing, probably, the tergal elements of the somites, and a smaller in 
front, which is freely articulated to the former and folds over the 




Fig. 73. — Cryptostemma Karschii, one of the Podogona. Dorsal 
view of male- 
Ill to VI, The third, fourth, fifth followed by the opisthosoma of 
and sixth appendages of the four visible somites, 
prosoma. an, Orifice within which the caudal 

a, Movable (hinged) sclerite (so- segments are withdrawn, 
called hood) overhanging the E, Extremity of the fifth append- 
first pair of appendages. age of the male modified to 
h, Fused terga of the prosoma subserve copulation. 

(Original drawing by Focock and Pickard-Cambridge.) 
appendages of the 1st pair. Ventral area without distinct sternal 
plates. Appendages of 1st pair, bi-segmented, completely chelate. 
Appendages of 2nd pair, with their basal segments uniting in the 
middle line below the mouth, weakly chelate at apex. Appendages 
of 3rd, 4th, 5th and 6th pairs similar in form; their basal segments 
in contact in the middle line and immovably welded, except those 
of the 3rd pair, which have been pushed aside so that the bases of 
the 2nd and 4th pairs are in contact with each other. A movable 
membranous joint between the prosoma and the opisthosoma, the 
generative aperture opening upon the ventral side of the membrane. 
Prae-genital somite suppressed ; the opisthosma consisting of nine 
segments, whereof the first and second are almost suppressed and 
concealed within the joint between the prosoma and the opistho- 
soma; the following four large and manifest, and the remaining 





three minute and forming a slender generally-retracted tail like that 
of Thelyphonus. Respiratory organs tracheal, opening by a pair of 
spiracles in the prosoma above the base of the fifth appendage on 

Fig. 74. — Cryptostemma Karschii. 
anterior aspect of the prosoma with 
the " hood " removed. I to IV, first 
to fourth appendages of the prosoma ; 
a, basal segment of the second pair 
of appendages meeting its fellow in 
the middle line (see fig. 75). 

(Original drawing by Pocock and 
Pickard-Cambridge.) 

each side. Intromittent organ of male placed at the distal end of 
the appendage of the 5th pair. 

Family — Cryptostemmidae (Cryptostemma, Poliochera), Car- 
boniferous. 
Remarks on the Podogona. — The name given to this small but 
remarkable group has reference to the position of the male intro- 
mittent organ (fig. 73, e). They are small degenerate animals 
with a relatively firm integument. Not more than four species and 
twice that number of specimens are known. They have been found 

Fig. 75. — Cryptostemma Karschii, one 
of the Podogona. Ventral view. 
I to VI, The six pairs of appendages of 

the prosoma, the last three cut short. 
I, 2, 3, 4, The four somites of the opis- 
thosoma. 

a, Visible hood overhanging the first pair 
of appendages. 

b, Position of the genital orifice. 

c, Part of 3rd appendage. 

d, Fourth segment of 2nd appendage. 
Observe that the basal segment of 
appendage III does not meet its fellow 
in the middle line. 

(Original drawing by Pocock and Pickard- 
Cambridge.) 

in West Africa and South America. A fact of special interest in 
regard to them is that the genus Poliochera, from the Coal Measures, 
appears to be a member of the same group. The name Crypto- 
stemma, given to the first-known genus of the order, described by 
Guerin-Meneville, refers to the supposed 
concealment of the eyes by the movable 
cephalic sclerite. Reference to litera- 
ture (38). 

Order 8. Opiliones(see fig. 77).— Dorsal 
area of prosoma covered by a single shield 
usually bearing a pair of eyes. Sternal 
elements much reduced. Appendages of 
1st pair large, three segmented and 
completely chelate; of 2nd pair either 
simple and pediform, or prehensile and 
subchelate; of remaining four pairs, 

similar in form, ambulatory in function; riu. /o.- WJP »»— 
the basal segment of the 2nd, 3rd and ^ or «*»- *? Xtr ? m *LnH 
sometimes of the 4 th pairs of appendages the fifth pair of append- 
fumished with sterno-coxal (maxillary) ages of the female for 
lobe. Opisthosoma confluent throughout comparison with that of 

its breadth with the prosoma, with the the male E m - fi S- 73- 
dorsal plate of which its anterior tergal 

plates are more or less fused; at most ten opisthosomatic somites 
traceable; the generative aperture thrust far forwards between 
the basal segments of the 6th appendages. Prae-genital somite 
suppressed. Respiratory organs tracheal, opening by a pair of stig- 
mata situated immediately behind the basal segments of the 6th 
pair of appendages on what is probably the sternum of the 2nd 
opisthosomatic somite and also in some cases upon the 5th segment 
of the legs. _ .. 

Intromittent organ of male lying within the genital orifice. 
Sub-order a. Laniatores. — Orifice of foetid glands opening above 
the coxa of the 4th appendage, not raised upon a tubercle. Orifice 
of coxal gland situated just behind that of the foetid gland. Sternal 
plate of prosoma long and narrow, with a distinct prosternal element 
underlying the mouth. Coxae of 4th, 5th and 6th appendages 
immovable. Appendages of 2nd pair, strong, usually prehensile 
and spiny. Genital orifice covered by an operculum. 

Families — Gonoleptidae (Gonoleptes, Goniasoma). 

Biantidae (Biantes). 

Oncopodidae (Oncopus, Pelitnus). 

Trioenonychidae (Trioenonyx, A cumontia) . 
Sub-order b. Palpatores. — Orifice of foetid glands opening above 
the coxa of the 3rd appendage, not raised upon a tubercle. Orifice 
of coxal gland situated between the coxae of the 5th and 6th append- 
ages. Sternal plate of prosoma usually short and wide, rarely longer 
than broad ; with a larger or smaller prosternal element underlying 
the mouth. Coxae of 3rd, 4th, 5th and 6th appendages movable 




Fig. 76. — Cryptostemma 



3io 



ARACHNIDA 



or immovable. Appendages of 2nd pair weak, pediform not pre- 
hensile. Genital orifice covered by an operculum. 

Families — Phalangiidae (Phalangium, Gagrella). 

Ischyropsalidae (Ischyropsalis, Taracus). 
Nemastomidae (Nemastoma). 
Trogulidae (Trogulus, Anelasmocephalus) . 
Sub-order c. Cyphophthalmi (Anepignathi). — Orifice of foetid 
glands opening on a tubercle situated near the lateral border of the 
carapace above the base of the 5th appendage. Orifice of coxal 
gland probably- situated at base of coxa of 5th appendage; sternal 
plate of proscma minute or absent; no prosternal element under- 
lying the mouth. Coxae of 5th and 6th, and usually also of 4th 
appendages immovable. Appendages of 2nd pair weak, pediform, 
not prehensile. Genital orifice not covered by an operculum. 
Families — Sironidae (Siro, Pettalus). 
Stylocellidae (Stylocellus) . 
Remarks on the Opiliones.— -These include the harvest-men, some- 
times called also daddy-long-legs, with round undivided bodies and 
very long, easily-detached legs. The intromittent organs of the 
male are remarkable for their complexity and elaboration. The 
confluence of the regions of the body and the dislocation of apertures 
from their typical position are results of degeneration. The Opiliones 
seem to lead on from the Spiders to the Mites. Reference to litera- 
ture (39). 

Apparently related to the Opiliones are two extinct groups, the 
Anthracomarti and Phalangiotarbi, which are not known to have 
survived the Carboniferous period. In the Anthracomarti the 

Fig. 77. — Stylocellus 
sumatranus, one of the 

j Opiliones; after Thorell. 

II Enlarged. 

in A, Dorsal view; I to VI, 

Iv the six prosomatic ap- 
~*V pendages. 

yi B, Ventral view of the 
prosoma and of the first 
somite of the opistho- 
soma, with the append- 
ages I to VI cut off at 
the base; a, tracheal 
stigma; mx, maxillary 
processes of the coxae of 
the 3rd pair of append- 
ages ; g.genitalaperture. 

C, Ventral surface of the 
prosoma and opistho- 
soma; a, tracheal 
stigma; 6, last somite. 

D, Lateral view of the 
1st and 2nd pair of ap- 
pendages. 

E, Lateral view of the whole body and two 1st appendages, show- 
ing the fusion of the dorsal elements of the prosoma into a single 
plate, and of those of the opisthosoma into an imperfectly seg- 
mented plate continuous with that of the prosoma. 

opisthosoma was movably articulated to the prosoma, and consisted 
of from eight to ten segments furnished with movable lateral plates, 
the anal segment being overlapped dorsally by a laminate expansion 
of the preceding segment. The carapace of the prosoma was un- 
segmented and often bore a pair of eyes. The appendages of the 
2nd pair were slender and pediform; those of the 3rd, 4th, 5th and 
6th pairs were similar in form and ambulatory in function with 
their basal segments arranged round a sternal area as in the order 
Araneae. The best-known genera were Anthracomartus and 
Eophognus. 

In the Phalangiotarbi the appendages resembled those of the 
Anthracomarti, except that the basal segments of the last four pairs 
were usually approximated in the middle line leaving a long and 
narrow sternal area between ; and the carapace of the prosoma was 
unsegmented. The prosoma and opisthosoma were broadly con- 
fluent and probably immovably welded together. The opisthosoma 
consisted of eight or nine segments, whereof the anterior five or six 
were very short in the dorsal region, and the posterior three ex- 
ceptionally large with the anal orifice terminal. 

Several genera have been established, the best-characterized 
being Geraphognus and Architarbus. 

Order 9. Rhynchostomi = Acari (see fig. 78). — Degenerate Arach- 
nids resembling the Opiliones in many structural points, but chiefly 
distinguishable from them by the following features: — The basal 
segments of the appendages of the 2nd pair are united in the middle 
line behind the mouth, those of the 3rd, 4th, 5th and 6th pairs are 
widely separated and not provided with sterno-coxal (maxillary) 
lobes, and take no share in mastication; the respiratory stig- 
mata, when present, belong to the prosoma, and the primitive 
segmentation of the opisthosoma has entirely or almost entirely 
disappeared. 

Sub-order a. Notostigmata. — Opisthosoma consisting of ten 
segments denned by integumental grooves, each of the anterior four 




of these furnished with a single pair of dorsally-placed spiracles or 
tracheal stigmata. 

Family — Opilioacaridae {Opilioacarus) . 
Sub-order b. Cryptostigmata. — Integument hard, strengthened 
by a continuously chitinized dorsal and ventral sclerite. Tracheae 
typically opening by stigmata situated in the articular sockets 
(acetabula) of the 3rd, 4th, 5th and 6th pairs of appendages. 
Family — Oribatidae (Oribata, Nothrus, Hoplophora). 
Sub-order c. Metastigmata. — Integument mostly like that of the 
Cryptostigmata. Tracheae opening by a pair of stigmata situated 
above and behind the base of the 4th or 5th or 6th pair of appendages. 
Families — Gamasidae (Gamasus, Pteroptus). 
Argasidae (Argas, Ornithodoros) . 
Ixodidae {Ixodes, Rhipicephalus). 
Sub-order d. Prostigmata. — Integument soft, strengthened by 
special sclerites, those on the ventral surface of the prosoma appar- 
ently representing the basal segments of the legs embedded in the 
skin. Tracheae, except in the aquatic species in which they are 
atrophied, opening by a pair of stigmata situated close to or above 
the base of the appendages of the 1st pair (mandibles). 

Families — Trombidiidae (Trombidium, Tetranychus). 
Hydrachnidae (Hydrachna, A tax). 
Halacaridae {Halacarus, Leptognathus). 
Bdellidae (Bdella, Eupodes). 
Sub-order e. Astigmata. — Degenerate, mostly parasitic forms 
approaching the Prostigmata in the development of integumental 




Fig. 78. — Holothyrus nitidis simus, one of the Acari ; after Thorell. 

A, Lateral view with appendages III to VI removed; 1, plate 
covering the whole dorsal area, representing the fused tergal 
sclerites of the prosoma and opisthosoma; 2, similarly-formed 
ventral plate; 3, tracheal stigma. 

B, Dorsal view of the same animal; II to VI, 2nd to 6th pairs of 
appendages. The 1st pair of appendages both in this and in C 
are retracted. 

C, Ventral view of the same; II to VI as in B; a, genital orifice; 
b, anus; c, united basal segments of the second pair of append- 
ages; d, basal segment of the 6th prosomatic appendage of the 
right side. The rest of the appendage, as also of app. Ill, IV 
and V, has been cut away. 

sclerites and the softness of the skin, but with the respiratory system 
absent. 

Families — Tyroglyphidae (Tyroglyphus, Rhizoglyphus) . 
Sarcoptidae (Sarcoptes, Analges). 

Sub-order/. Vermiformia. — Degenerate atracheate parasitic forms 
with the body produced posteriorly into an annulated caudal pro- 
longation, and the 3rd, 4th, 5th and >6th pairs of appendages short 
and only three-jointed. 

Family — Demodicidae (Demodex). 

Sub-order g. Tetrapoda. — Degenerate atracheate gall-mites in which 
the body is produced posteriorly and annulated, as in Demodex, but in 
which the appendages of the 3rd and 4th pairs are long and normally 
segmented and those of the 5th and 6th pairs entirely absent. 
Family — Eriophyidae (Eriophyes, Phyllocoptes). 

Remarks on the Rhynchostomi. — The Acari include a number of 
forms which are of importance and special interest on account of 
their parasitic habits. The ticks (Ixodes) are not only injurious 
as blood-suckers, but are now credited with carrying the germs 
of Texas cattle-fever, just as mosquitoes carry those of malaria. 
The itch-insect (Sarcoptes scabiei) is a well-known human parasite, 
so minute that it was not discovered until the end of the 18th century, 
and " the itch " was treated medicinally as a rash. The female 
burrows in the epidermis much as the female trap-door spider burrows 
in turf in order to make a nest in which to rear her young. The male 
does not burrow, but wanders freely on the surface of the skin. 
Demodex folliculorum is also a common parasite of the sebaceous 



ARAD 



311 



glands of the skin of the face in man, and is frequent in the skin 
of the dog. Many Acari are parasitic on marine and freshwater 
molluscs, and others are found on the feathers of birds and the hair 
of mammals. Others have a special faculty of consuming dry, 
powdery vegetable and animal refuse, and are liable to multiply 
in manufactured products of this nature, such as mouldy cheese. 
A species of Acarus is recorded as infesting a store of powdered 
strychnine and feeding on that drug, so poisonous to larger organisms. 
Reference to literature (40). 

Authorities cited by numbers in the text. — 1. Strauss-Diirckheim 
(as reported by M M . Riester and Sanson in an append ix to the sixth 
volume of the French translation of Meckel's Anatomy, 1829); 2. 
Lankester, " Limulusan Arachnid," Quart. Journ. Micr. Sci. vol. xxi. 
N.S., 1881 ; 3. Idem, " On the Skeletotrophic Tissues of Limulus, 
Scorpio and Mygale," Quart. Journ. Micr. Sci. vol. xxiv. N.S., 1884; 
4. Idem, Trans. Zool. Soc. vol. xi., 1883 ; S. Lankester and A.G. Bourne, 
"Eyes of Limulus and Scorpio," Quart. Journ. Micr. Sci. vol. xxiii. 
N.S., Jan. 1883; 6. Milne-Edwards, A., " Recherches sur l'anatomie 
des Limules," Ann. Sci. Nat. 5th Series, Zoologie, vol. xvii., 1873; 
7. Owen, Richard, " Anatomy of the King-Crab, " Trans. Linn. Soc. 
Lond., vol. xxviii., 1872; 8. Kishinouye, "Development of Limulus 
longispina," Journal of the Science College of Japan, vol. v., 1892; 
9. firauer, " Development of Scorpion," Zeitschrift fur wiss. Zoologie, 
vol. lix., 1895; 10. Hansen, H. J., "Organs and Characters in 
Different Orders of Arachnida," Entomol. Meddel. vol. iv. pp. 137- 
149; 11. Watase, " On the Morphology of the Compound Eyes of 
Arthropods," Studies from the Biolog. Lab. Johns Hopkins University, 
vol. iv. pp 287-334; 12. Newport, George, " Nervous and Circula- 
tory Systems in Myriapoda and Macrourous Arachnids," Phil. 
Trans. Roy. Soc, 1843; 13. Lankester, " Coxal Glands of Limulus, 
Scorpio and Mygale," Quart. Journ. Micr. Sci. vol. xxiv. N.S., 1884; 
13a. W. Patten and A. P. Hazen, " Development of the Coxal Glands 
of Limulus," Journ. of Morphology, vol. xvi., 1900; 13b. Bernard, 
" Coxal Glands of Scorpio," Ann. and Mag. Nat. Hist. vol. xii., 1893, 
p. 55; 14. Benham, " Testis of Limulus," Trans. Linn. Soc, 1882; 
IS. Lankester, " Mobility of the Spermatozoa of Limulus," Quart. 
Journ. Micr. Sci. vol. xviii. N.S., 1878; l6. Korschelt and Heider, 
Entwickelungsgeschichte (Jena, 1892), ibique citata; 17. Laurie, M., 
" The Embryology of a Scorpion,' Quart. Journ. Micr. Sci. vol. xxxi. 
N.S., 1890, and " On Development of Scorpio fulvipes," ibid. vol. 
xxxii., 1891; 18. Lankester (Homoplasy and Homogeny), "On 
the Use of the term Homology in Modern Zoology," Ann. and Mag. 
Nat. Hist., 1870; 19. Idem, " Degeneration, a Chapter in Darwinism," 
1878, reprinted in the Advancement of Science (Macmillan, 1890); 

20. Idem, "Limulus an Arachnid," Q. J. Micr. Sci. vol. xxi. N.S. ; 

21. Claus, " Degeneration of the Acari and Classification of Arthro- 
poda," Anzeiger d. k. k. Akad. Wissen. Wien, 1885 ; see also Ann. and 
Mag. Nat. Hist. (5) vol. xvii., 1886, p. 364, and vol. xix. p. 225; 

22. Lindstrom, G., " Researches on the Visual Organs of the Trilo- 
bites," K. Svenska Vet. Akad. Handl. xxxiv. No. 8, pp. 1-86, Pis. i.-vi., 
1901 ; 22*. Zittel, American edition of his Palaeontology (the Mac- 
millan Co., New York), where ample references to the literature of 
Trilobitae and Eurypteridae will be found; also references to 
literature of fossil Scorpions and Spiders; 23. Hoek, " Report on the 
Pycnogonida," Challenger Expedition Reports, 1881; Meinert, 
" Pycnogonida of the 'Danish Ingolf Expedition," vol. iii., 1899; 
Morgan, " Embryology and Phylogeny of the Pycnogonids," Biol. 
Lab. Baltimore, vol. v., 1891; 24. Bourne, A. G., "The Reputed 
Suicide of the Scorpion," Proc. Roy. Soc, vol. xlii. pp. 17-22; 25. 
Lankester, " Notes on some Habits of Scorpions," Journ. Linn. Soc. 
Zool. vol. xvi. p. 455, 1882; 26. Huxley, ' Pharynx of Scorpion," 
Quart. Journ. Micr. Sci. vol. viii. (old series), i860, p. 250; 27. 
Pocock, " How and Why Scorpions hiss," Natural Science, vol. ix., 
1896; cf. idem, " Stridulating Organs of Spiders," Ann. and Mag. 
Nat. Hist. (6), xvi. pp. 230-233; 28. Kraepelin, Das Thierreich 
(Scorpiones et Pedipalpi) (Berlin, 1899); Peters, " Eine neue Ein- 
theilung der Skorpione," Mon. Akad. Wiss. Berlin, 1861 ; Pocock, 
" Classification of Scorpions," Ann. and Mag. Nat. Hist. (6) xii., 
1893; Thorell and Lindstrom, " On a Silurian Scorpion," Kbngl. 
Svens. Vet. Akad. Hand!, xxi. No. 9, 1885; 29. Cambridge, O. P., 
" A New Family (Tartarides) and Genus of Thelyphonidea, " Ann. 
and Mag. Nat. Hist. (4) x., 1872, p. 413; Cook, " Hubbardia, a New 
Genus of Pedipalpi," Proc Entom. Soc Washington, vol. iv., 1899; 
Thorell, " Tartarides, &c." Ann. Mus. Genova, vol. xxvii., 1889; 
30. M'Cook, American Spiders and their Spinning Work (3 vols.; 
Philadelphia, 1889-1893) ; 31. Peckham, " On Sexual Selection in 
Spiders," Occasional Papers Nat. Hist. Soc. Wisconsin, vol. i. pp. 
1-113, '889; 32. Moggridge, Harvesting Ants and Trap-Door Spiders 
(1873) ; 33. Bertkau, Ph., Arch.f. Naturgesch. vol. xlviii. pp. 316-362 ; 
Idem, same journal, 1875, p. 235, and 1878, p. 351; Cambridge, 
O. P., " Araneidea " in Biologia Centr. Americana, vols. i. and ii. 
(London, 1899) ; Keyserling, Spinnen Amerikas (Nuremberg, 1880- 
1892); Pocock, " Liphistius and the Classification of Spiders," 
Ann. and Mag. Nat. Hist. (6) x., 1892; Simon, Hist. nat. des 
Araignees, vols. i. and ii., 1892, 1897; Wagner, "L'Industrie des 
Araneina," Mem. Acad. St-Petersbourg; Idem, " La Mue des 
Araignees," Ann. Sci. Nat. vol. vi. ; 34. Grassi, G. B. " Intorno 
ad un nuovo Aracnide artrogastro (Koenenia mirabilis) &c." Boll. 
Soc. Ent. Hal. vol. xviii., j886; 35. H. J. Hansen and Sorensen, 



" The Order Palpigradi, Thorell {Koenenia), and its Relationships 
with other Arachnida," Ent. Tidskr. vol. xviii. pp. 233-240, 1898; 
Kraepelin, Das Thierreich (Berlin, 1901); 36. Bernard. " Compar. 
Morphol. of the Galeodidae," Trans. Linn. Soc. Zool. vol. vi., 1896, 
ibique citata; Dufour, " Galeodes," Mim. pres. Acad. Sci. Paris, 
vol. xvii., 1862; Kraepelin, Das Thierreich (Berlin, 1901); Pocock, 
" Taxonomy of Solifugae," Ann. and Mag. Nat. Hist. vol. xx. ; 
37. Balzan, " Voyage au Venezuela (Pseudoscorpiones)," Ann. Soc. 
Entom. France, 1891, pp. 497-522; 38. Guerin-Meneville, Rev. Zool., 
1838, p. 11; Karsch, " Ueber Cryptostemma Guer." Berliner entom. 
Zeitschrift, xxxviii. pp. 25-32, 1892; Thorell, "On an apparently 
new Arachnid belonging to the family Cryptostemmidae," Westv. 
Bihang Svenska Vet. Akad. Handligar, vol. xvii. No. 9, 1892; 39. 
Hansen and Sorensen, On Two Orders of Arachnida (Cambridge, 
1904); Sorensen, " Opiliones laniatores ," Nat. Tidskr. (3) vol. xiv., 
1884; Thorell, " Opilioni," Ann. Mus. Genova, vol. viii., 1876; 
40. Berlese, " Acari, &c, in Italia reperta " (Padova, 1892); Canes- 
trini, Acarofauna Italiana (Padova, 1885) ; Canestrini and Kramer, 
" Demodicidae and Sarcoptidae " in Das Thierreich (Berlin, 1899); 
Michael, " British Oribatidae," Ray Soc; Idem, " Oribatidae " in 
Das Thierreich (Berlin, 1898) ; Idem, " Progress and Present State 
of Knowledge of Acari," Journ. Roy. Micr. Soc, 1894; Nalepa, 
" Phytoptidae," Das Thierreich (Berlin, 1898); Trouessart, "Classi- 
fication des Acariens," Rev. Sci. Nat. de I'ouest, p. 289, 1892 ; Wagner, 
Embryonal Entwick, von Ixodes (St Petersburg, 1893) ; 41. Bertkau, 
Ph., " Coxaldrusen der Arachniden," Sitzb. Niederl. Gesettsch., 1885; 
42. Patten, W., " Brain and Sense Organs of Limulus," Quart. Journ. 
Mic. Sci. vol. xxxv., 1894; see also his " Origin of Vertebrates from 
Arachnids," ibid. vol. xxxi. 

Authorities not cited by numbers in the text : — 
Lung-books: — Berteaux, " Le Poumon des Arachnides," La 
Cellule, vol. v. 1891 ; Jawarowski, " Die Entwick. d. sogen. Lunge 
bei der Arachniden," Zeitsch. wiss. Zool. vol. lviii., 1-894; Macleod, 
" Recherches sur la structure et la signification de 1 appareil res- 
piratoire des Arachnides," Arch. d. Biologie. vol. v., 1884; Schneider, 
A., " Melanges arachnologiques," in Tablettes zoologiques, vol. ii. 
p. 135, 1892; Simmons, " Development of Lung in Spiders," 
Amer. Journ. Science, vol. xlviii., 1894. Coxal glands: — Bertkau, 
"Ueber die Coxaldrusen der Arachniden," Sitzb. d. Niederl. Gesellsch., 
1885; Loman, " Altes und neues tiber das Nephridium (die Coxal- 
driise) der Arachniden," Byd. tot de Dierkunde, vol. xiv., 1887; 
Macleod, " Glande coxale chez les Galeodes," Bull. Acad. Belg. (3) 
vol. viii., 1884; Pelseneer, " On the Coxal Glands of Mygale," Proc. 
Zool. Soc, 1885; Tower, " The External Opening of the brick-red 
Glands of Limulus," Zool. Anzeiger, vol. xviii. p. 471, 1895. Ento- 
sternite: — Schimkewitsch, " Bau und Entwick. des Endosternitesder 
Arachniden," Zool. Jahrb., Anal. Abtheil.,vol.viii.,i894. Embryology: 
— Balfour, " Development of the Araneina," Q. J. Micr. Sci. vol. xx., 
1880; Kingsley, " The Embryology of Limulus," Journ. Morphology, 
vols. vii. and viii.; Kishinouye, " Development of Araneina," Journ. 
Coll. Sci. Univ. of Japan, vol. iv., 1890; Locy, " Development of 
Agelena," Bull. Mus. Harvard, vol. xii., 1885; Metchnikoff, " Em- 
bryologie d. Scorpion," Zeit. wiss. Zool. vol. xxi., 1871 ; Idem, 
" Embryol. Chelifer," Zeit. wiss. Zool. vol. xxi., 1871; Schimkewitsch, 
" Developpement des Araignees," Archives d. Biologie, vol. vi. 
1887. Sense organs: — Bertkau, " Sinnesorgane der Spinnen," 
Arch.f. mikros. Anat. vol. xxvii. p. 589, 1886; Graber, Unicor- 
neale Tracheaten Auge," Arch. f. mikr. Anat. vol. xvii., 1879; 
Grenacher, Gehororgane der Arthropoden (Gottingen, 1879); Kishi- 
nouye, " Lateral Eyes of Spiders," Zool. Anz. vol. xiv. p. 381, 1-891 ; 
Purcell," Phalangiden Augen," Zool. Anzeiger, vol. xv. p. 461. 

General works on Arachnida: — Blanchard, " Les Arachnides" in 
L' Organisation du regne animal; Gaubert, " Recherches sur les 
Arachnides," Ann. Sci. Nat. (7) vol. xiii., 1892; Koch, C, Die 
Arachniden (16 vols., Nuremberg, 1831-1848); Koch, Keyserling 
and Sorensen, Die Arachniden Austr aliens (Nuremberg, 1871-1890); 
Pocock, Arachnida of British India (London, 1900) ; Idem, " On 
African Arachnida," in Proc Zool. Soc. and Ann. and Mag. Nat. 
Hist., 1897-1900; Simon, Les Arachnides de la France (7 vols., 
Paris, 1874-1881); Thorell, "Arachnida from the Oriental Region," 
Ann. Mus. Genova, 1877-1899. (E. R. L.) 

ARAD, or 6-Arad, a town of Hungary, capital of the county 
of the same name, 159 m. S.E. of Budapest by rail. Pop. (1900) 
53,903. It is situated on the right bank of the river Maros, and 
consists of the inner town and five suburbs. Arad is a modern- 
built town, and contains many handsome private and public build- 
ings, including a cathedral. It is the seat of a Greek-Orthodox 
bishop, and possesses a Greek-Orthodox theological seminary, 
two training schobls for teachers — one Hungarian, and the other 
Rumanian — and a conservatoire for music. The town played 
an important part in the Hungarian revolution of 1848-49, 
and possesses a museum containing relics of this war of inde- 
pendence. One of the public squares contains a martyrs' 
monument, erected in memory of ths thirteen Hungarian 
generals shot here on the 6th of October 1849, by order of the 
Austrian general Haynau. It consists of a colossal figure of 



312 



ARAEOSTYLE— ARAGO 



Hungary, with four allegorical groups, and medallions of the 
executed generals. Arad is an important railway junction, 
and has become the largest industrial and commercial centre 
of south-eastern Hungary. Its principal industries are: dis- 
tilling, milling, machinery-making, leather-working and saw- 
milling. A large trade is carried on in grain, flour, alcohol, 
cattle and wood. Arad was a fortified place, and was captured 
by the Turks during the wars of the 17th century, and kept by 
them till the end of that century. The new fortress, built in 
1763, although small, was formidable, and played a great role 
during the Hungarian struggle for independence in 1849. 
Bravely defended by the Austrian general Berger until the 
1st of July 1849, it was then captured by the Hungarian rebels, 
who made it their headquarters during the latter part of the 
insurrection. It was from it that Kossuth issued his famous 
proclamation (nth August 1849) , and it was here that he handed 
over the supreme military and civil power to Gorgei. The 
fortress was recaptured shortly after the surrender of Gorgei 
to the Russians at Vilagos. The fortress is now used as an 
ammunition depot. 

The town of Uj-Arad, i.e. New Arad (pop. 6124), situated on 
the opposite bank of the Maros, is practically a suburb of Arad, 
with which it is connected by a bridge. The town was founded 
during the Turkish wars of the 17 th century. The works erected 
by the Turks for the capture of the fortress of Arad formed 
the nucleus of the new town. 

Vilagos, the town where the famous capitulation of Gorgei 
to the Russians took place on the 13th of August 1849, lies 
21 m. by rail north-east of Arad. 

ARAEOSTYLE (Gr. apatos, weak or widely spaced, and orDXos, 
column), an architectural term for the intercolumniation (g.v.) 
given to those temples where the columns had only timber 
architraves to carry. 

ARAEOSYSTYLE (Gr. dpcuos, widely spaced, and avarvXos, 
with columns set close together), an architectural term applied to 
a colonnade, in which the intercolumniation (q.v.) is alternately 
wide and narrow, as in the case of the western porch of St Paul's 
cathedral and the east front of the Louvre by Perrault. 

ARAGO, DOMINIQUE FRANQOIS JEAN (1786-1853), French 
physicist, was born on the 26th of February 1786, at Estagel, a 
small village near Perpignan, in the department of the eastern 
Pyrenees. He was the eldest of four brothers. Jean (1788- 
1836) emigrated to America and became a general in the Mexican 
army. Jacques Etienne Victor (1799-1855) took part in L. C. 
de S. de Freycinet's exploring voyage in the " Uranie " from 
1817 to 1821, and on his return to France devoted himself to 
journalism and the drama. The fourth brother, fitienne Vincent 
(1802-1892), is said to have collaborated with H. de Balzac in the 
Hiritiere de Birague, and from 1822 to 1847 wrote a great number 
of light dramatic pieces, mostly in collaboration. A strong 
republican, he was obliged to leave France in 1849, but returned 
after the amnesty of 1859. In 1879 he was nominated director 
of the Luxembourg museum. 

Showing decided military tastes Francois Arago was sent to 
the municipal college of Perpignan, where he began to study 
mathematics in preparation for the entrance examination of 
the polytechnic school. Within two years and a half he had 
mastered all the subjects prescribed for examination, and a 
great deal more, and, on going up for examination at Toulouse, 
he astounded his examiner by his knowledge of Lagrange. 
Towards the close of 1803 he entered the polytechnic school, 
with the artillery service as the aim of his ambition, and in 1804, 
through the advice and recommendation of S. D. Poisson, he 
received the appointment of secretary to the Observatory of 
Paris. He now became acquainted with Laplace, and through 
his influence was commissioned, with J. B. Biot, to complete 
the meridional measurements which had been begun by J. B. J. 
Delambre, and interrupted since the death of P. F. A. Mechain 
(1744-1804). The two left Paris in 1806 and began queries
among the mountains of Spain, but Biot returned to Paris 
after they had determined the latitude of Forrnentera, the 
southernmost point to which they were to carry the survey, 



leaving Arago to make the geodetical connexion of Majorca 
with Ivica and with Forrnentera. 

The adventures and difficulties of the latter were now only 
beginning. The political ferment caused by the entrance of 
the French into Spain extended to these islands, and the ignorant 
populace began to suspect that Arago's movements and his 
blazing fires on the top of Mount Galatzo were telegraphic 
signals to the invading army. Ultimately they became so in- 
furiated that he was obliged to cause himself to be incarcerated 
in the fortress of Belver in June 1808. On the 28th of July he 
managed to escape from the island in a fishing-boat, and after 
an adventurous voyage he reached Algiers on the 3rd of August. 
Thence he procured a passage in a vessel bound for Marseilles, 
but on the 16th of August, just as the vessel was nearing Mar- 
seilles, it fell into the hands of a Spanish corsair. With the rest 
of the crew, Arago was taken to Rosas, and imprisoned first in 
a windmill, and afterwards in the fortress of that seaport, until 
the town fell into the hands of the French, when the prisoners 
were transferred to Palamos. After fully three months' imprison- 
ment they were released on the demand of the dey of Algiers, 
and again set sail for Marseilles on the 28th of November, but 
when within sight of their port they were driven back by a 
northerly wind to Bougie on the coast of Africa. Transport 
to Algiers by sea from this place would have occasioned a weary 
stay of three months; Arago, therefore, set out for it by land 
under conduct of a Mahommedan priest, and reached it on 
Christmas day. After six months' stay in Algiers he once again, 
on the 21st of June 1809, set sail for Marseilles, where he had to 
undergo a monotonous and inhospitable quarantine in the 
lazaretto, before his difficulties were over. The first letter he 
received, while in the lazaretto, was from A. von Humboldt; 
and this was the origin of a connexion which, in Arago's words, 
" lasted over forty years without a single cloud ever having 
troubled it." 

Through all these vicissitudes Arago had succeeded in preserv- 
ing the records of his survey; and his first act on his return 
home was to deposit them in the Bureau des Longitudes at 
Paris. As a reward for his adventurous conduct in the cause 
of science, he was in September 1809 elected a member of the 
Academy of Sciences, in room of J. B. L. Lalande, at the re- 
markably early age of twenty-three, and before the close of 
the same year he was chosen by the council of the polytechnic 
school to succeed G. Monge in the chair of analytical geometry. 
About the same time he was named by the emperor one of the 
astronomers of the Royal Observatory, which was accordingly 
his residence till his death, and it was in this capacity that he 
delivered his remarkably successful series of popular lectures 
on astronomy, which were continued from 1812 to 1845. 

In 1816, along with Gay-Lussac, he started the Annales de 
chimie et de physique, and in 18 18 or 18 19 he proceeded along 
with Biot to execute geodetic queries on the coasts of France,
England and Scotland. They measured the length of the 
seconds-pendulum at Leith, and in Unst, one of the Shetland 
isles, the results of the observations being published in 182 1, 
along with those made in Spain. Arago was elected a member 
of the Board of Longitude immediately afterwards, and contri- 
buted to each of its Annuals, for about twenty-two years, 
important scientific notices on astronomy and meteorology 
and occasionally on civil engineering, as well as interesting 
memoirs of members of the Academy. 

In 1830, Arago, who always professed liberal opinions of the 
extreme republican type, was elected a member of the chamber 
of deputies for the Lower Seine, and he employed his splendid 
gifts of eloquence and scientific knowledge in all questions con- 
nected with public education, the rewards of inventors, and the 
encouragement of the mechanical and practical sciences. Many 
of the most creditable national enterprises, dating from this 
period, are due to his advocacy — such as the reward to L. J. M. 
Daguerre for the invention of . photography, the grant for 
the publication of the works of P. Fermat and Laplace, 
the acquisition of the museum of Cluny, the development 
of railways and electric telegraphs, the improvement of the 



ARAGON 



313 



navigation of the Seine, and the boring of the artesian wells at 
Grenelle. 

In the year 1830 also he was appointed director of the Observ- 
atory, and as a member of the chamber of deputies he was able 
to obtain grants of money for rebuilding it in part, and for the 
addition of magnificent instruments. In the same year, too, 
he was chosen perpetual secretary of the Academy of Sciences, 
in room of J. B. J. Fourier. Arago threw his whole soul into its 
service, and by his faculty of making friends he gained at once 
for it and for himself a world-wide reputation. As perpetual 
secretary it fell to him to pronounce historical eloges on deceased 
members; and for this duty his rapidity and facility of thought, 
his happy piquancy of style, and his extensive knowledge 
peculiarly adapted him. 

In 1834 he again visited England, to attend the meeting of 
the British Association at Edinburgh. From this time till 1848 
he led a life of comparative quiet — not the quiet of inactivity, 
however, for his incessant labours within the Academy and the 
Observatory produced a multitude of contributions to all depart- 
ments of physical science, — but on the fall of Louis Philippe he 
left his laboratory to join in forming the provisional govern- 
ment. He was entrusted with the discharge of two important 
functions, that had never before been united in one person, viz. 
the ministry of war and of marine; and in the latter capacity 
he effected some salutary reforms, such as the improvement of 
rations in the navy and the abolition of flogging. He also 
abolished political oaths of all kinds, and, against an array of 
moneyed interests, succeeded in procuring the abolition of negro 
slavery in the French colonies. 

In the beginning of May 1852, when the government of 
Louis Napoleon required an oath of allegiance from all its 
functionaries, Arago peremptorily refused, and sent in his 
resignation of his post as astronomer at the Bureau des Longi- 
tudes. This, however, the prince president, to his credit, de- 
clined to accept, and made " an exception in favour of a savant 
whose works had thrown lustre on France, and whose existence 
his government would regret to embitter." But the tenure 
of office thus granted did not prove of long duration. Arago 
was now on his death-bed, under a complication of diseases, 
induced, no doubt, by the hardships and labours of his earlier 
years. In the summer of 1853 he was advised by his physicians 
to try the effect of his native air, and he accordingly set out 
for the eastern Pyrenees. But the change was unavailing, and 
after a lingering illness, in which he suffered first from diabetes, 
then from Bright's disease, complicated by dropsy, he died in 
Paris on the 2nd of October 1853. 

Arago's fame as an experimenter and discoverer rests mainly 
on his contributions to magnetism and still more to optics. He 
found that a magnetic needle, made to oscillate over non- 
ferruginous surfaces, such as water, glass, copper, &c, falls 
more rapidly in the extent of its oscillations according as it is 
more or less approached to the surface. This discovery, which 
gained him the Copley medal of the Royal Society in 1825, was 
followed by another, that a rotating plate of copper tends to 
communicate its motion to a magnetic needle suspended over 
it ("magnetism of rotation"). Arago is also fairly entitled 
to be regarded as having proved the long-suspected connexion 
between the aurora borealis and the variations of the magnetic 
elements. 

In optics we owe to him not only important optical discoveries 
of his own, but the credit of stimulating the genius of A. J. 
Fresnel, with whose history, as well as with that of E. L. Malus 
and of Thomas Young, this part of his life is closely interwoven. 
Shortly after the beginning of the 19th century the labours of 
these three philosophers were shaping the modern doctrine 
of the undulatory theory of light. Fresnel's arguments in 
favour of that theory found little favour with Laplace, Poisson 
and Biot, the champions of the emission theory; but they were 
ardently espoused by Humboldt and by Arago, who had been 
appointed by the Academy to report on the paper. This was 
the foundation of an intimate friendship between Arago and 
Fresnel, and of a determination to carry on together further 



researches in this subject, which led to the enunciation of the 
fundamental laws of the polarization of light known by their 
names (see Polarization). As a result of this work Arago 
constructed a polariscope, which he used for some interesting 
observations on the polarization of the light of the sky. To him 
is also due the discovery of the power of rotatory polarization 
exhibited by quartz, and last of all, among his many contri- 
butions to the support of the undulatory hypothesis, comes 
the experimentum cruris which he proposed to carry out for 
comparing directly the velocity of light in air and in water 
or glass. On the emission theory the velocity should be acceler- 
ated by an increase of density in the medium; on the wave 
theory, it should be retarded. In 1838 he communicated to the 
Academy the details of his apparatus, which utilized the re- 
volving mirrors employed by Sir C. Wheatstone in 1835 for 
measuring the velocity of the electric discharge; but owing to 
the great care required in the carrying out of the project, and to 
the interruption to his labours caused by the revolution of 1848, 
it was the spring of 1850 before he was ready to put his idea 
to the test; and then his eyesight suddenly gave way. Before 
his death, however, the retardation of light in denser media 
was demonstrated by the experiments of H. L. Fizeau and 
J. B. L. Foucault, which, with improvements in detail, were 
based on the plan proposed by him. 

Arago's CEuvres were published after his death under the direction 
of J. A. Barral, in 17 vols., 8vo, 1854-1862; also separately his 
Astronomie populaire, in 4 vols.; Notices biographiques, in 3 vols.; 
Notices scientifiques, in 5 vols. ; Voyages scientifiques, in I vol. ; 
Memoires scientifiques, in 2 vols. ; Melanges, in I vol. ; and Tables 
analytiques et documents importants (with portrait), in I vol. English 
translations of the following portions of his works have appeared : — 
Treatise on Comets, by C. Gold, C.B. (London, 1833) ; also translated 
by Smyth and Grant (London, 1 861) ; Hist, eloge of James Watt, by 
James Muirhead (London, 1839); also translated, with notes, by 
Lord Brougham; Popular Lectures on Astronomy, by Walter Kelly 
and Rev. L. Tomlinson (London, 1854) ; also translated by Dr W. H. 
Smyth and Prof. R. Grant, 2 vols. (London, 1855); Arago's Auto- 
biography, translated by the Rev. Baden Powell (London, 1855, 
1858); Arago's Meteorological Essays, with introduction by Hum- 
boldt, translated under the superintendence of Colonel Sabine 
(London, 1855), and Arago's Biographies of Scientific Men, trans- 
lated by Smyth, Powell and Grant, 8vo (London, 1857). 

ARAGON, or Arragon (in Span. Aragon), a captaincy- 
general, and formerly a kingdom of Spain; bounded on the 
N. by the Pyrenees, which separate it from France, on the E. 
by Catalonia and Valencia, S. by Valencia, and W. by the two 
Castiles and Navarre. Pop. (1900) 912,711; area, 18,294 
sq. m. Aragon was divided in 1833 into the provinces of Huesca, 
Teruel and Saragossa; an account of its modern condition is 
therefore given under these names, which have not, however, 
superseded the older designation in popular usage. 

Aragon consists of a central plain, edged by mountain ranges. 
On the south, east and west, these ranges, though wild and 
rugged, are of no great elevation, but on the north the Pyrenees 
attain their greatest altitude in the peaks of Aneto (11,168 ft.) 
and Monte Perdido (10,998 ft.) — also known as Las Tres Sorores, 
and, in French, as Mont Perdu. The central pass over the 
Pyrenees is the Port de Canfranc, on the line between Saragossa 
and Pau. Aragon is divided by the river Ebro (q.v.) , which flows 
through it in a south-easterly direction, into two nearly equal 
parts, known as Trans-ibero and Cis-ibero. The Ebro is the prin- 
cipal river, and receives from the north, in its passage through 
the province, the Arba, the Gallego and the united waters 
of the Cinca, Esera, Noguera Ribagorzana, Noguera Pallaresa 
and Segre — the last three belonging to Catalonia. From the 
south it receives the Jalon and Jiloca (or Xalon and Xiloca) 
and the Guadalope. The Imperial Canal of Aragon, which was 
begun by the emperor Charles V. in 1529, but remained un- 
finished for nearly two hundred years, extends from Tudela to 
El Burgo de Ebro, a distance of 80 m. ; it has a depth of 9 ft., and 
an average breadth of 69, and is navigable for vessels of about 
80 tons. The Royal Canal of Tauste, which lies along the north 
side of the Ebro, was cut for purposes of irrigation, and gives 
fertility to the district. Two leagues north-north east of Albar- 
racin is the remarkable fountain called Cella, 3700 ft. above the 



3H 



ARAGONITE— ARAGUA 



sea, which forms the source of the Jiloca; and between this river 
and the Sierra Molina is an extensive lake called Gallocanta, 
covering about 6000 acres. The climate is characterized by 
extreme heat in the summer and cold in the winter; among the 
mountains the snowfall is heavy, and thunderstorms are frequent, 
but there is comparatively little rain. 

Within a recent geological period, central Aragon was un- 
doubtedly submerged by the sea, and the parched chalky soil 
remains saturated with salt, while many of the smaller streams 
run brackish. As the mountains of Valencia and Catalonia 
effectually bar out the fertilizing moisture of the sea-winds, 
much of the province is a sheer wilderness, stony, ash-coloured, 
scarred with dry watercourses, and destitute of any vegetation 
except thin grass and heaths. In contrast with the splendid 
fertility of Valencia or the south of France, the landscape of 
this region, like the rest of central Spain, seems almost a con- 
tinuation of the north African desert area. There are, however, 
extensive oak, pine and beech forests in the highlands, and many 
beautiful oases in the deeply sunk valleys, and along the rivers, 
especially beside the Ebro, which is, therefore, often called the 
" Nile of Aragon." In such oases the flora is exceedingly rich. 
Wheat, maize, rice, oil, flax and hemp, of fine quality, are grown 
in considerable quantities; as well as saffron, madder, liquorice, 
sumach, and a variety of fruits. Merino wool is one of the chief 
products. 

In purity of race the Aragonese are probably equal to the 
Castilians, to whom, rather than to the Catalans or Valencians, 
they are also allied in character. The dress of the women is less 
distinctive than that of the men, who wear a picturesque black 
and white costume, with knee-breeches, a brilliantly coloured 
sash, black hempen sandals, and a handkerchief wound round 
the head. 

Three counties — Sobrarbe, situated near the headwaters of 
the Cinca, Aragon, to the west, and Ribagorza or Ribagorca, 
to the east — are indicated by tradition and the earliest chronicles 
as the cradle of the Aragonese monarchy. These districts were 
never wholly subdued when the Moors overran the country 
(711-713). Sobrarbe especially was for a time the headquarters 
of the Christian defence in eastern Spain. About 1035, 
Sancho III. the Great, ruler of the newly established kingdom 
of Navarre, which included the three counties above mentioned, 
bequeathed them to Gonzalez and Ramiro, his sons. Ramiro 
soon rid himself of his rival, and welded Sobrarbe, Ribagorza 
and Aragon into a single kingdom, which thenceforward grew 
rapidly in size and power and shared with Castile the chief part 
in the struggle against the Moors. The history of this period, 
which was terminated by the union of Castile and Aragon under 
Ferdinand and Isabella in 1479, is given, along with a full account 
of the very interesting constitution of Aragon, under Spain 
(q.v.). At the height of its power under James I. (1213-1276), 
the kingdom included Valencia, Catalonia, the Balearic Islands 
and the considerable territory of Montpellier in France; while 
Peter III. (1276-1285) added Sicily to his dominions. 

The literature relating to Aragon is very extensive. See, in 
addition to the works cited in the article Spain (section History), 
" Les Archives d'Aragon et de Navarre," by L. Cadier, in Bibliotheque 
de V&cole des Chartes, 49 (Paris, 1888). Among the more important 
original authorities, the following may be selected: — for general 
history, Anales de la corona de Aragon, by G. Curita, 3rd ed. in 7 
folio volumes (Saragossa, 1668-1671; 1st ed. 1562-1580); — for 
ecclesiastical history, Teatro historico de las iglesias de Aragon 
(Pamplona, 1770-1807); for economic history, Historic, de la 
economiapolitica de Aragon, by I. J. de Asso y del Rio (Saragossa, 
1798). For the constitution and laws of Aragon, see Origines del 
Justicia de Aragon, &c, by J. Ribera Tarrago (Saragossa, 1897), and 
Instituciones y reyes de Aragon, by V. Balaguer (Madrid, 1896). The 
topography, inhabitants, art, products, &c, of the kingdom are 
described in a volume of the series Espana entitled Aragdn, by J. M. 
Quadrado (Barcelona, 1886). 

ARAGONITE, one of the mineral forms of calcium carbonate 
(CaC0 3 ), the other form being the more common mineral calcite. 
It crystallizes in the orthorhombic system, and the crystals are 
either prismatic or acicular in habit. Simple crystals are, how- 
ever, rare; twinning on the prism planes {M in the figures) 
being a characteristic feature of the mineral (fig. 1). This 



M 



M 



M 



!M 



Fig. 1. 



Fig. 2. 



twinning is usually often repeated on the same plane (fig. 2), 
and gives rise to striations on the terminal faces (k) of the 
crystals; often, also, three crystals are twinned together on 
two of the prism planes of one of them, producing an apparently 
hexagonal prism. The mineral is colourless, white or yellowish, 
transparent or translucent, has a vitreous lustre, and, in fact, is 
not unlike calcite in general appearance. It may, however, 
always be readily distinguished from calcite by the absence of 
any marked cleavage, and by its greater hardness (H. = 3|— 4) 
and specific gravity (2-93); further, it is optically biaxial, whilst 
calcite is uniaxial. It is brittle and has a subconchoidal fracture ; 
on a fractured surface the lustre is decidedly resinous in character. 

The mineral was first found, as reddish twinned crystals with 
the form of six-sided prisms, at Molina in Aragon, Spain, where 

it occurs with gypsum and 

small crystals of ferruginous yl5*T* \-- - k -/ / 

quartz in a red clay. It is ^' '■ ^^ k 

from this locality that the 

mineral takes its name, 

which was originally spelt 

arragonite. Fine groups of 

crystals of the same habit 

are found in the sulphur 

deposits of Girgenti in 

Sicily; also at Herren- 

grund near Neusohl in 

Hungary. At many other 

localities the mineral takes the form of radiating groups of 

acicular crystals, such as those from the haematite mines of 

west Cumberland: beautiful feathery forms have been found 

in a limestone cave in the Transvaal. Fibrous forms are also 

common. A peculiar coralloidal variety known as flosferri 

(" flower of iron ") consists of radially arranged fibres: 

magnificent snow-white specimens of this variety have long 

been known from the iron mines of Eisenetz in Styria. The 

calcareous secretions of many groups of invertebrate animals 

consist of aragonite (calcite is also common); pearls may be 

specially cited as an example. 

Aragonite is a member of the isomorphous group of minerals 
comprising witherite (BaC0 3 ), strontianite (SrC0 3 ), cerussite 
(PbC0 3 ) and bromlite ((Ba, Ca)C0 3 ); and crystals of aragonite 
sometimes contain small amounts of strontium or lead. A 
variety known as tarnowitzite, from Tarnowitz in Silesia, 
contains about 5 % of lead carbonate. 

Aragonite is the more unstable of the two modifications of 
calcium carbonate. A crystal of aragonite when heated becomes 
converted into a granular aggregate of calcite individuals: 
altered crystals of this kind (paramorphs) are not infrequently 
met with in nature, whilst in fossil shells the original nacreous 
layer of aragonite has invariably been altered to calcite. From 
a solution of calcium carbonate in water containing carbon 
dioxide crystals of calcite are deposited at the ordinary tem- 
perature, but from a warm solution aragonite crystallizes 
out. The thermal springs of Carlsbad deposit spherical 
concretions of aragonite, forming masses known as pisolite or 
Sprudelstein. (L. J. S.) 

ARAGUA, one of the smaller states of Venezuela under the 
redivision of 1904, lying principally within the parallel ranges 
of the Venezuelan Cordillera, and comprising some of the most 
fertile and healthful valleys of the republic. It is bounded E. 
by the Federal District and Maturin, S. by Guarico and W. by 
Zamora and Carabobo. Pop. (1905, est.) 152,364. Aragua 
has a short coast-line on the Caribbean west of the Federal 
District, but has no port of consequence. Cattle, swine and goats 
are raised, and the state produces coffee, sugar, cacao, beans, 
cereals and cheese. The climate of the higher valleys is sub- 
tropical, the mean annual temperature ranging from 74 to 80° F. 
The capital, La Victoria (pop. 7800), is situated in the fertile 
Aragua valley, 1558 ft. above sea-level and 36 m. south-west of 
Caracas. Other important towns are Barbacoas (pop. 13,109) on 
the left bank of the Guarico in a highly fertile region, Ciudad 
de Cura and Maracay (pop. 7500), 56 m. west-south-west of 



ARAGUAYA— ARAKCHEEV 



315 



Caracas near the north-east shore of Lake Valencia. The last 
two towns are on the railway between Caracas and Valencia. 

ARAGUAYA, Araguay or Araguia, a river of Brazil and 
principal affluent of the Tocantins, rising in the Serra do Cayapo, 
where it is known as the Rio Grande, and flowing in a north by 
east direction to a junction with the Tocantins at Sao Joao do 
Araguaya, or Sao Joao das Duas Barras. Its upper course forms 
the boundary line between Goyaz and Matto Grosso. The river 
divides into two branches at about 13 20' S. lat., and unites again 
at io° 30', forming the large island of Santa Anna or Bananal. 
The eastern branch, called the Furo, is the one used by boats, 
as the main channel is obstructed by rapids. Its principal 
affluent is the Rio das Mortes, which rises in the Serra de Sao 
Jeronymo, near Cuyaba, Matto Grosso, and is utilized by 
boatmen going to Para. Of other affluents, the Bonito, Gargas, 
Cristallino and Tapirape on the west, and the Pitombas, Claro, 
Vermelho, Tucupa. and Chavante on the east, nothing definite is 
known as the country is still largely unexplored. The Araguaya 
has a course of 1080 m., considerable stretches of which are 
navigable for small river steamers, but as the river below Santa 
Anna Island is interrupted by reefs and rapids in two places — 
one having a fall of 85 ft. in 18 m., and the other a fall of 50 ft. 
in 12 m. — it affords no practicable outlet for the products of 
the state. It was explored in part by Henri Coudreau in 1897. 

See Coudreau's Voyage au Tocantins-Araguaya (Paris, 1897). 

ARAKAN, a division of Lower Burma. It consists of a strip 
of country running along the eastern seaboard of the Bay of 
Bengal, from the Naaf estuary, on the borders of Chittagong, 
to Cape Negrais. Length from northern extremity to Cape 
Negrais, about 400 m.; greatest breadth in the northern part, 
90 m., gradually diminishing towards the south, as it is hemmed 
in by the Arakan Yoma mountains, until, in the extreme south, 
it tapers away to a narrow strip not more than 15 m. across. 
The coast is studded with islands, the most important of which 
are Cheduba, Ramree and Shahpura. The division has its head- 
quarters at Akyab and consists of four districts — namely, Akyab, 
Northern Arakan Hill Tracts, Sandoway and Kyaukpyu, 
formerly called Ramree. Its area is 18,540 sq. m. The popu- 
lation at the time of the British occupation in 1826 did not exceed 
100,000. In 1831 it amounted to 173,000; in 1839 to 248,000, 
and in 1901 to 762,102. 

The principal rivers of Arakan are — (1) the Naaf estuary, in 
the north, which forms the boundary between the division and 
Chittagong; (2) the Myu river, an arm of the sea, running a 
course almost parallel with the coast for about 50 m.; (3) the 
Koladaing river, rising near the Blue mountain, in the extreme 
north-east, and falling into the Bay of Bengal a few miles south 
of the Myu river, navigable by vessels of from 300 to 400 tons 
burden for a distance of 40 m. inland; and (4) the Lemyu river, 
a considerable stream falling into the bay a few miles south of 
the Koladaing. Farther to the south, owing to the nearness 
of the range which bounds Arakan on the east, the rivers are of 
but little importance. These are the Talak and the Aeng, 
navigable by boats; and the Sandoway, the Taungup and the 
Gwa streams, the latter of which alone has any importance, 
owing to its mouth forming a good port of call or haven for 
vessels of from 9 to 10 ft. draught. There are several passes over 
the Yoma mountains, the easiest being that called the Aeng 
route, leading from the village of that name into Upper Burma. 
The staple crop of the province is rice, along with cotton, tobacco, 
sugar, hemp and indigo. The forests produce abundance of 
excellent oak and teak timber. 

The natives of Arakan trace their history as far back as 
2666 B.C., and give a lineal succession of 227 native princes down 
to modern times. According to them, their empire had at one 
period far wider limits, and extended over Ava, part of China, 
and a portion of Bengal. This extension of their empire is not, 
however, corroborated by known facts in history. At different 
times the Moguls and Pegus carried their arms into the heart of 
the country. The Portuguese, during the era of their greatness 
in Asia, gained a temporary establishment in Arakan; but in 
1782 the province was finally conquered by the Burmese, from 



which period until its cession to the British in 1826, under the 
treaty of Yandaboo, its history forms part of that of Burma. 
The old city of Arakan, formerly the capital of the province, is 
situated on an inferior branch of the Koladaing river. Its 
remoteness from the ports and harbours of the country, com- 
bined with the extreme unhealthiness of its situation, have led 
to its gradual decay subsequently to the formation of the com- 
paratively recent settlement of Akyab, which place is now the 
chief town of the province. The old city (now Myohaung) lies 50 
m. north-east of Akyab. The Maghs, who form nearly the whole 
population of the province, follow the Buddhist doctrines, which 
are universally professed throughout Burma. The priests are 
selected from all classes of men, and one of their chief employ- 
ments is the education of children. Instruction is consequently 
widely diffused, and few persons, it is said, can be found in the 
province who are unable to read. The qualifications for entering 
into the priestly order are good conduct and a fair measure of 
learning — such conduct at least as is good according to Buddhist 
tenets, and such learning as is esteemed among their votaries. 

The Arakanese are of Burmese origin, but separated from the 
parent stock by the Arakan Yoma mountains, and they have 
a dialect and customs of their own. Though conquered by the 
Burmese, they have remained distinct from their conquerors. 

The Northern Arakan Hill Tracts district is under a super- 
intendent, who is usually a police officer, with headquarters 
at Paletwa. The area of the Hill Tracts is 5233 sq. m. ; pop. 
(1901) 20,682. (J. G. Sc.) 

ARAKCHEEV, ALEKSYEI ANDREEVICH, Count (1760- 
1834), Russian soldier and statesman, was descended from an 
ancient family of Great Novgorod. From his mother, Elizabeth 
Vitlitsaya, he inherited most of his characteristics, an insatiable 
love of work, an almost pedantic love of order and the most 
rigorous sense of duty. In 1788 he entered the corps of noble 
cadets in the artillery and engineering department, where his 
ability, especially in mathematics, soon attracted attention. 
In July 1 791 he was made an adjutant on the staff of Count 
N. I. Saltuikov, who (September 1792) recommended him to 
the cesarevich Paul Petrovich as the artillery officer most capable 
of reorganizing the army corps maintained by the prince at 
Gatchina. Arakcheev speedily won the entire confidence of 
Paul by his scrupulous zeal and undeniable technical ability. 
His inexorable discipline (magnified into cruelty by later legends) 
soon made the Gatchina corps a model for the rest of the 
Russian army. On the accession of Paul to the throne Arak- 
cheev' was promptly summoned to St Petersburg, appointed 
military commandant in the capital, and major-general in the 
grenadier battalion of the Preobrazhenskoe Guard. On the 
1 2th of December 1796, he received the ribbon of St Anne and 
a rich estate at Gruzina in the government of Novgorod, the 
only substantial gift ever accepted by him during the whole of 
his career. At the coronation (5th of April 1797) Paul created 
him a baron, and he was subsequently made quartermaster- 
general and colonel of the whole Preobrazhenskoe Guard. It 
was to Arakcheev that Paul entrusted the reorganization of the 
army, which during the latter days of Catherine had fallen into 
a state of disorder and demoralization. Arakcheev remorselessly 
applied the iron Gatchina discipline to the whole of the imperial 
forces, beginning with the Guards. He soon became generally 
detested by the army, but pursued his course unflinchingly 
and introduced many indispensable hygienic reforms. " Clean 
barracks are healthy barracks," was his motto. Nevertheless, 
the opposition of the officers proved too strong for him, and on 
the 18th of March 1798 he was dismissed from all his appoint- 
ments. Arakcheev's first disgrace only lasted six months. On 
the nth of August he was received back into favour, speedily 
reinstated in all his former offices, and on the 5th of May 1799 
was created a count, the emperor himself selecting the motto: 
" Devoted, not servile." Five months later he was again in 
disgrace, the emperor dismissing him on the strength of a 
denunciation subsequently proved to be false. It was a fatal 
step on Paul's part, for everything goes to prove that he would 
never have been assassinated had Arakcheev continued by his 



^i6 



ARAL 



side. During the earlier years of Alexander, Arakcheev was 
completely overlooked. Only on the 27th of April 1803, was 
the count recalled to St Petersburg, and employed as inspector- 
general of the artillery. His wise and thorough reorganization 
of the whole department contributed essentially to the victories 
of the Russians during the Napoleonic wars. All critics agree, 
indeed, that the Arakcheev administration was the golden era 
of the Russian artillery. The activity of the inexhaustible 
inspector knew no bounds, and he neglected nothing which 
could possibly improve this arm. His principal reforms were 
the subdivision of the artillery divisions into separate inde- 
pendent units, the formation of artillery brigades, the estab- 
lishment of a committee of instruction (1808), and the publishing 
of an Artillery Journal. At Austerlitz he had the satisfaction 
of witnessing the actual results of his artillery reforms. The 
commissariat scandals which came to light after the peace of 
Tilsit convinced the emperor that nothing short of the stern and 
incorruptible energy of Arakcheev could reach the sources of 
the evil, and in January 1808 he was appointed inspector-general 
and war minister. When, on the outbreak of the Swedish war 
of 1809, the emperor ordered the army to take advantage of an 
unusually severe frost and cross the ice of the Gulf of Finland, 
it was only the presence of Arakcheev that compelled an un- 
willing general and a semi-mutinous army to begin a campaign 
which ended in the conquest of Finland. On the institution of 
the "Imperial Council" (1st of January 1810), Arakcheev was 
made a member of the council of ministers and a senator, while 
still retaining the war office. Subsequently Alexander was 
alienated from him owing to the intrigues of the count's enemies, 
who hated him for his severity and regarded him as a dangerous 
reactionary. The alienation was not, however, for long. It is 
true, Arakcheev took no active part in the war of 1812, but 
all the correspondence and despatches relating to it passed 
through his hands, and he was the emperor's inseparable com- 
panion during the whole course of it. At Paris (31st of March 
1814) Alexander, with his own hand, wrote the ukaz appointing 
him a field-marshal, but he refused the dignity, accepting, 
instead, a miniature portrait of his master. From this time 
Alexander's confidence in Arakcheev steadily increased, and 
the emperor imparted to him, first of all, his many projects of 
reform, especially his project of military colonies, the carrying 
out of the details of which was committed to Arakcheev (1824). 
The failure of the scheme was due not to any fault of the count, 
but to the inefficiency and insubordination of the district 
officers. In Alexander's last years Arakcheev was not merely 
his chief counsellor, but his dearest friend, to whom he submitted 
all his projects for consideration and revision. The most inter- 
esting of these projects was the plan for the emancipation of the 
peasantry (1818). On the accession of Nicholas I., Arakcheev, 
thoroughly broken in health, gradually restricted his immense 
sphere of activity, and on the 26th of April 1826, resigned all his 
offices and retired to Carlsbad. The 50,000 roubles presented 
to him by the emperor as a parting gift he at once handed to 
the Pavlovsk Institute for the education of the daughters of 
poor gentlemen. His last days he spent on his estate at Gruzina, 
carefully collecting all his memorials of Alexander, whose memory 
he most piously cherished. He also set aside 25,000 roubles for 
the author of the best biography of his imperial friend. Arak- 
cheev died on the 21st of April 1834, with his eyes fixed to the 
last on the late emperor's portrait. " I have now done every- 
thing," he said, " so I can go and make my report to the emperor 
Alexander." In 1806 he had married Natalia Khomutova, but 
they lived apart, and he had no children by her. 

See Vasily Ratch, Memorials of Count Arakcheev (Rus.) (St Peters- 
burg, 1864); Mikhail Ivanovich Semevsky, Count Arakcheev and 
the Military Colonies (Rus.) (St Petersburg, 1871); Theodor Schie- 
mann, Gesch. Russland's unter Kaiser Nikolaus I., vol. i., Alex- 
ander I., &c. (Berlin, 1904). (R. N. B.) 

ARAL, a lake or inland sea in the west of Asia, situated 
between lat. 43 30' and 46 51' N., and long. 58 13' and 
6i° 56' E. It was known to the ancient Arab and Persian 
geographers as the Sea of Khwarizm or Kharezm, from the neigh- 
bouring district of the Chorasmians, and derives its present name 



from the Kirghiz designation of Aral-denghiz, or Sea of Islands. 
In virtue of its area (26,233 sq.m.) it is the fourth largest inland 
sea of the world. It has nearly the same length as width, 
namely about 170 m., if its northern gulf (Kichkineh-denghiz) 
is left out of account. Its depth is insignificant, the maximum 
being 220 ft. in a depression in the north-west, and the mean 
depth only 50 ft., so that notwithstanding its area it contains 
only eleven times as much water as the Lake of Geneva. Its 
altitude is 242! ft. above the Caspian, i.e. about 155 ft. above 
the ocean. The lake is surrounded on the north by steppes; on 
the west by the rocky plateau of Ust-Urt, which separates it from 
the Caspian; on the south by the alluvial district of Khiva; and 
on the east by the Kyzyl-kum, or Red Sand Desert. On the north 
the shores are comparatively low, and the coast-line is broken by 
a number of irregular bays, of which the most important are 
those of Sary-chaganak and Paskevich. On the west an almost 
unbroken wall of rock extends from Chernychev Bay south- 
wards, rising towards the middle to 500 ft. The southern coast 
is occupied by the delta of the Oxus (Jihun, Amu-darya), one 
of the arms of which, the Laudan, forms a swamp, 80 m. long 
and 20 broad, before it discharges into the sea. The only 
other tributary of any size that the sea receives is the Jaxartes 
(Sihun, Syr-darya) which enters towards the northern extremity 
of the east coast, and is suspected to be shifting its embouchure 
more and more to the north. This river, as well as the Amu, 
conveys vast quantities of sediment into the lake; the delta 
of the Syr-darya increased by 13! sq. m. between 1847 and 1900. 
The eastern coast is fringed with multitudes of small islands, 
and other islands, some of considerable size, are situated in the 
open towards the north and west. Kug-Aral, the largest, lies 
opposite the mouth of the Syr-darya, cutting off the Kichkineh- 
denghiz or Little Sea. The next largest island is the Nikolai, 
nearly in the middle. Navigation is dangerous owing to the 
frequency and violence of the storms, and the almost total 
absence of shelter. The north-east wind is the most prevalent, 
and sometimes blows for months together. The only other 
craft, except the steamships of the Russians, that venture on 
the waters, are the flat-bottomed boats of the Kirghiz. 

In regard to the period of the formation of the Aral there were 
formerly two theories. According to Sir H. C. Rawlinson 
(Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc, March 1867) the disturbances which 
produced the present lake took place in the course of the middle 
ages; while Sir Roderick Murchison contended (Joum. of Roy. 
Geog. Soc, 1867, p. cxliv. &c.) that the Caspian and Aral existed 
as separate seas before and during all the historic period, and 
that the main course of the rivers Jaxartes and Oxus was deter- 
mined in a prehistoric era. The former based his opinion largely 
on historical evidence, and the latter trusted principally to 
geological data. There is no doubt that in recent historical 
times Lake Aral had a much greater extension than it has at the 
present time, and that its area is now diminishing. This is, of 
course, due to the excess of evaporation over the amount of 
water supplied by its two feeders, the Amu-darya and the Syr- 
darya, both of which are seriously drawn upon for irrigation in 
all the oases they flow through. Old shore lines and other 
indications point to the level of the lake having once been 50 ft. 
above the existing level. Nevertheless the general desiccation 
is subject to temporary fluctuations, which appear to corre- 
spond to the periods recently suggested by Eduard Bruckner 
(b. 1862); for, whereas the lake diminished and shrank during 
1850-1880, since the latter year it has been rising again. Islands 
which were formerly connected with the shore are now some 
distance away from it and entirely surrounded by water. More- 
over, on a graduated level, put down in 1874, there was a per- 
manent rise of nearly 4 ft. by 1901. The temperature at the 
bottom was found (1 900-1 902) by Emil Berg to be 33-8° Fahr., 
while that of the surface varied from 44-5° to 80-5° between 
May and September; the mean surface temperature for July 
was 75°. The salinity of the water is much less than that of 
the ocean, containing only 1-05% of salt, and the lake freezes 
every year for a great distance from its shores. The opinion 
that Lake Aral periodically disappeared, which was for a long 



ARAM— ARANDA 



3*7 



time countenanced by Western geographers, loses more and 
more probability now that it is evident that at a relatively 
recent period the Caspian Sea extended much farther eastward 
than it does now, and that Lake Aral communicated with it 
through the Sary-kamysh depression. The present writer is 
even inclined to think that, besides this southern communication 
with the Caspian, Lake Aral may have been, even in historical 
times, connected with the Mortvyi Kultuk (Tsarevich) Gulf of 
the Caspian, discharging part of its water into that sea through 
a depression of the Ust-Urt plateau, which is marked by a chain 
of lakes (Chumyshty, Asmantai). In this case it might have 
been easily confounded with a gulf of the Caspian (as by Jenkin- 
son). That the level of Lake Aral was much higher in post- 
Pliocene times is proved by the discovery of shells of its char- 
acteristic species of Peclen and Mytilus in the Kara-kum Desert, 
33 m. south of the lake and at an altitude of 70 ft. above its 
present level, and perhaps even up to 200 ft. (by Syevertsov). 

The fish of Lake Aral belong to fresh-water species, and in 
some of its rapid tributaries the interesting Scaphirhynchus, 
which represents a survival from the Tertiary epoch, is found. 
The fishing is very productive, the fish being exported to Turkes- 
tan, Merv and Russia. The shores of the lake are uninhabited; 
the nearest settlements are Kazala, 55 m. east, on the Syr, and 
Chimbai and Kungrad in the delta of the Amu. 

Authorities. — Maksheev's " Description of Lake Aral," and 
Kaulbars' " Delta of the Amu," in Zapiski of Russ. Geogr. Soc, 
1st series, v., and new series, ix. ; Grimm's Studies of the Aral- 
Caspian Expedition; Nikolsky's " Fishing in Lake Aral," in Izvestia, 
Russ. Geogr. Soc, 1887; Prof. Mushketov, Turkestan, vol. i. (1886), 
which contains bibliographical references; Rosier, Die Aralseefrage 
(1873); Wood, The Shores of the Aral Lake (1876); and Berg in 
Izvestia, Turkestan Branch of Russian Geog. Soc. (vol. iii., Tashkent, 
1902). (P. A. K.) 

ARAM, EUGENE (1704-1750), English scholar, but more 
famous as the murderer celebrated by Hood in his ballad, the 
Dream of Eugene Aram, and by Bulwer Lytton in his romance 
of Eugene Aram, was born of humble parents at Ramsgill, 
Yorkshire, in 1704. He received little education at school, but 
manifested an intense desire for learning. While still young, 
he married and settled as a schoolmaster at Netherdale, and 
during the years he spent there, he taught himself both Latin 
and Greek. In 1734 he removed to Knaresborough, where he 
remained as schoolmaster till 1745. In that year a man named 
Daniel Clark, an intimate friend of Aram, after obtaining a con- 
siderable quantity of goods from some of the tradesmen in the 
town, suddenly disappeared. Suspicions of being concerned in 
this swindling transaction fell upon Aram. His garden was 
searched, and some of the goods found there. As, however, 
there was not evidence sufficient to convict him of any crime, 
he was discharged, and soon after set out for London, leaving 
his wife behind. For several years he travelled through parts 
of England, acting as usher in a number of schools, and settled 
finally at Lynn, in Norfolk. During his travels he had amassed 
considerable materials for a work he had projected on etymology, 
to be entitled a Comparative Lexicon of the English, Latin, Greek, 
Hebrew and Celtic Languages. He was undoubtedly an original 
philologist, who realized, what was then not yet admitted by 
scholars, the affinity of the Celtic language to the other languages 
of Europe, and could dispute the then accepted belief that Latin 
was derived from Greek. Aram's writings show that he had 
grasped the right idea on the subject of the Indo-European 
character of the Celtic language, which was not established 
till J. C. Prichard published his book, Eastern Origin of the Celtic 
Nations, in 1831. But he was not destined to live in history as 
the pioneer of a new philology. In February 1758 a skeleton 
was dug up at Knaresborough, and some suspicion arose that 
it might be Clark's. Aram's wife had more than once hinted 
that her husband and a man named Houseman knew the secret 
of Clark's disappearance. Houseman was at once arrested and 
confronted with the bones that had been found. He affirmed his 
innocence, and, taking up one of the bones, said, " This is no 
more Dan Clark's bone than it is mine." His manner in saying 
this roused suspicion that he knew more of Clark's disappearance 



than he was willing to admit. He was again examined, and 
confessed that he had been present at the murder of Clark by 
Aram and another man, Terry, of whom nothing further is heard. 
He also gave information as to the place where the body had been 
buried in St Robert's Cave, a well-known spot near Knares- 
borough. A skeleton was dug up here, and Aram was im- 
mediately arrested, and sent to York for trial. Houseman was 
admitted as evidence against him. Aram conducted his own 
defence, and did not attempt to overthrow Houseman's evidence, 
although there were some discrepancies in that; but made a 
skilful attack on the fallibility of circumstantial evidence in 
general, and particularly of evidence drawn from the discovery 
of bones. He brought forward several instances where bones 
had been found in caves, and tried to show that the bones found 
in St Robert's Cave were probably those of some hermit who 
had taken up his abode there. He was found guilty, and con- 
demned to be executed on the 6th of August 1759, three days 
after his trial. While in his cell he confessed his guilt, and threw 
some light on the motives for his crime, by asserting that he had 
discovered a criminal intimacy between Clark and his own wife. 
On the night before his execution he made an unsuccessful 
attempt at suicide by opening the veins in his arm. 

ARAMAIC LANGUAGES, a class of languages so called from 
Aram, a geographical term, which in old Semitic usage desig- 
nates nearly the same districts as the Greek word Syria. Aram, 
however, does not include Palestine, while it comprehends 
Mesopotamia (Heb. Aram of two rivers), a region which the 
Greeks frequently distinguish from Syria proper. Thus the 
Aramaic languages may be geographically defined as the Semitic 
dialects originally current in Mesopotamia and the regions 
extending south-west from the Euphrates to Palestine. (See 
Semitic Languages; Syriac; Targum.) 

ARANDA, PEDRO PABLO ABARCA DE BOLEA, Count of 
(1719-1798), Spanish minister and general, was born at the castle 
of Sietamo, a lordship of his family near Huesca in Aragon, on the 
1st of August 1 7 19. The house of Abarca was very ancient, a 
fact of which Don Pedro, who never forgot that he was a " rico 
hombre " (noble) of Aragon, was deeply conscious. He was 
educated partly at Bologna and partly at the military school 
of Parma. In 1740 he entered the army as captain in the 
regiment " Castilla," of which his father was proprietary colonel. 
On the death of his father he became colonel, and served in the 
Italian campaigns of the War of the Austrian Succession. In 
1749 he married Dona Ana, daughter of the 9th duke of Hijar, 
by whom he had one son, who died young, and a daughter. 
During the following years he travelled and visited the camp 
of Frederick the Great, whose system of drill he admired and 
afterwards introduced into the Spanish army. After a short 
period of diplomatic service in Portugal, where his exacting 
temper made it impossible for him to agree with the premier, 
Pombal, he returned to Madrid, was made a knight of the Golden 
Fleece, and director-general of artillery — a post which he threw 
up, together with his rank of lieutenant-general, because • he 
was not allowed to punish certain fraudulent contractors. The 
king, Ferdinand VI., exiled him to his estates, but Charles III. 
on his accession took him into favour. He was again employed 
in diplomacy, and then appointed to command an army against 
Portugal in 1763. In 1764 he was made governor of Valencia. 
When in 1766 the king was driven from his capital in a riot, he 
summoned Aranda to Madrid and made him president of the 
council, and captain-general of New Castile. Until 1773 Aranda 
was the most important minister in Spain. He restored order 
and aided the king most materially in his work of administrative 
reform. But his great achievements, which gave him a high 
reputation throughout Europe with the philosophical and anti- 
clerical parties, were his expulsion of the Jesuits, whom the 
king considered responsible for the riot of 1766, and the active 
part he took in the suppression of the order. Aranda had come 
much under foreign influence by his education and his travels, 
and had acquired the reputation of being a confirmed sceptic. 
By Voltaire and the Encyclopaedists he was erected into a hero 
from whom great things were expected. His ability, his 



3i8 



ARAN ISLANDS— ARANY 



remarkable capacity for work, and his popularity made him in- 
dispensable to the king. But he was a trying servant, for his 
temper was captious and his tongue sarcastic, while his aristo- 
cratic arrogance led him to display an offensive contempt for 
the golillas (the stiff c'ollars), as he called the lawyers and public 
servants whom the king preferred to choose as ministers, and 
he permitted himself an amazing freedom of language with his 
sovereign. At last Charles III. sent him as ambassador to Paris 
in a disguised disgrace. Aranda held this position till 1787, but 
in Paris he was chiefly known for his oddities of manner and 
for perpetual wrangling with the French on small points of 
etiquette. He resigned his post for private reasons. In the 
reign of Charles IV., with whom he had been on familiar terms 
during the life of the old king, he was for a very short time prime 
minister in 1792. In reality he was merely used as a screen by 
the queen Maria Louisa and her favourite Godoy. His open 
sympathy with the French Revolution brought him into collision 
with the violent reaction produced in Spain by the excesses of 
the Jacobins, while his temper, which had become perfectly 
uncontrollable with age, made him insufferable to the king. 
After his removal from office he was imprisoned for a short time 
at Granada, and was threatened with a trial by the Inquisition. 
The proceedings did not go beyond the preliminary stage, and 
Aranda died at Epila on the 9th of January 1798. 

See Don Jacobo de la Pezuela in the Revista de Espana, vol. 
xxv. (1872); Don Antonio M a . Fabie, in the Diccionario general 
de politico, y administration of Don E. Suarez Inclan (Madrid, 1868), 
vol. i. ; M. Morel Fatio, Etudes sur I'Espagne (2nd series, Paris, 
1890). (D. H.) 

ARAN ISLANDS, or South Aran, three islands lying across 
Galway Bay, on the west coast of Ireland, in a south-easterly 
direction, forming a kind of natural breakwater. They belong 
to the county Galway, and their population in 1901 was 2863. 
They are called respectively — beginning with the northernmost 
■ — Inishmore (or Aranmore), the Great Island; Inishmaan, the 
Middle Island; and Inisheer, the Eastern Island. The first 
has an elevation of 354 ft., the second of 259, and the third of 
202. Their formation is carboniferous limestone. These islands 
are remarkable for a number of architectural remains of a very 
early date. In Inishmore there stand, on a cliff 220 ft. high, large 
remains of a circular cyclopean tower, called Dun-Aengus, 
ascribed to the Fir-bolg or Belgae; or, individually, to the first 
of three brothers, Aengus, Conchobar and Nil, who reached Aran 
Islands from Scotland in the 1st century a.d. There are seven 
other similar structures in the group. Inishmore also bears the 
name of Aran-na-naomh, Aran-of-the-Saints, from the number 
of religious recluses who took up their abode in it, and gave a 
celebrity to the holy wells, altars and shrines, to which many 
are still attracted. No less, indeed, than twenty buildings of 
ecclesiastical or monastic character have been enumerated in 
the three islands. On Inishmore are remains of the abbey of 
Killenda. Christianity was introduced in the 5th century, and 
Aran soon became one of the most famous island-resorts of 
religious teachers and ascetics. The extraordinary fame of the 
foundations here has been inferred from the inscription " VII. 
Romani " on a stone in the church Teampull Brecain on Inish- 
more, attributed to disciples from Rome. The total area of the 
islands is 11,579 acres. The Congested Districts Board made 
many efforts to improve the condition of the inhabitants, especi- 
ally by introducing better methods of fishing. A curing station 
is established at Killeany, the harbour of Inishmore. 

ARANJUEZ (perhaps the ancient Ara Jovis), a town of central 
Spain, in the province of Madrid, 30 m. S. of Madrid, on the left 
bank of the river Tagus, at the junction of the main southern 
railways to Madrid, and at the western terminus of the Aranjuez- 
Cuenca railway. Pop. (1900) 12,670. Aranjuez occupies part 
of a wide valley, about 1500 ft. above the sea. Its formal, 
straight streets, crossing one another regularly at right angles, 
and its uniform, two-storeyed houses were built in imitation of 
the Dutch style, under the direction of Jeronimo, marquis de 
Grimaldi (1716-1788), ambassador of Charles III. at the Hague. 
A rapid in the Tagus, artificially converted into a weir, renders 
irrigation easy, and has thus created an oasis in the midst of the 



barren plateau of New Castile. On every side the town is sur- 
rounded by royal parks and woods of sycamores, plane-trees 
and elms, often of extraordinary size. The prevalence of the 
dark English elms, first introduced into the country and planted 
here by order of Philip II. (1527-1598), gives to the Aranjuez 
district a character wholly distinct from that of other Spanish 
landscapes; and at an early period, despite the unhealthy 
climate, and especially the oppressive summer heat, which often 
approaches ioo° F., Aranjuez became a favourite residence of 
the Spanish court. In the 14th and 15th centuries, the master 
of the Order of Santiago had a country seat here, which passed, 
along with the mastership, into the possession of the crown 
of Spain in w;22. Its successive occupants, from the emperor 
Charles V. (1500-1558) down to Ferdinand VII. (1784-1833), 
modified it according to their respective tastes. The larger 
palace was built by Pedro Caro for Philip V. (1683-1746), in the 
French style of the period. It overlooks the Jardin de la Isla, a 
beautiful garden laid out for Philip II. on an island in the 
Tagus, which forms the scene of Schiller's famous drama Don 
Carlos. The Casa del Labrador, or Labourer's Cottage, as it 
is called, is a smaller palace built by Charles IV. in 1803, 
and full of elaborate ornamentation. The chief local industry 
is farming, and an annual fair is held in September for the sale 
of live stock. Great attention is given to the rearing of horses 
and mules, and the royal stud used to be remarkable for the 
beauty of its cream-coloured breed. The treaty of 1 7 7 2 between 
France and Spain was concluded at Aranjuez, which afterwards 
suffered severely from the French during the Peninsular War. 
Here, also, in 1808, the insurrection broke out which ended in 
the abdication of Charles IV. 

For a fuller description of Aranjuez see D.S. Vinas y Rey, Aranjuez 
(Madrid, 1890) ; F. Nard, Guia de Aranjuez, su historia y description 
(Madrid, 1851), (illustrated); Alvarez de Quindos, Description 
historica del real bosque y casa de Aranjuez (Madrid, 1804). 

ARANY, JANOS (1817-1882), the greatest poet of Hungary 
after Petofi, was born at Nagy-Szalonta on the 2nd of March 
1817, the son of Gyorgy Arany and Sara Megyeri; his people 
were small Calvinist yeomen of noble origin, whose property 
consisted of a rush-thatched cottage and a tiny plot of land. 
An only son, late born, seeing no companions of his own age, 
hearing' nothing but the voices of his parents and the hymns 
and prayers in the little Calvinist chapel, Arany grew up a grave 
and gentle, but by no means an ignorant child. His precocity 
was remarkable. At six years of age he went to school at 
Szalonta, where he read everything he could lay his hands 
upon in Hungarian and Latin. From 1832 to 1836 Arany was 
a preceptor at Kis-Ujszallas and Debreczen, still a voracious 
reader with a wider field before him, for he had by this time 
taught himself French and German. Tiring of the monotony 
of a scholastic life, he joined a troupe of travelling actors. The 
hardships he suffered were as nothing compared with the pangs 
of conscience which plagued him when he thought of the despair 
of his father, who had meant to make a pastor of this prodigal 
son, to whom both church and college now seemed for ever 
closed. At last he borrowed sixpence from the stage-manager 
and returned home, carrying all his property tied up in a hand- 
kerchief. Shortly after his home-coming his mother died and 
his father became stone-blind. Arany at once resolved that it 
was his duty never to leave his father again, and a conrectorship 
which he obtained at this time enabled them to live in modest 
comfort. In 1840 he obtained a notaryship also, and the same 
year married Juliana Ercsey, the penniless orphan daughter of 
an advocate. The next few happy years were devoted to his 
profession and a good deal of miscellaneous reading, especially 
of Shakespeare (he learnt English in order to compare the 
original with his well-thumbed German version) and Homer. 
Meanwhile the reactionaries of Vienna were goading the Magyar 
Liberals into revolt, and Arany found a safety-valve for his 
growing indignation by composing a satirical poem in hex- 
ameters, entitled " The Lost Constitution." The Kisfaludy 
Society, the great literary association of Hungary, about this 
time happened to advertise a prize for the best satire on current 



ARAPAHO— ARARAT 



3*9 



events. Arany sent in his work, and shortly afterwards was 
awarded the 25-gulden prize (7 th of February 1846) by the 
society, which then advertised another prize for the best Magyar 
epic poem. Arany won this also with his Toldi (the first part 
of the present trilogy), and immediately found himself famous. 
All eyes were instantly turned towards the poor country notary, 
and Petofi was the first to greet him as a brother. In February 
of the following year Arany was elected a member of the Kis- 
faludy Society. In the memorable year 1848 the people of 
Szalonta elected him their deputy to the Hungarian parliament. 
But neither now nor subsequently (1861, 1869) would he accept 
a parliamentary mandate. He wrote many articles, however, 
in the gazette Nepbardlja, an organ of the Magyar government, 
and served in the field as a national guard for eight or ten weeks. 
In 1849 he was in the civil service of the revolutionary govern- 
ment, and after the final catastrophe returned to his native 
place, living as best he could on his small savings till 1850, when 
Lajos Tisza, the father of Kalman Tisza, the future prime 
minister, invited him to his castle at Geszt to teach his son 
Domokos the art of poetry. In the following year Arany was 
elected professor of Hungarian literature and language at the 
Nagy-Koros gymnasium. He also attempted to write another 
epic poem, but the time was not favourable for such an under- 
taking. The miserable condition of his country, and his own 
very precarious situation, weighed heavily upon his sensitive 
soul, and he suffered severely both in mind and body. On the 
other hand reflection on past events made clear to him not only 
the sufferings but the defects and follies of the national heroes, 
and from henceforth, for the first time, we notice a bitterly 
humorous vein in his writings. Thus Bolond Istok, the first 
canto of which he completed in 1850, is full of sub-acrid merri- 
ment. During his nine years' residence at Nagy-Kbros, Arany 
first seriously turned his attention to the Magyar ballad, and 
not only composed some of the most beautiful ballads in the 
language, but wrote two priceless dissertations on the technique 
of the ballad in general: " Something concerning assonance " 
(1854), and " On Hungarian National Versification " (1856). 

When the Hungarian Academy opened its doors again after 
a ten years' cessation, Arany was elected a member (15th 
of December 1858). On the 15th of July i860 he was elected 
director of the revived Kisfaludy Society, and went to Pest. 
In November, the same year, he started Szipirodalmi Figyelo, 
a monthly review better known by its later name, Koszeru, which 
did much for Magyar criticism and literature. He also edited 
the principal publications of the society, including its notable 
translation of Shakespeare's Dramatic Works, to which he con- 
tributed the Midsummer Night's Dream (1864), Hamlet and 
King John (1867). The same year he won the Nadasdy prize 
of the Academy with his poem "Death of Buda." From 1865 
to 1879 he was the secretary of the Hungarian Academy. 

Domestic affliction, ill-health and his official duties made these 
years comparatively unproductive, but he issued an edition of 
his collected poems in 1867, and in 1880 won the Karacsonyi 
prize with his translation of the Comedies of Aristophanes (1880). 
In 1879 he completed his epic trilogy by publishing The Love 
of Toldi and Toldi' s Evening, which were received with universal 
enthusiasm. He died suddenly on the 24th of October 1882. 
The first edition of his collected works, in 8 volumes, was pub- 
lished in 1884-1885. 

Arany reformed Hungarian literature. Hitherto classical 
and romantic successively, like other European literatures, he 
first gave it a national direction. He compelled the poetry of 
art to draw nearer to life and nature, extended its boundaries and 
made it more generally intelligible and popular. He wrote not for 
one class or school but for the whole nation. He introduced the 
popular element into literature, but at the same time elevated 
and ennobled it. What Petofi had done for lyrical he did for 
epic poetry. Yet there were great differences between them. 
Petofi was more subjective, more individual; Arany was more 
objective and national. As a lyric poet Petofi naturally gave 
expression to present moods and feelings; as an epic poet Arany 
plunged into the past. He took his standpoint on tradition. 



His art was essentially rooted in the character of the whole 
nation and its glorious history. His genius was unusually rich 
and versatile; his artistic conscience always alert and sober. 
His taste was extraordinarily developed and absolutely sure. 
To say nothing of his other great qualities, he is certainly the 
most artistic of all the Magyar poets. 

See Posthumous Writings and Correspondence of A rany, edited by 
Laszlo Arany (Hung.), (Budapest, 1887-1889) ; article " Arany," in 
A Pallas Nagy Lexikona, Kot 2 (Budapest, 1893) ; Mor Gaal, Life of 
Jdnos Arany (Hung.), (Budapest, 1898); L. GyOngyosy, Jdnos 
Arany's Life and Works (Hung.), (Budapest, 1901). Translations 
from Arany : The Legend of the Wondrous Hunt (canto 6 of Buda's 
Death), by D. Butler (London, 1881); Toldi, poeme en 12 chants 
(Paris, 1895); Dichtungen (Leipzig, 1880); Kbnig Buda's Tod 
(Leipzig, 1879); Balladen (Vienna, 1886). (R. N. B.) 

ARAPAHO (possibly from the Pawnee for " trader "), a tribe 
of North American Indians of Algonquian stock. They formerly 
ranged over the central portion of the plains between the Platte 
and Arkansas. They were a brave, warlike, predatory tribe. 
With the Sioux and Cheyennes they waged unremitting warfare 
upon the Utes. The southern divisions of the tribe were placed 
(1867) on a reservation in the west of Indian Territory (now 
Oklahoma), while the northern are in western Wyoming. The 
southern section sold their reservations in 1892 and became 
American citizens. The Arapahos number in all some 2000. 

See Indians, North American; H. R. Schoolcraft, History of the 
Indian Tribes of the United States (1851-1857, 6 vols.) ; Handbook 
of American Indians, ed. F. W. Hodge (Washington, 1907). 

ARARAT (Armen. Massis, Turk. Egri Dagh, i.e. " Painful 
Mountain," Pers. Koh-i-Nuh, i.e. " Mountain of Noah,"), the 
name given to the culminating point of the Armenian plateau 
which rises to a height of 17,000 ft. above the sea. The massif 
of Ararat rises on the north and east out of the alluvial plain of 
the Aras, here from 2500 ft. to 3000 ft. above the sea, and on the 
south-west sinks into the plateau of Bayezid, about 4500 ft. It 
is thus isolated on all sides but the north-west, where a col about 
6900 ft. high connects it with a long ridge of volcanic mountains. 
Out of the massif rise two peaks, " their bases confluent at a 
height of 8800 ft., their summits about 7 m. apart." The higher, 
Great Ararat, is " a huge broad-shouldered mass, more of a dome 
than a cone "; the lower, Little Ararat, 12,840 ft. on which the 
territories of the tsar, the sultan, and the shah meet, is " an 
elegant cone or pyramid, rising with steep, smooth, regular sides 
into a comparatively sharp peak " (Bryce). On the north and 
west the slopes of Great Ararat are covered with glittering fields 
of unbroken neve. The only true glacier is on the north- 
east side, at the bottom of a large chasm which runs into the 
heart of the mountain. The great height of the snow-line,- 
14,000 ft., is due to the small rainfall and the upward rush of dry 
air from the plain of the Araxes. The middle zone of Ararat, 
5000-11,500 ft., is covered with good pasture, the upper and 
lower zones are for the most part sterile. Whether the tradition 
which makes Ararat the resting-place of Noah's Ark is of any 
historical value or not, there is at least poetical fitness in the 
hypothesis, inasmuch as this mountain is about equally distant 
from the Black Sea and the Caspian, from the Mediterranean and 
the Persian Gulf. Another tradition — accepted by the Kurds, 
Syrians and Nestorians — fixes on Mount Judi, in the south of 
Armenia, on the left bank of the Tigris, near Jezire, as the Ark's 
resting-place. There so-called genuine relics of the ark were 
exhibited, and a monastery and mosque of commemoration 
were built; but the monastery was destroyed by lightning 
in 776 a.d., and the tradition has declined in credit. Round 
Mount Ararat, however, gather many traditions connected with 
the Deluge. The garden of Eden is placed in the valley of the 
Araxes; Marand is the burial-place of Noah's wife; at Arghuri, 
a village near the great chasm, was the spot where Noah planted 
the first vineyard, and here were shown Noah's vine and the 
monastery of St James, until village and monastery were over- 
whelmed by a fall of rock, ice and snow, shaken down by an 
earthquake in 1840. According to the Babylonian account, the 
resting-place of the Ark was " on the Mountain of Nizir," which 
some writers have identified with Mount Rowanduz, and others 
with Mount Elburz, near Teheran. 



320 



ARARAT— ARASON 



From the Armenian plateau, Ararat rises in a graceful isolated 
cone far into the region of perennial snow. It was long believed 
by the Armenian monks that no one was permitted to reach the 
" secret top " of Ararat with its sacred remains, but on the 27th 
of September 1829, Dr. Johann Jacob Parrot (1 792-1 840) of 
Dorpat, a German in the employment of Russia, set foot on the 
" dome of eternal ice." Ararat has since been ascended by 
S. Aftonomov (1834 and 1843); M. Wagner and W. H. Abich 
(1845); J. Chodzko, N. W. Chanykov, P. H. Moritz and a party 
of Cossacks in the service of the Russian government (1850); 
Stuart (1856); Monteith (1856); D. W. Freshfield (1868); 
James Bryce (1876); A. V. Markov (1888); P. Pashtukhov and 
H. B. Lynch (1893). Mr Freshfield thus described the moun- 
tain: — "It stands perfectly isolated from all the other ranges, 
with the still more perfect cone of Little Ararat ( a typical 
volcano) at its side. Seen thus early in the season (May), with 
at least 9000 ft. of snow on its slopes, from a distance and height 
well calculated to permit the eye to take in its true proportions, 
we agreed that no single mountain we know presented such a 
magnificent and impressive appearance as the Armenian Giant." 
There are a number of glaciers in the upper portion, and the 
climate of the whole district is very severe. The greater part of the 
mountain is destitute of trees, but the lower Ararat is clothed with 
birches. The fauna and flora are both comparatively meagre. 

Both Great and Little Ararat consist entirely of volcanic rocks, 
chiefly andesites and pyroxene andesites, with some obsidian. No 
crater now exists at the summit of either, but well-formed para- 
sitic cones occur upon their flanks. There are no certain historic 
records of any eruption. The earthquake and fall of rock which 
destroyed the village of Arghuri in 1840 may have been caused 
by a volcanic explosion, but the evidence is unsatisfactory. 

The name of Ararat also applies to the Assyrian Urardhu, the 
country in which the Ark rested after the Deluge (Gen. viii. 4), 
and to which the murderers of Sennacherib fled (2 Kings xix. 37; 
Isaiah xxxvii. 38). The name Urardhu, originally that of a 
principality which included Mount Ararat and the plain of the 
Araxes, is given in Assyrian inscriptions from the 9th century b. c. 
downwards to a kingdom that at one time included the greater 
part of the later Armenia. The native name of the kingdom was 
Biainas, and its capital was Dhuspas, now Van. The first king, 
Sarduris I. (c. 833 B.C.), subdued the country of the Upper 
Euphrates and Tigris. His inscriptions are written in cuneiform, 
in Assyrian, whilst those of his successors are in cuneiform, 
in their own language, which, is neither Aryan nor Semitic. The 
kings of Biainas extended their kingdom eastward and westward, 
and defeated the Assyrians and Hittites. But Sarduris II. was 
overthrown by Tiglath Pileser III. (743 B.C.), and driven north of 
the Araxes, where he made Armavir, Armauria, his capital. 
Interesting specimens of Biainian art have been found on the site 
of the palace of Rusas II., near Van. Shortly after 645 B.C. the 
kingdom fell, possibly conquered by Cyaxares, and a way was 
thus opened for the immigration of the Aryan Armenians. The 
name Ararat is unknown to the Armenians of the present day. 
The limits of the Biblical Ararat are not known, but they must 
have included the lofty Armenian plateau which overlooks the 
plain of the Araxes on the north, and that of Mesopotamia on 
the south. It is only natural that the highest and most striking 
mountain in the district should have been regarded as that upon 
which the Ark rested, and that the old name of the country 
should have been transferred to it. 

See also H. B. Lynch, Armenia (1901); Sayce, "Cuneiform 
Inscriptions of Lake Van," in Journal of Royal Asiatic Society, vols. 
xiv., xx. and xxvi. ; Maspero, Histoire ancienne des peuples de 
V Orient classique, tome iii., Les Empires (Paris, 1899); J. Bryce, 
Transcaucasia and Ararat (4th ed., 1896); D. W. Freshfield, Travels 
in the Central Caucasus and Bashan (1869) ; Parrot, Reise zum 
Ararat (1834); Wagner, Reise nach dem Ararat (1848); Abich, Die 
Besteigung des Ararat (1849); articles "Ararat," in Hastings' 
Dictionary of the Bible, and the Encyclopaedia Biblica. (C. W. W.) 

ARARAT, a municipal town of Ripon county, Victoria, 
Australia, 130 m. by rail W.N.W. of Melbourne. Pop. (1901) 
3580. It lies at an elevation of 1028 ft. towards the western 
extremity of the Great Dividing range. It is the commercial 



centre of the north-western grain and wool-producing district 
and is also noted for its quartz and alluvial gold-mines. Excellent 
wine is made, and flour-milling, leather- working, brick and candle 
making and soap-boiling are the chief industries. The district 
also yields the best timber in great quantity. Granite, hluestone, 
limestone and slate abound in. the neighbourhood. 

ARAROBA POWDER, a drug occurring in the form of a 
yellowish-brown powder, varying considerably in tint, which 
derives an alternative name — Goa powder — from the Portuguese 
colony of Goa, where it appears to have been introduced about 
the year 1852. The tree which yields it is the Andira Araroba 
of the natural order Leguminosae. It is met with in great abund- 
ance in certain forests in the province of Bahia, preferring as a 
rule low and humid spots. The tree is from 80 to 100 ft. high 
and has large imparipinnate leaves, the leaflets of which are 
oblong, about i| in. long and f in. broad, and somewhat truncate 
at the apex. The flowers are papilionaceous, of a purple colour 
and arranged in panicles. The Goa powder or araroba is con- 
tained in the trunk, filling crevices in the heartwood. It is a 
morbid product in the tree, and yields to hot chloroform 50% 
of a substance known officially as chrysarobin, which has a 
definite therapeutic value and is contained in most modern 
pharmacopoeias. It occurs as a micro-crystalline, odourless, 
tasteless powder, very slightly soluble in either water or alcohol; 
it also occurs in rhubarb root. This complex mixture con- 
tains pure chrysarobin (C15H12O3), di-chrysarobin methylether 
(CsoHzjOrOCIL), di-chrysarobin (C30H24O7). Chrysarobin is a 
methyl trioxyanthracene and exists as a glucoside in the plant, 
but is gradually oxidized to chrysophanic acid (a dioxy-methyl 
anthraquinone) and glucose. This strikes a blood-red colour in 
alkaline solutions, and may therefore cause much alarm if 
administered to a patient whose urine is alkaline. The British 
pharmacopoeia has an ointment containing one part of chrysa- 
robin and 24 of benzoated lard. 

Both internally and externally the drug is a powerful irritant. 
The general practice amongst modern dermatologists is to use 
only chrysophanic acid, which may be applied externally and 
given by the mouth in doses of about one grain in cases of 
psoriasis and chronic eczema. The drug is a feeble parasiticide, 
and has been used locally in the treatment of ringworm. It 
stains the skin — and linen— a deep yellow or brown, a coloration 
which may be removed by caustic alkali in weak solution. 

ARAS, the anc. Araxes, and the Phasis of Xenophon (Turk, 
and Arab. Ras, Armen. Yerash, Georg. Rashki), a river which 
rises south of Erzerum, in the Bingeul-dagh, and flows east 
through the province of Erzerum, across the Pasin plateau, 
and then through Russian Armenia, passing between Mount 
Ararat and Erivan, and forming" the Russo-Persian frontier. 
Its course is about 600 m. long; its principal tributary is the 
Zanga, which flows by Erivan and drains Lake Gokcha or 
Sevanga. It is a rapid and muddy stream, dangerous to cross 
when swollen by the melting of the snows in Armenia, but 
fordable in its ordinary state. It formerly joined the Kura; 
but in 1897 it changed its lower course, and now runs direct 
to the Kizil-agach Bay of the Caspian. On an island in its bed 
stood Artaxata, the capital of Armenia from 180 B.C. to a.d. 50. 

ARASON, JON (1484-1551), Icelandic bishop and poet, 
became a priest about 1504, and having attracted the notice 
of Gottskalk, bishop of Holar, was sent by that prelate on two 
missions to Norway. In 1522 he succeeded Gottskalk in the 
see of Holar, but he was soon driven out by the other Icelandic 
bishop, Ogmund of Skalholt. His exile, however, was brief, and 
some years after his return he became involved in a dispute 
with his sovereign, Christian III., king of Denmark, because 
he refused to further the progress of Lutheranism in the island. 
Then in 1548, when a large number of the islanders had accepted 
the reformed doctrines, Arason and Ogmund joined their forces 
and attacked the Lutherans. Civil war broke out, and in 1551 
the bishop of Holar and two of his sons were captured and 
executed. Arason, who was the last Roman Catholic bishop in 
Iceland, is celebrated as a poet, and as the man who introduced 
printing into the island. 



ARATOR— ARAUCANIANS 



321 



ARATOR, of Liguria, a Christian poet, who lived during the 
6th century. He was an orphan, and owed his early education 
*o Lauren tius, archbishop of Milan, and Ennodius, bishop of Pa via, 
who took great interest in him. After completing his studies, he 
practised with success as an advocate, and was appointed to an 
influential post at the court of Athalaric, king of the Ostrogoths. 
About 540, he quitted the service of the state, took orders and 
was elected sub-deacon of the Roman Church. He gained the 
favour of Pope Vigilius, to whom he dedicated his De Actibus 
Apostolorum (written about 544), which was much admired 
in the middle ages. The poem, consisting of some 2500 hexa- 
meters, is of little merit, being full of mystical and allegorical 
interpretations and long-winded digressions; the versification, 
except for certain eccentricities in prosody, is generally correct. 

Text by Hiibner, 1850. See Leimbach, " Der Dichter Arator," in 
Theologische Studien und Kritik (1873); Manitius, Geschichte der 
christlich-lateinischen Poesie (1891). 

ARATUS, Greek statesman, was born at Sicyon in 271 B.C., 
and educated at Argos after the death of his father, at the hands 
of Abantidas, tyrant of Sicyon. When twenty years old Aratus 
delivered Sicyon from its tyrant by a bold coup de main. By 
enrolling it in the Achaean League {q.v.) he secured it against 
Macedonia, and with funds received from Ptolemy Philadelphus 
he pacified the returned exiles. Ever anxious to extend the 
league, in which after 245 he was general almost every second 
year, Aratus took Corinth by surprise (243), and with mingled 
threats and persuasion won over other cities, notably Megalopolis 
(233) and Argos (229), whose tyrants abdicated voluntarily. 
He fought successfully against the Aetolians (241), and in 228 
induced the Macedonian commander to evacuate Attica. But 
when Cleomenes III. (q.v.) opened hostilities, Aratus sustained 
several reverses, and was badly defeated near Dyme (226 or 225). 
Rather than admit Cleomenes as chief of the league, where he 
might have upset the existing timocracy, Aratus opposed all 
attempts at mediation. As plenipotentiary in 224 he called 
in Antigonus Doson of Macedonia, and helped to recover Corinth 
and Argos and to crush Cleomenes at Sellasia, but at the same 
time sacrificed the independence of the league. In 220-219 tne 
Aetolians defeated him in Arcadia and harried the Peloponnese 
unchecked. When Philip V. of Macedon came to expel these 
marauders, Aratus became the king's adviser, and averted a 
treacherous attack on Messene (215); before long, however, he 
lost favour and in 213 was poisoned. The Sicyonians accorded 
him hero-worship as a " son of Asclepius." To Aratus is due the 
credit of having made the Achaean League an effective instru- 
ment against tyrants and foreign enemies. But his military 
incapacity and his blind hatred of democratic reform went far 
to undo his work. 

Polybius (ii.-viii.) follows the Memoirs which Aratus wrote to 
justify his statesmanship, — Plutarch (Aratus and Cleomenes) used 
this same source and the hostile account of Phylarchus; Paus. ii. 
10; see Neumeyer, Aratos von Sikyon (Leipzig, 1886). 

(M. O. B. C.) 

ARATUS, of Soli in Cilicia, Greek didactic poet, a contem- 
porary of Callimachus and Theocritus, was born about 315 B.C. 
He was invited (about 276) to the court of Antigonus Gonatas 
of Macedonia, where he wrote his most famous poem, ^cuvo/ieva 
(Appearances, or Phenomena). He then spent some time with 
Antiochus I. of Syria; but subsequently returned to Macedonia, 
where he died about 245. Aratus's only extant works are two 
short poems, or two fragments of his one poem, written in 
hexameters; an imitation of a prose work on astronomy by 
Eudoxus of Cnidus, and Aioar} fj.ua (on weather signs), chiefly 
from Theophrastus. The work has all the characteristics of the 
Alexandrian school of poetry. Although Aratus was ignorant 
of astronomy, his poem attracted the favourable notice of 
distinguished specialists, such as Hipparchus, who wrote com- 
mentaries upon it. Amongst the Romans it enjoyed a high 
reputation (Ovid, Amores, i. 15, 16). Cicero, Caesar Germanicus 
and Avienus translated it; the two last versions and fragments of 
Cicero's are still extant. Quintilian (Instil, x. 1, 55) is less 
enthusiastic. Virgil has imitated the Prognostica to some extent 
11. 11 



in the Georgics. One verse from the opening invocation to Zeus 
has become famous from being quoted by St Paul (Acts xvii. 28). 
Several accounts of his life are extant, by anonymous Greek 
writers. 

Editio princeps, 1499; Buhle, 1793; Maass, 1893; Aratea (1892), 
Commentariorum in Aratum Reliquiae (1898), by the same. English 
translations: Lamb, 1848; Poste, 1880; R. Brown, 1885; Prince, 
1895. On recently discovered fragments, see H. I. Bell, in Classical 
Quarterly, April 1907; also Berliner Klassikertexte, Heft v. 1, 
pp. 47-54. 

ARAUCANIA, the name of a large territory of Chile, South 
America, S. of the Bio-bio river, belonging to the Araucanian 
Indians (see below) at the time of their independence of Spanish 
and Chilean authority. The loss of their political independence 
has been followed by that of the greater part of their territory, 
which has been divided up into the Chilean provinces of Arauco,- 
Bio-bio, Malleco and Cautin, and the Indians, much reduced in 
number, now live in the wooded recesses of the three provinces 
last named. 

ARAUCANIANS (or Atjca), a tribal group of South American 
Indians in southern Chile (see above). Physically a fine race, 
their hardiness and bravery enabled them successfully to 
resist the Incas in the 15 th century. Their government was 
by four toquis or princes, independent of one another, but 
confederates against foreign enemies. Each tetrarchy was 
divided into five provinces, ruled by five chiefs called apo-ulmen; 
and each province into nine districts, governed by as many ulmcn, 
who were subject to the apo-ulmen, as the latter were to the 
toquis. These various chiefs (who all bore the title of ulmen) 
composed the aristocracy of the country. They held their 
dignities by hereditary descent in the male line, and in the order 
of primogeniture. The supreme power of each tetrarchy resided 
in a council of the ulmen, who assembled annually in a large plain. 
The resolutions of this council were subject to popular assent. 
The chiefs, indeed, were little more than leaders in war; for the 
right of private revenge limited their authority in judicial matters; 
and they received no taxes. Their laws were merely traditional 
customs. War was declared by the council, messengers bearing 
arrows dipped in blood being sent to all parts of the country 
to summon the men to arms. From the time of the first Spanish 
invasion (1535) the Araucanians made a vigorous resistance, and 
after worsting the best soldiers and the best generals of Spain for 
two centuries obtained an acknowledgment of their independence. 
Their success was due as much to their readiness in adopting 
their enemy's methods of warfare as to their bravery. Realizing 
the inefficiency of their old missiles when opposed to musket 
balls, they laid aside their bows, and armed themselves with 
spears, swords or other weapons fitted for close combat. Their 
practice was to advance rapidly within such a distance of the 
Spaniards as would not leave the latter time to reload after 
firing. Here they received without shrinking a. volley, which was 
certain to destroy a number of them, and then rushing forward 
in close order, fought their enemies hand to hand. 

The Araucanians believe in a supreme being, and in many 
subordinate spirits, good and bad. They believe also in omens 
and divination, but they have neither temples nor idols, nor 
religious rites. Very few have become Roman Catholics. They 
believe in a future state, and have a confused tradition respecting 
a deluge, from which some persons were saved on a high mountain. 
They divide the year into twelve months of thirty days, and add 
five days by intercalation. They esteem poetry and eloquence, 
but can scarcely be induced to learn reading or writing. 

The tribal divisions have little or no organization. Some 
50,000 in number, they spend a nomad existence wandering from 
pasture to pasture, living in low skin tents, their herds providing 
their food. They still preserve their warlike nature, though in 
1870 they formally recognized Chilean rule. In 1861 Antoine de 
Tounens (1820-1878), a French adventurer in Chile, proclaimed 
himself king of Araucania under the title of Orelie Antoine I., 
and tried to obtain subscriptions from France to support his 
enterprise. But his pretensions were ludicrous; he was quickly 
captured by the Chileans and sent back to France (1862) as a 
madman; and though he made one more abortive effort in 1874 



322 



ARAUCARIA— ARBE 



to recover his " kingdom," and occupied his pen in magnifying 
his achievements, nobody took him seriously except a few of the 
deluded Indians. 

See Domeyko, Araucania y sus habitantes (Santiago, 1846); de 
Ginoux, " Le Chili et les Araucans," in Bull, de la soc. de geogr. 
(1852); E. R. Smith, Araucanians (New York, 1855); J. T. Medina, 
Los aborjenes de Chile (Santiago, 1882) ; A. Polakowsky, Die heutigen 
Araukanen, Globus No. 74 (Brunswick, 1898). 

ARAUCARIA, a genus of coniferous trees included in the tribe 
Araucarineae. They are magnificent evergreen trees, with 
apparently whorled branches, and stiff, flattened, pointed leaves, 
found in Brazil and Chile, Polynesia and Australia. The name 
of the genus is derived from Arauco, the name of the district in 
southern Chile where the trees were first discovered. Araucaria 
imbricata, the Chile pine, or " monkey puzzle," was introduced 
into Britain in 1796. It is largely cultivated, and usually stands 
the winter of Britain ; but in some years, when the temperature 
fell very low, the trees have suffered much. Care should be 
taken in planting to select a spot somewhat elevated and well 
drained. The tree grows to the height of 1 50 f t. in the Cordilleras 
of Chile. The cones are from 8 to 8^ in. broad, and 7 to 75 in. long. 
The wood of the tree is hard and durable. This is the only 
species which can be cultivated in the open air in Britain. 
Araucaria brasiliana, the Brazil pine, is a native of the mountains 
of southern Brazil, and was introduced into Britain in 1819. 
It is not so hardy as A. imbricata, and requires protection 
during winter. It is grown in conservatories for half-hardy 
plants. Araucaria excelsa, the Norfolk Island pine, a native of 
Norfolk Island and New Caledonia, was discovered during 
Captain Cook's second voyage, and introduced into Britain by 
Sir Joseph Banks in 1793. It cannot be grown in the open air 
in Britain, as it requires protection from frost, and is more 
tender than the Brazilian pine. It is a majestic tree, sometimes 
attaining a height of more than 220 ft. The scales of its cones 
are winged, and have a hook at the apex. Araucaria Cunning- 
hami, the Moreton Bay pine, is a tall tree abundant on the shores 
of Moreton Bay, Australia, and found through the littoral region 
of Queensland to Cape York Peninsula, also in New Guinea. 
It requires protection in England during the winter. Araucaria 
Bidwilli, the Bunya-Bunya pine, found on the mountains of 
southern Queensland, between the rivers Brisbane and Burnett, 
at 27 S. lat., is a noble tree, attaining a height of 100 to 150 ft., 
with a straight trunk and white wood. It bears cones as large 
as a man's head. Its seeds are very large, and are used as food by 
the natives. Araucaria Rulei, which is a tree of New Caledonia, 
attains a height of 50 or 60 ft. Araucaria Cookii, also a native 
of New Caledonia, attains a height of 150 ft. It is found also in 
the Isle of Pines, and in the New Hebrides. The tree has a 
remarkable appearance, due to shedding its primary branches 
for about five-sixths of its height and replacing them by a small 
bushy growth, the whole resembling a tall column crowned with 
foliage, suggesting to its discoverer, Captain Cook, a tall column 
of basalt. 

ARAUCO, a coast province of southern Chile, bounded N., E. 
and S. by the provinces of Concepci6n, Bio-bio, Malleco and 
Cautin. Area, 2458 sq. m.; pop. (est. 1902) 70,635. The 
province originally covered the once independent Indian territory 
of Araucania (q.v.), but this was afterwards divided into four 
provinces. It is devoted largely to agricultural pursuits. The 
capital Lebu (pop. in 1902, 3178) is situated on the coast about 
55 m. south of Conception, with which it is connected by rail. 

ARAVALLI HILLS, a range of mountains in India, running 
for 300 m. in a north-easterly direction, through the Rajputana 
states and the British district of Ajmere-Merwara, situated 
between 24 and 27° 10' N. lat., and between 72 and 75° E. long. 
They consist of a series of ridges and peaks, with a breadth 
varying from 6 to 60 m. and an elevation of 1000 to 3000 ft., 
the highest point being Mount Abu, rising to 5653 ft., near the 
south-western extremity of the range. Geologically they belong 
to the primitive formation — granite, compact dark blue slate, 
gneiss and syenite. The dazzling white effect of their peaks is 
produced, not by snow, as among the Himalayas, but by enormous 



masses of vitreous rose-coloured quartz. On the north their 
drainage forms the Luni and Sakhi rivers, which fall into the 
Gulf of Cutch. To the south, their drainage supplies two distinct 
river systems, one of which debouches in comparatively small 
streams on the Gulf of Cambay, while the other unites to form 
the Chambal river, a great southern tributary of the Jumna, 
flowing thence via the Ganges, into the Bay of Bengal on the 
other side of India. The Aravalli hills are for the most part bare 
of cultivation, and even of jungle. Many of them are mere heaps 
of sand and stone; others consist of huge masses of quartz. The 
valleys between the ridges are generally sandy deserts, with an 
occasional oasis of cultivation. At long intervals, however, a 
fertile tract marks some great natural line of drainage, and 
among such valleys Ajmere city, with its lake, stands conspicuous. 
The hills are inhabited by a very sparse population of Mhairs, 
an aboriginal race. For long these people formed a difficult 
problem to the British government. Previously to the British 
occupation of India they had been accustomed to live, almost 
destitute of clothing, by the produce of their herds, by the chase 
and by plunder. But Ajmere having been ceded to the East 
India Company in 1818, the Mhair country was soon afterwards 
brought under British influence, and the predatory instincts of 
the people were at the same time controlled and utilized by 
forming them into a Merwara battalion. As the peaceful results 
of British rule developed, and the old feuds between the Mhairs 
and their Rajput neighbours died out, the Mhair battalion was 
transformed into a police force. The Aravalli mountaineers 
strongly objected to this change, and pleaded a long period of 
loyal usefulness to the state. They were accordingly again 
erected into a military battalion and brought upon the roll of the 
British army. Under Lord Kitchener's scheme of 1903 they 
were entitled the 50th Merwara Infantry. The Aravalli hills send 
off rocky ridges in a north-easterly direction through the states 
of Alwar and Jaipur, which from time to time reappear in the 
form of isolated hills and broken rocky elevations to near Delhi. 

ARAWAK (" meal-eaters," in reference to cassava, their 
staple food), a tribe of South American Indians of Dutch 
and British Guiana. The Arawaks have given their name to a 
linguistic stock of South America, the Arawakan, which includes 
many once powerful tribes. The Arawakans were once numerous, 
their tribes stretching from southern Brazil and Bolivia to Central 
America, occupying the whole of the West Indies and having 
settlements on the Florida seaboard. They were found by the 
Spaniards in Haiti and possibly in the Bahamas, but the Caribs 
had expelled them from most of the islands. The Arawaks 
proper were physically an undersized, weakly people, peaceable 
agriculturists, by far the most civilized of all Guiana peoples, 
being skilful weavers and workers in stone and gold. The chief 
tribes which may be called Arawakan are the Anti, Arawak, 
Barre, Goajiro, Guana, Manaos, Maneteneri, Maipuri, Maranho, 
Moxo, Passe, Piro and Taruma. 

See Everard F. im Thurn, Among the Indians of Guiana (London, 
1883). 

ARBACES, according to Ctesias (Diodor. ii. 24 ff. 32),' one 
of the generals of Sardanapalus, king of Assyria and founder of 
the Median empire about 830 B.C. But Ctesias's whole history 
of the Assyrian and Median empires is absolutely fabulous; 
his Arbaces and his successors are not historical personages. 
From the inscriptions of Sargon of Assyria we know one " Arbaku 
Dynast of Arnashia " as one of forty-five chiefs of Median districts 
who paid tribute to Sargon in 713 B.C. See Media. (Ed. M.) 

ARBE (Serbo-Croatian Rab), an island in the Adriatic 
Sea, forming the northernmost point of Dalmatia, Austria. 
Pop. (1900) 4441. Arbe is 13 m. long; its greatest breadth 
is 5 m. The capital, which bears the same name, is a walled 
town, remarkable, even among the Dalmatian cities, for its 
beauty. It occupies a steep ridge jutting out from the west 
coast. At the seaward end of this promontory is the 13th- 
century cathedral; behind which the belfries of four churches, 
at least as ancient, rise in- a row along the crest of the ridge; 
while behind these, again, are the castle and a background of 
desolate hills. Many of the houses are roofless and untenanted; 



ARBELA— ARBITRAGE 



323 



for, after five centuries of prosperity under Venetian or Hungarian 
rule, an outbreak of plague in 1456 swept away the majority 
of the townsfolk, and ruined the survivors. Some of the old 
palaces are, nevertheless, of considerable interest; one especially 
as the birthplace of the celebrated philosopher, Marc Antonio 
de Dominis. Fishing and agriculture constitute the chief re- 
sources of the islanders, whose ancient silk industry is still 
maintained. In 1018 the yearly tribute due to Venice was 
fixed at ten pounds of silk or five pounds of gold. 

ARBELA (Arba'il, i.e. "Four-god-city"), an ancient town 
in Adiabene, the capital in Assyrian and pre-Assyrian times 
of the country between the greater and lesser Zab, and seat 
of an important cult of Ishtar. The battle in which Alexander 
>verthrew Darius in 331 B.C., though named in the old books 
after Arbela, was probably fought at Gaugamela, some 60 m. 
away (Yorck von Wartenburg, Kurze Ubersicht der Feldziige 
A. des Gr.). The modern town of Erbil or Arbil, in the vilayet 
of Mosul, is about 40 m. from Mosul on the road to Bagdad. 
The greater part of the town, which seems at one time to have 
been very large, is situated on an artificial mound about 150 ft. 
high . It became the seat of the Ayyubite sultan Saladin in 1 1 84 ; 
was bequeathed in 1233 to the caliphs of Bagdad; was plundered 
by the Mongols in 1236 and in 1393 by Timur, and was taken 
in 1732 by the Persians under Nadir Shah. In the 14th century 
the Christians were almost exterminated. The population, which 
varies from 2000 to 6000, is chiefly composed of Kurds. 

The ruins of another Arbela (Irbid, Beth-Arbel) in Palestine, 
situated near the west shore of the Sea of Galilee, a little north 
of its centre, are not in themselves of high interest, but the site 
is noteworthy through its connexion with the neighbouring 
caves in the lofty flank of the Wadi Hamam, above which Arbela 
stood. These caves (called by the Arabs Kulat ibn Ma'an) 
are apparently natural, but were enlarged and fortified. They 
were used by the inhabitants of Arbela as a place of refuge 
from the army of Bacchides, general of Demetrius III., king of 
Syria, and were the resort of bandits in the reign of Herod the 
Great. He laid siege to them, and his men could only gain access 
to the caves by being let down from above. The caves were 
also fortified against the Romans by Josephus. 

ARBER, EDWARD (1836- ), English man of letters, 
was born in London on the 4th of December 1836. From 1854 
to 1878 he was a clerk in the admiralty; from 1878 to 1881 
lecturer on English, under Prof. H. Morley, at University College; 
and from 1881 to 1894 professor of English at Mason College, 
Birmingham. From 1894 he lived in London as emeritus pro- 
fessor, being also a fellow of King's College. In 1905 he received 
the honorary degree of D. Litt. at Oxford. He married in 1869, 
and had two sons, one of them, E. A. N. Arber, becoming 
demonstrator in palaeobotany at Cambridge. As a scholarly 
editor Professor Arber's services to English literature are memor- 
able. His name is associated particularly with the series of 
" English Reprints " (1868-1880), by which an accurate text of 
the works of many English authors, formerly only accessible in 
rare or expensive editions, was placed within reach of the 
general public. Among the thirty volumes of the series were 
Gosson's School of Abuse, Ascham's Toxophilus, Tottel's Mis- 
cellany, Naunton's Fragmenta Regalia, &c. It was followed by 
the " English Scholar's Library " (16 vols.) which included the 
Works (1884) of Captain John Smith, governor of Virginia, and 
the Poems (1882) of Richard Barnfield. In his English Gamer 
(8 vols. 187.7-1896) he made an admirable collection of rare old 
tracts and poems; in 1 899-1 901 he issued British Anthologies 
(10 vols.), and in 1907 began a series called A Christian Library. 
He also accomplished single-handed the editing of two vast, and 
invaluable, English bibliographies: A Transcript of the Registers 
of the Stationers' Company, 1553-1640 (1875-1894), and The 
Term Catalogues. 1668-ijog; with a number for Easter Term 
iyn (1904-1906), edited from the quarterly lists of the book- 
sellers. 

ARBITRAGE, the term applied to the system of equalizing 
prices in different commercial centres by buying in the cheaper 
market and selling in the dearer. These transactions, or their 



converse, are mainly confined to stocks and shares, foreign 
exchanges and bullion; and are for the most part carried on 
between London and other European capitals and largely with 
New York. When prices in London are affected by financial or 
political causes, all other markets are sooner or later influenced, 
as London is the banking and financial centre for the commerce 
of the world. It may, however, also occur that some local event 
of importance initiates a rise or fall in a particular market which 
must ultimately affect other countries. For instance, a crisis 
in France would immediately depress all French securities, and 
by exciting the fears of capitalists would stimulate transfers 
of funds and raise all the exchanges against France. 

In ordinary times those engaged in arbitrage operate with a 
very small margin of profit. The great improvement in postal, 
telegraphic and telephonic communication enables operators 
to close transactions with amazing rapidity, while competition 
reduces the margin of profit to a minimum. Operations in 
American stocks and shares are carried on between London and 
New York on a vast scale, while transactions in African mining 
shares are undertaken to a considerable extent between London 
and Paris. The frequent fluctuations in the prices of the latter 
securities offer a large and fruitful field to bold operators possessed 
of large resources, while those who have small means often 
succumb in a commercial crisis. As regards foreign exchange 
and bullion, arbitrage operators stand on a fairly safe foundation, 
the fluctuations being slight and involving little or no risk, 
although they yield a very small margin of profit. Arbitrage 
queries are for these reasons resorted to frequently by one
country in supplying the requirements of another. The slightest 
advantage in any market is put to profit, and as the margin in 
ordinary exchange transactions is minute, the ability to operate 
in this cross fashion renders business possible, which would 
otherwise be impracticable. To give concrete instances of the 
working of arbitrage the following may be cited: — 

On the 2 1 st of May 1906 the exchange on London in Vienna 
was telegraphed from that city 24 kronen 4! cents; London, 
requiring to purchase remittances, found that Antwerp had 
some Vienna to sell, and arranged to buy there. The transac- 
tions worked out as follows: — The direct exchange in Antwerp 
on London being 25-255, and Antwerp's selling price of Vienna 
being 105 francs for 100 kronen, on dividing 25-255 by 105 an 
exchange of 24-05! was obtained or \ cent cheaper than the 
direct exchange between Vienna and London. 

Again a portion of the proceeds of the Russian loan of 1906 
had to be remitted to Berlin from Paris. Having exhausted 
local balances in Berlin, Paris on one side, and Berlin on the 
other, sought to prevent gold shipments from Berlin, and thus 
cause stringency in that money market. On the 2istof May 1906 
Berlin was therefore seeking to sell Paris in London at 81-35 
marks for 100 francs, and draw on London for the proceeds at 
20-50. This transaction produced a parity between the exchanges 
of 25-20, which left a small margin in London. 

Two instances of arbitrage of stocks are the following: — 
On the 24th of March 1906, Japanese exchequer bonds, series 
2 and 3, were bought in Tokio at 93! and were paid for by 
telegraphic transfer at 24I pence per yen, and were sold in 
London the same day at 94 for payment on arrival of bonds. 
It took five weeks for the transmission of the bonds to London, 
where they were dealt in on the fixed basis of exchange, namely 
24J pence per yen. The London price works out thus: 
93-25 X 24-375 . 
24-50 

to which must be added the loss of interest, as the firm in London 
paid cash on the 24th of March for the telegraphic transfer, 
and did not recover payment until the arrival of the bonds from 
Tokio five weeks later. The following is a computation of the 
transaction: — 

London price 9 2 '77 

Five weeks at 5 % . -. . . . . -45 
English stamp \ % on nominal amount . . . -50 
Insurance 1% -12 



- = 92-77. 



93-84 



324 



ARBITRATION 



This sum represents the net cost to the arbitrage house in London, 
and the money paid on the 28th of April left a profit of about 
T 8 ? %. The bonds being " to bearer " insurance was necessary 
for the safety in this, as in all similar transactions. 

In the next example, however, this expense was unnecessary, 
the bonds being " inscribed." On the 21st of May 1906 American 
Steel common shares were sold for cash in New York at 4It\ 
dollars per share, and were bought in London at 42^ for the 
account day, May 31st. These figures are explained by the 
fact that transactions in the United States stocks and shares are 
on the fixed basis of five dollars per pound sterling, while as 
regards payments in New York the exchange varies daily. Rail- 
way shares are generally 100 dollars each. In the London market, 
however, five shares of 100 dollars would be £100 nominal. 
These shares, therefore, cost in London, at the purchase price 
of 42 ^j, £42: 4: 5. The money realized in New York for five 
shares at 41-r^ was 205-93 dollars. A cheque on London was 
bought at 4 dollars 85J cents, realizing £42 : 8 : 9. It should be 
noted that the shares in these cases are generally lent by the 
New York correspondent, thus saving loss of interest. The 
resulting profit in this particular instance was 4s. 4d. for each 
five shares, divided between the London and New York arbitrage 
firms. Arbitrage queries with distant countries such as India
are large and mainly profitable. Arbitrage with India consists 
cmefly in buying bills of exchange in London, such as India 
Council rupee bills amounting to about 16 millions sterling 
annually, and commercial bills drawn against goods exported 
to India. The counter-operation consists in purchasing in India, 
for short or long delivery, sterling bills drawn against exports 
to Great Britain of Indian produce, such as cotton, tea, indigo, 
jute and wheat. These queries greatly facilitate trade and the
moving of produce from the interior of India to the seaports. 
Without this assistance Great Britain's enormous trade could 
not be carried on, and she would have to revert to the primitive 
system of barter. The same advantages are afforded to her vast 
trade with China and Japan, with the material difference that 
the supply of government council bills is confined to the Indian 
trade. The balance of trade with all countries is generally 
settled by specie shipments; hence, with the Far East, silver 
and gold play an important part in arbitrage. 

It will thus be seen that arbitrage fills a useful place in com- 
merce; the profits are small because the competition is great; 
nevertheless huge transactions employing thousands of clerks 
result from this system. 

The literature of the subject is extremely meagre. Lord Goschen's 
Theory of Foreign Exchanges(London, 1866) is general and theoretical, 
but throws great light upon particular aspects of the philosophy of 
arbitrage, without touching specially on the details of the subject 
itself. The principal other works are: Kelly's Cambist (181 1, 
1835); Otto Swoboda, Die kaufmdnnische Arbitrage (Berlin, 1873), 
and Borse und Actien (Cologne, 1869); Coquelinet Guillaumin, 
Dictionnaire de Veconomie politique (Paris, 1 851-1853) ; Ottomar 
Haupt, London Arbitrageur (London, 1870) ; Charles le Touze, 
Traite iheorique et pratique du change (Paris, 1868); Tate, Modern 
Cambist (London, 1868); Simon Spitzer, ' Ueber Miinz- und Arbi- 
tragenrechnung (Vienna, 1872); J. W. Gilbart, Principles and Prac- 
tice of Banking (London, 1871); G. Clare, The A B C of Foreign 
Exchanges (2nd ed., 1895); Money Market Primer and Key to the 
Exchanges (2nd ed., 1900) ; J. Pallain, Les Changes Hrangers et les 
prix (Paris, 1905). (Sw.) 

ARBITRATION (Lat. arbitrari, to examine or judge), a term 
derived from the nomenclature of Roman law, and applied to an 
arrangement for taking, and abiding by, the judgment of a 
selected person in some disputed matter, instead of carrying 
it to the established courts of justice. In disputes between 
states, arbitration has long played an important part (see 
Arbitration, International). The present article is restricted 
to arbitration under municipal law; but a separate article 
is also devoted to the use of arbitration in labour disputes (see 
Arbitration and Conciliation). 

Roman Law. — Arrangements for avoiding the delay and 
expense of litigation, and referring a dispute to friends or neutral 
persons, are a natural practice, of which traces may be found 
in any state of society; but it is from Roman Law that we 
derive arbitration as a system which has found its way into the 



practice of European nations in general, and has even evaded 
the dislike of the English common lawyers to the civil law. 
The praetor, who had the arrangement of all trials or private 
suits and the formal appointment of judges for them, referred 
the great majority of such cases for decision to a judge who 
was styled usually judex but sometimes arbiter. The phrase 
judex arbiterve frequently occurs. The judex and the arbiter 
had the same functions, and apparently the only express basis 
for the distinction between the two words is that there might 
be several arbitri but never more than one judex in a cause. 
The term arbiter seems, however, to have been sometimes used 
when the referee had a certain degree of latitude, and was en- 
titled to give weight to equitable considerations (Roby, Inst. 
Rom. Law u i. 318; Hunter, Roman Law (1897), p. 48; and 
see Cicero pro Rose. Com. 4, ss. 10-13; Gaius, Inst. iv. s. 163). 
Apart from this system of compulsory reference by the praetor, 
Roman law recognized a voluntary reference (compromissum) 
to an arbiter or arbitrator by the parties themselves. The 
arbitrator ex compromisso sumptus had no coercive jurisdiction, 
and in order to make his award effective, the agreement of 
reference was confirmed by a stipulation and usually provided 
a penalty {poena, pecunia compromisso) in case of disobedience. 
The sum agreed on by way of penalty might be either specific 
or unliquidated, e.g. " whatever the matter may be worth " 
(Dig. iv., tit. 8, s. 28). The arbitrator ex compromisso sumptus, 
like the judicial arbiter, was expected to take account of equitable 
considerations in coming to a decision. If three arbitrators 
were appointed, a majority could decide; in case of two being 
appointed and not agreeing, the praetor would compel them to 
choose a third (Roby, ubi sup., i. 320, 321 ; Dig. iv., tit. 8, s. 17). 
As in English law, it was necessary that the award should cover 
all the points submitted (Dig. iv., tit. 8, s. 21). 

Law of England. — The law of England as to arbitration is now 
practically summed up in the Arbitration Act of 1889. This 
statute is an express code as to proceedings in all arbitration, 
but " criminal proceedings by the crown " cannot be referred 
under it (ss. 13, 14). The statute subdivides its subject-matter 
into two headings. I. References by consent out of court; 
II. References under order of court. 

(1) Here the first matter to be dealt with is the submission. A 
submission is defined as a written agreement (it need not be signed 
by both parties) to submit present or future differences References 
to arbitration, whether a particular arbitrator is by consent 
named in it or not. The capacity of a person to agree out °f 
to arbitration, or to act as arbitrator, depends on the 
general law of contract. A submission by an infant is not void, 
but is voidable at his option (see Infant). A counsel has a 
general authority to deal with the conduct of an action, which 
includes authority to refer it to arbitration, but he has no 
authority to refer an action against the wishes of his client, or 
on terms different from those which his client has sanctioned; 
and if he does so, the reference may be set aside, although the 
limit put by the client on his counsel's authority is not made 
known to the other side when the reference is agreed upon 
(Neale v. Gordon Lennox, 1902, A.C. 465). The committee of 
a lunatic, with the sanction of the judge in lunacy, may refer 
disputes to arbitration. As an arbitrator is chosen by the parties 
themselves the question of his eligibility is of comparatively 
minor importance; and where an arbitrator has been chosen 
by both parties, the courts are reluctant to set the appointment 
aside. This question has arisen chiefly in contracts, for works, 
which frequently contain a provision that the engineer shall be 
the arbitrator, in any dispute between the contractor and his 
own employer. The practical result is to make the engineer 
judge in his own cause. But the courts will not in such cases 
prevent the engineer from acting, where the contractor was 
aware of the facts when he signed the contract, and there is no 
reason to believe that the engineer will be unfair (Ives and 
Barker v. Willans, 1894, 2 Ch. 478). Even the fact that he has 
expressed an opinion on matters in dispute will not of itself 
disqualify him (Hailiday v. Hamilton's Trustees, 1903, 5 Fraser, 
800). So, too, where a barrister was appointed arbitrator, the 



ARBITRATION 



325 



court refused to stop the arbitration on the mere ground that 
he was the client of a firm of solicitors, the conduct of one of 
whom was in question {Bright v. River Plate Construction Co., 
1900, 2 Ch. 835). 

Under the law prior to the act of 1889 (a) an agreement to 
refer disputes generally, without naming the arbitrators, was 
always irrevocable, and an action lay for the breach of it, 
although the court could not compel either of the parties to 
proceed under it; (b) an agreement to refer to a particular arbi- 
trator was revocable, and if one of the parties revoked that 
particular arbitrator's authority he could not be compelled 
to submit to it; (c) when, however, the parties had got their 
tribunal fixed, and were proceeding to carry out the agreement 
to refer, the act 9 and 10 Will. III. c. 15 provided that the 
submission might be made a rule of court, a provision which 
gave the court power to assist the parties in the trial of the case, 
and to enforce the award of the arbitrators; (d) the statute 
3 and 4 Will. IV. c. 42 (s. 39) put an end to the power to revoke 
the authority of a particular arbitrator after the reference to him 
had been made a rule of court; and — a liability which existed 
also under the act of 9 and 10 Will. III. c. 15 — any person 
revoking the appointment of an arbitrator after the submission 
had been made a rule of court might be attached. The Arbi- 
tration Act 1889 provides that a submission, unless a contrary 
intention is expressed in it, is irrevocable except by leave of the 
court or a judge, and is to have the same effect in all respects 
as if it had been made an order of court. The object of this enact- 
ment was to save the expense of making a submission a rule of 
court by treating it as having been so made, and it leaves the 
law in this position, that while the authority of an arbitrator, 
once appointed, is irrevocable, there is no power — any more than 
there was under the old law — to compel an unwilling party to 
proceed to a reference, except in cases specially provided for by 
sections 5 and 6 of the act of 1889. The former of these sections 
deals with the power of the court, the latter with the power of 
the parties to a reference, to appoint an arbitrator in certain 
circumstances. Section 5 provides that where a reference is to 
be to a single arbitrator, and all the parties do not concur in 
appointing one, or an appointed arbitrator refuses to act or 
becomes incapable of acting, or where the parties or two arbi- 
trators fail, when necessary, to appoint an umpire or third 
arbitrator, or such umpire or arbitrator when appointed refuses 
to act, or becomes incapable of acting, and the default is not 
rectified after seven clear days' notice, the court may supply the 
vacancy. Under section 6, where a reference is to two arbi- 
trators, one to be appointed by each party, and either the 
appointed arbitrator refuses to act, or becomes incapable of 
acting, and the party appointing him fails, after seven clear 
days' notice, to supply the vacancy, or such party fails, after 
similar notice, to make an original appointment, a binding 
appointment (subject to the power of the court to set it aside) 
may be made by the other party to the reference. The court 
may compel parties to carry out an arbitration, not only in the 
above cases by directly appointing an arbitrator, &c, or by 
allowing one appointed by a party to proceed alone with the 
reference, but also indirectly by staying any proceedings before 
the legal tribunals to determine matters which come within the 
scope of the arbitration. Where the agreement to refer stipulates 
that the submission of a dispute to arbitration shall be a con- 
dition precedent to the right to bring an action in regard to it, 
an action does not lie until the arbitration has been held and an 
award made, and it is usual in such cases not to apply for a 
stay of proceedings, but to plead the agreement as a bar to the 
action (Viney v. Bignold, 1887, 20 Q.B.D. 172). The court will 
refuse to stay proceedings where the subject-matter of the liti- 
gation falls outside the scope of the reference, or there is some 
serious objection to the fitness of the arbitrator, or some other 
good reason of the kind exists. 

An arbitrator is not liable to be sued for want of skill or for 
negligence in conducting the arbitration (Pappa v. Rose, 1872, 
L.R. 7 C.P. 525). When a building contract provides that a 
certificate of the architect, showing the final balance due to the 



contractor, shall be conclusive evidence of the works having 
been duly completed, the architect occupies the position of an 
arbitrator, and enjoys the same immunity from liability for 
negligence in the discharge of his functions (Chambers v. Gold- 
thorpe, 1901, 1 Q.B. 624). An arbitrator cannot be compelled 
to act unless he is a party to the submission. 

An arbitrator (and the following observations apply mutatis 
mutandis to an umpire after he has entered on his duties) has 
power to administer oaths to, or take the affirmations of, the 
parties and their witnesses; and any person who wilfully and 
corruptly gives false evidence before him may be prosecuted 
and punished for perjury (Arbitration Act 1889, sched. i. and 
s. 22). At any stage in the reference he may, and shall if he be 
required by the court, state in the form of a special case for the 
opinion of the court any question of law arising in the arbitration. 
The arbitrator may also state his award in whole or in part as 
a special case (ib. s. 19), and may correct in an award any clerical 
mistake or error arising from an accidental slip or omission. 
The costs of the reference and the award — which, under sched. i. 
of the act, must be in writing, unless the submission otherwise 
provides — are in the arbitrator's discretion, and he has a lien 
on the award and the submission for his fees, for which — if there 
is an express or implied promise to pay them — he can also sue 
(Crampton v. Ridley, 1887, 20 Q.B.D. 48). An arbitrator or 
umpire ought not, however, to state his award in such a way 
as to deprive the parties of their right to challenge the amount 
charged by him for his services; and accordingly where an 
umpire fixed for his award a lump sum as costs, including 
therein his own and the arbitrators' fees, the award was re- 
mitted back to him to state how much he allotted to himself 
and how much to the arbitrators (in Re Gilbert v. Wright, 1904, 
20 Times L.R. 164). But in the absence of evidence to show 
that the fees charged by arbitrators or umpire are extortionate, 
or unfair and unreasonable, the courts will not interfere with 
them (Llandrindod Wells Water Co. v. Hawksley, 1904, 20 Times 
L.R. 241). 

If there is no express provision on the point in the submission, 
an award under the Arbitration Act 1889 must be made within 
three months after the arbitrator has entered on the reference, 
or been called upon to act by notice in writing from any party 
to the submission. The time may, however, be extended by 
the arbitrator or by the court. An umpire is required to make 
his award within one month after the original or extended 
time appointed for making the award of the arbitrators has 
expired, or any later day to which he may enlarge it. The 
court may by order remit an award to the arbitrators or 
umpire for reconsideration, in which case the reconsidered 
award must be made within three months after the date of the 
order. 

An award must be intra vires: it must dispose of all the points 
referred; and it must be final, except as regards certain matters 
of valuation, &c. (see in Re Stringer and Riley Brothers, 1901, 
1 K.B. 105). An award may, however, be set aside where the 
arbitrator has misconducted himself (an arbitrator may also be 
removed by the court on the ground of misconduct), or where 
it is ultra vires, or lacks any of the other requisites — above 
mentioned — of a valid award, or where the arbitrator has been 
wilfully deceived by one of the parties, or some such state of 
things exists. An award may, by leave of the court, be enforced 
in the same manner as a judgment or decree to the same effect. 
Under the Revenue Act 1906, s. 9, a uniform duty of ten 
shillings is payable on awards in England or Ireland, and on 
decreets arbitral in Scotland. 

Provisions for the arbitration of special classes of disputes are 
contained in many acts of parliament, e.g. the Local Government 
Acts 1888, 1894, the Agricultural Holdings (England) Acts 1883 to 
1906, the Small Holdings and Allotments Act 1907, the Light Rail- 
ways Act 1896, the Housing of the Working Classes Act 1890, the 
Workmen's Compensation Act 1906, &c. 

The Conciliation Act 1896 provides machinery for the prevention 
and settlement of trade disputes, and in 1892 a chamber of arbitra- 
tion for business disputes was established by the joint action of the 
corporation of the city of London and the London chamber of 
commerce. At the time when the London chamber of arbitration 



326 



ARBITRATION 



order of 
court. 



was established, there was considerable dissatisfaction among the 
mercantile community with the delays that occurred in the disposal 
of commercial cases before the ordinary tribunals. But the special 
provision made by the judges in 1895 f° r the prompt trial of com- 
mercial causes to a large extent destroyed the raison d'etre of the 
chamber of arbitration, and it did not attain any great measure of 
success. 

(2) The court or a judge may refer any question arising 
in any cause or matter to an official or special referee, whose 
References report may be enforced like a judgment or order to 
under the same effect. This power may be exercised whether 
the parties desire it or not. The official referees are 
salaried officers of court. The remuneration of special 
referees is determined by the court or judge. An entire action 
may be referred, if all parties consent, or if it involves any pro- 
longed examination of documents, or scientific or local examina- 
tion, or consists wholly or partly of matters of account. 

Scots Law. — The Arbitration (Scotland) Act 1894, unlike the 
English Arbitration Act 1889, did not codify the previously existing 
law, and it becomes necessary, therefore, to deal with that law in 
some detail. It differs in important particulars from the law of 
England. Although (as in England apart from the Arbitration Act 
1889) there is nothing to prevent a verbal reference, submissions 
are generally not merely written but are effected by deed. The 
deed of submission first defines the terms of the. reference, the name 
or names of the arbiters or arbitrators, and the " oversman " or 
umpire, whose decision in the event of the arbiters differing in opinion 
is to be final. Formerly, where no oversman was named in the sub- 
mission, and no power given to the arbiters to name one, the pro- 
ceedings were abortive if the arbiters disagreed, unless the parties 
consented to a nomination. But under the Arbitration (Scotland) 
Act 1894, s. 4, where arbiters differ in opinion, they, or, if they fail 
to agree on the point, the court, on the application of either party, 
may nominate an oversman whose decision is to be final. The deed 
of submission next gives to the arbiters the necessary powers for 
disposing of the matters referred (e.g. powers to summon witnesses, 
to administer oaths and to award expenses), and specifies the time 
within which the " decreet arbitral " is to be pronounced. If this 
date is left blank, practice has limited the arbiter's power of deciding 
to a year and a day, unless, having express or clearly implied power 
in the submission, he exercises this power, or the parties expressly 
or tacitly agree to its prorogation. The deed of submission then goes 
on to provide that the parties bind themselves, under a stipulated 
penalty to abide by the decreet arbitral, that, in the event of the 
death of either of them, the submission shall continue in force against 
their heirs and representatives, and that they consent to the regis- 
tration, for preservation and execution, both of the deed itself and 
of the decreet arbitral. The power to enforce the award depends on 
this last provision. Under the common law of Scotland, a sub- 
mission of future disputes or differences to an arbiter, or arbiters, 
unnamed, was ineffectual except where the agreement to refer did 
not contemplate the decision of proper disputes between the parties 
but the adjustment of some condition, or the liquidation of some 
obligation, contained in the contract of which the agreement to 
submit formed a part. And by the Arbitration (Scotland) Act 1894, 
s. 1 , an agreement to refer to arbitration is not invalid by reason of 
the reference being to a person not named, or to be named by another, 
or to a person merely described as the holder for the time being of 
any office or appointment. An arbiter who has accepted office may 
be compelled by an action in court of session to proceed with his 
duty unless he has sufficient cause, such as ill-health or supervening 
interest, for renouncing. The court may name a sole arbiter, where 
provision is made for one only and the parties cannot agree (Arbitra- 
tion [Scotland] Act 1894, s. 2); and may name an arbiter where a 
party having the right or duty to nominate one of two arbiters 
will not exercise it (ib. s. 3). Scots law as to the requisites of a valid 
award is practically identical with the law of England. The grounds 
of reduction of a decreet arbitral are "corruption," "bribery," 
"false hold " (Scots Act of Regulations 1695, s. 25). An attempt 
was made to include, under the expression " constructive corruption," 
among these statutory grounds of reduction, irregular conduct on the 
part of an arbitrator, with no suggestion of any corrupt motive. 
But it was definitely overruled by the House of Lords (Adams v. 
Great North of Scotland Railway Co., 1891, A.C. 31). The statutory 
definition of the grounds of reduction was intended, however, 
merely to put an end to the practice which had previously obtained 
of reviewing awards on their merits, and it does not prevent the 
courts from setting aside an award where the arbitrator has exceeded 
his jurisdiction, or disregarded any one of the expressed conditions 
of the submission, or been guilty of misconduct. A private arbiter 
cannot demand remuneration except in virtue of contract, or by 
implication from the nature of the work done, or if the reference is 
in pursuance of some statutory enactment (e.g. the Lands Clauses 
[Scotland] Act 1845, s. 32). 

Judicial References have been long known to the law of Scotland. 
When an action is in court the parties may at any stage withdraw 



it from judicial determination, and refer it to arbitration. This 
is done by minute of reference to which the court interpones its 
authority. When the award is issued it becomes the judgment of 
the court. The court has no power to compel parties to enter into a 
reference of this kind, >nd it is doubtful whether counsel can bind 
their clients in such a matter. A judicial reference falls like the 
other by the elapse of a year; and the court cannot review the 
award on the ground of miscarriage. By the Court of Session Act 
1850, s. 50, a provision is introduced whereby parties to an action in 
the supreme court may refer judicially any issue for trial to one, 
three, five or seven persons, who shall sit as a jury, and decide by a 
majority. 

Law of Ireland. — The Common Law Procedure Act (Ireland) 
1856, which is incorporated by s. 60 of the Supreme Court of Judi- 
cature Act (Ireland) 1877, and thereby made applicable to all 
divisions of the High Court of Justice, provides, on the lines of the 
English Common Law Procedure Act 1854, for the conduct of 
arbitrations and the enforcement of awards. Irish statute law, like 
that of England and Scotland, contains numerous provisions for 
arbitration under special enactments. 

Indian and Colonial Law. — The provisions of the English Arbitra- 
tion Act 1889 have in substance been adopted by the Indian Legisla- 
ture (see Act ix. of 1899), and by many of the colonies (see, e.g., Act 
No. 13 of 1895, Western Australia; No. 24 of 1898, Natal; c. 20 of 
1899, Bahamas; No. 10 of 1895, Gibraltar; No. 29 of 1898, Cape 
of Good Hope : s. 7 of this last statute excludes from submission to 
arbitration criminal cases, so far as prosecution and punishment are 
concerned, and, without the special leave of the court, matters 
relating to status, matrimonial causes, and matters affecting minors 
or other perons under legal disability ; Trinidad and Tobago, No. 35 
of 1898). 

United States. — The common law and statute law of the 
United States as to arbitration bear a general resemblance 
to the law of England. 

All controversies of a civil nature, and any question of personal 
injury on which a suit for damages will lie, although it may also 
be indictable, may be referred to arbitration; but 
crimes, and perhaps actions on penal statutes by VoI "° tar y 
common informers may not. The submission may be missions. 
effected sometimes by parol, sometimes by written 
instrument, sometimes by deed or deed poll. Capacity to refer 
depends on the general law of contractual capacity. The law 
of England as to the capacity to act as an arbitrator and as to 
objections to an arbitrator on the ground of interest has been 
closely followed by the American courts. The same observation 
applies as to the requisites of an award, the mode of its enforce- 
ment and the grounds on which it will be set aside. The 
arbitrator has a lien on the award for his fees ; and — a point of 
difference from the English law — he may sue for them without 
an express promise to pay (cf. Goodoil v. Cooley, 1854, 29 New 
Hamp. 48) . At common law, a submission is generally revocable 
at any time before award; and it is also, in the absence of 
stipulation to the contrary, revoked by the death of one of the 
parties. Provision has been made in Pennsylvania for com- 
pulsory arbitration by an act of the 16th of June 1836 (see 
Pepper and Lewis, Pennsylvania Digest, tit. " arbitration "). 

The rules of court also of many of the states of the United 
States provide for reference through the intervention of 
the court at any stage in the progress of a litigation. J ^ efer ^ aces 
Such submissions are usually declared irrevocable by court. 
the rules providing for them. 

In addition to voluntary submissions and references by rules 
of court there are in America, as in the United Kingdom, various 
statutes which provide for arbitration in particular 
cases. Most of these statutes are founded on the 9 and ar &,-^' y 
10 Will. III., c. 15, and 3 and 4 Will. IV. c. 42, s. 49, tions. 
" by which it is allowed to refer a matter in dispute 
(not then in court) to arbitrators, and agree that the submission 
be made a rule of court. This agreement, being proved on the 
oath of one of the witnesses thereto, is enforced as if it had been 
made at first a rule of court" (Bouvier, Law Diet. s.v. "Arbitra- 
tion"). 

Ample provision is made in America for the arbitration of 
labour disputes. 

Law of France. — Voluntary arbitration has always been recognized 
in France. In cases of mercantile partnerships, arbitration was 
formerly compulsory; but in 1856 (law of the 17th of July 1856) 
jurisdiction in disputes between parties was conferred on the 
Tribunals of Commerce (as to which see Code de Commerce, arts. 



ARBITRATION, INTERNATIONAL 



327 



615 et seq.), and arbitration at the present time is purely voluntary. 
The subject is very fully dealt with in the Code de Procedure Civile 
(arts. 1003-1028). The submission to arbitration (comprotnis) must, 
on pain or nullity, be acted upon within three months from its date 
(art. 1007). The submission terminates (i.) by the death, refusal, 
resignation or inability to act of one of the arbitrators; (ii.) by the 
expiration of the period agreed upon, or of three months if no time 
had been fixed; (iii.) by the disagreement of two arbitrators, unless 
power be reserved to them to appoint an umpire (art. 1012). An 
arbitrator cannot resign if he has once commenced to act, and can 
only be relieved on some ground arising subsequently to the sub- 
mission (art. 1014). Each party to the arbitration is required to 
produce his evidence at least fifteen days before the expiration of 
the period fixed by the submission (art. 1016). If the arbitrators, 
differing in opinion, cannot agree upon an umpire (Hers arbitre), the 
president of the Tribunal of Commerce will appoint one, on the 
application of either party (art. 1017). The umpire is required to 
give his decision within one month of his acceptance of the appoint- 
ment; before making his award, he must confer with the previous 
arbitrators who disagreed (art. 1018). Arbitrators and umpire must 
proceed according to the ordinary rules of law, unless they are 
specially empowered by the submission to proceed as amiables 
compositeurs (art. 1019). The award is rendered executory by an 
order of the president of the Civil Tribunal of First Instance (art. 
1020). Awards cannot be set up against third parties (art. 1022), 
or attacked by way of opposition. An a.ppeal against an award lies 
to the Civil Tribunal of First Instance, or to the court of appeal, 
according as the subject-matter, in the absence of arbitration, 
would have been within the jurisdiction of the justice of the peace, 
or of the Civil Tribunal of First Instance (art. 1023). In the manu- 
facturing towns of France, there are also boards of umpires (Conseils 
de Pmd' homines) to deal with trade disputes between masters and 
workmen belonging to certain specified trades. 

Other Foreign Laws. — The provisions of French law as to arbitra- 
tion are in force in Belgium [Code de Proc. Civ., arts. 1003 et seq.) ; 
and a convention (8th of July 1899) between France and Belgium 
regulates, inter alia, the mutual enforcement of awards. The law of 
France has also been reproduced in substance in the Netherlands 
(Cede of Civil Procedure, arts. 620 et seq.). The German Imperial 
Code of Procedure did not create any system of arbitration in civil 
cases. But this omission was supplied in Prussia by a law of the 
29th of March 1879, which provided for the appointment, in each 
commune, of an arbitrator (Schiedsmann) before whom conciliation 
proceedings in contentious matters might be conducted. The pro- 
cedure was gratuitous and voluntary; and the functions of the 
arbitrator were not judicial; he merely recorded the arrangement 
arrived at, or the refusal of conciliation. This law was followed in 
Brunswick by a law of the 2nd of July 1896, and in Baden by a law 
of the 16th of April 1886. In Luxemburg, compulsory arbitration 
in matters affecting commercial partnerships was abolished in 1879 
(law of the 16th of April 1879). A system of conciliation, similar to 
the Prussian, exists in Italy (laws of the 16th of June 1892, and the 
26th of December 1892) and in some of the Swiss cantons (law of the 
29th of April 1883). Spain (Code of Civil Proc, arts. 1003-1028; 
Civil Code, arts. 1 820-1 821) and Sweden^and Norway (law of the 
28th of October 1887) have followed the r rench law. In Portugal, 
provision has been made for the creation in important industrial 
centres, on the application of the administrative corporations, of 
boards of conciliation (decrees of the 14th of August 1889, and the 
1 8th of May 1893). 

Authorities. — Russell, Arbitration (London, 1906); Annual 
Practice (London, yearly); Redman, Arbitration (London, 1897); 
Crewe, Arbitration Act of i88g (London, 1898); Pollock, On Arbi- 
trators (London, 1906). As to Scots law: Bell, On Arbitration 
(2nd ed., Edinburgh, 1877); Erskine, Principles (20th ed., Edin- 
burgh, 1903). As to American law: Morse, Law of Arbitration 
(Boston, 1872). As to foreign law generally: the texts of the laws 
cited, and the Annuaire de legislation ctrangere. (A. W. R.) 

ARBITRATION, INTERNATIONAL. International arbitra- 
tion is a proceeding in which two nations refer their differences 
to one or more selected persons, who, after affording to each 
party an opportunity of being heard, pronounce judgment on 
the matters at issue. It is understood, unless otherwise expressed, 
that the judgment shall be in accordance wdth the law by which 
civilized nations have agreed to be bound, whenever such law is 
applicable. Some authorities, notably the eminent Swiss jurist, 
J. K. Bluntschli, consider that unless this tacit condition is 
complied with, the award may be set aside. This would, however, 
be highly inconvenient since international law has never been 
codified. A fresh arbitration might have to be entered on to 
decide (1) what the law was, (2) whether it applied to the 
matter in hand. Arbitration differs from Mediation (q.v.) in so 
far as it is a judicial act, whereas Mediation involves no 
decision, but merely advice and suggestions to those who invoke 
its aid. 



Arbitral Tribunals. — An international arbitrator may be the 
chief of a friendly power, or he may be a private individual. 
When he is an emperor, a king, or a president of a republic, it is 
not expected that he will act personally; he may appoint a 
delegate or delegates to act on his behalf, and avail himself of 
their labours and views, the ultimate decision being his only in 
name. In this respect international arbitration differs from 
civil arbitration, since a private arbitrator cannot delegate his 
office without express authority. The analogy between the two 
fails to hold good in another respect also. In civil arbitration, 
the decision or award may be made a rule of court, after which it 
becomes enforceable by writ of execution against person or 
property. An international award cannot be enforced directly; 
in other words it has no legal sanction behind it. Its obligation 
rests on the good faith of the parties to the reference, and on the 
fact that, with the help of a world-wide press, public opinion 
can always be brought to bear on any state that seeks to evade 
its moral duty. The obligation of an ordinary treaty rests on 
precisely the same foundations. Where there are two or any 
other even number of arbitrators, provision is usually made for 
an umpire (French sur-arbitre) . The umpire may be chosen by 
the arbitrators themselves or nominated by a neutral power. 
In the " Alabama " arbitration five arbitrators were nominated 
by the president of the United States, the queen of England, the 
king of Italy, the president of the Swiss Confederation, and the 
emperor of Brazil respectively. In the Bering Sea arbitration 
there were seven arbitrators, two nominated by Great Britain, 
two by the United States, and the remaining three by the 
president of the French Republic, the king of Italy, and the king 
of Sweden and Norway respectively. In neither of these cases 
was there an umpire; nor was any necessary, since the decision, 
if not unanimous, lay with the majority. (See separate articles 
on Bering Sea Arbitration and "Alabama" Arbitration.) 

Arbitral tribunals may have to deal with questions either 
of law or fact, or of both combined. When they have to deal 
with law only, that is to say, to lay down a principle or decide a 
question of liability, their functions are judicial or quasi-judicial, 
and the result is arbitration proper. Where they have to deal 
with facts only, e.g. the evaluation of pecuniary claims, their 
functions are administrative rather than judicial, and the term 
commission is applied to them. " Mixed commissions," so 
called because they are composed of representatives of the 
parties in difference, have been frequently resorted to for 
delimitation of frontiers, and for settling the indemnities to be 
paid to the subjects of neutral powers in respect of losses sustained 
by non-combatants in times of war or civil insurrection. The 
two earliest of these were nominated in 1794 under the treaty 
negotiated by Lord Grenville with Mr John Jay, commonly 
called the " Jay Treaty," their tasks being (1) to define the 
boundary between Canada and the United States which had been 
agreed to by the treaty signed at Paris in 1783; (2) to estimate 
the amount to be paid by Great Britain and the United States 
to each other in respect of illegal captures or condemnation of 
vessels during the war of the American Revolution. 

Although arbitrations proper may be thus distinguished .from 
" mixed commissions," it must not be supposed that any hard 
or fast theoretical line can be drawn between them. Arbitrators 
strictly so called may (as in the " Alabama " case) proceed to 
award damages after they have decided the question of liability; 
whilst " mixed commissions," before awarding damages, usually 
have to decide whether the pecuniary claims made are or are not 
well founded. 

Awards. — International awards, as already pointed out, 
differ from civil awards in having no legal sanction by which 
they can be enforced. On the other hand, they resemble civil 
awards in that they may be set aside, i.e. ignored, for sufficient 
reason, as, for example, if the tribunal has not acted in good 
faith, or has not given to each party an opportunity of being 
heard, or has exceeded its jurisdiction. An instance under the 
last head occurred in 1831, when it was referred to the king of 
the Netherlands as sole arbitrator to fix the north-eastern 
boundary of the state of Maine. The king's representatives 



3 28 



ARBITRATION, INTERNATIONAL 



were unable to draw the frontier line by reason of the imperfection 
of the maps then in existence, and he therefore directed a 
further survey. This direction was beyond the terms of the 
reference, and the award, when made, was repudiated by the 
United States as void for excess. The point in dispute was 
only finally disposed of by the Webster-Ashburton treaty of 
1842. 

Subject-matter.— The history of international arbitration is 
dealt with in the article Peace, where treaties of general arbitra- 
tion are discussed, both those which embrace all future differences 
thereafter to arise between the contracting parties, and also 
those more limited conventions which aim at the settlement 
of all future differences in regard to particular subjects, e.g. 
commerce or navigation. The rapid growth of international 
arbitration in recent times may be gathered from the following 
figures. Between 1820 and 1840, there were eight such instances; 
between 1840 and i860, there were thirty; between i860 and 
1880, forty-four; between 1880 and 1900, ninety. Of the 
governments which were parties in these several cases Great 
Britain heads the list in point of numbers, the United States of 
America being a good second. France, Portugal, Spain and the 
Netherlands are the European states next in order. The present 
article is concerned Exclusively with arbitration in regard to 
such existing differences as are capable of precise statement and 
of prompt adjustment. These differences may be arranged in 
two main groups: — 

(a) Those which have arisen between state and state in 
their sovereign capacities; 

(b) Those in which one state has made a demand upon another 
state, ostensibly in its sovereign capacity, but really on 
behalf of some individual, or set of individuals, whose 
interests it was bound to protect. 

To group (a) belong territorial differences in regard to ownership 
of land and rights of fishing at sea; to group (b) belong pecuniary 
claims in respect of acts wrongfully done to one or more subjects 
of one state by, or with the authority of, another state. To 
enumerate even a tenth part of the successful arbitrations in 
recent times' would occupy too much space. Some prominent 
examples (dealt with elsewhere under their appropriate titles) 
are the dispute between the United States and Great Britain 
respecting the " Alabama " and other vessels employed by the 
Confederate government during the American Civil War (award 
in 1872); that between the same powers respecting the fur-seal 
fishery in Bering Sea (award in 1893); that between Great 
Britain and Venezuela respecting the boundary of British Guiana 
(award in 1899) ; tnat between Great Britain, the United States 
and Portugal respecting the Delagoa railway (award in 1900); 
that between Great Britain and the United States respecting the 
boundary of Alaska (award in 1903). The long-standing New- 
foundland fishery dispute with France (finally settled in 1904) is 
dealt with under Newfoundland. Other examples are shortly 
noticed in the tables on p. 329, which although by no means 
exhaustive, sufficiently indicate the scope and trend of arbitra- 
tion during the years covered. The cases decided by the perma- 
nent tribunal at the Hague established in 1900 are not included 
in these tables. They are separately discussed later. 

The Hague Tribunal. — The establishment of a permanent 
tribunal at the Hague, pursuant to the Peace convention of 1899, 
marks a momentous epoch in the history of international arbitra- 
tion. This tribunal realized an idea put forward by Jeremy 
Bentham towards the close of the 18th century, advocated by 
James Mill in the middle of the 19th century, and worked out 
later by Mr Dudley Field in America, by Dr Goldschmidt in 
Germany, and by Sir Edmund Hornby and Mr Leone Levi in 
England. The credit of the realization is due, in the first place, 
to the tsar of Russia, who initiated the Hague Conference of 
1899, and, in the second place to Lord Pauncefote (then Sir 
Julian Pauncefote, British ambassador at Washington), who 
urged before a committee of the conference the importance of 
organizing a permanent international court, the service of which 
should be called into requisition at will, and who also submitted 
an outline of the mode in which such a court might be formed. 



The pious 
fund of 
the Call- 
fornias. 



The result was embodied in the following articles of the Con- 
vention, signed on behalf of sixteen of the assembled powers on 
the 29th of July 1899. 

(Art. 23). Each of the signatory powers is to designate within 
three months from the ratification of the convention four persons at 
the most, of recognized competence in international law, enjoying 
the highest moral consideration, and willing to accept the duties of 
arbitrators. Two or more powers may agree to nominate one or 
more members in common, or the same person may be nominated 
by different powers. Members of the court are to be appointed for 
six years and may be re-nominated. (Art. 25). The signatory 
powers desiring to apply to the tribunal for the settlement of a 
difference between them are to notify the same to the arbitrators. 
The arbitrators who are to determine this difference are, unless 
otherwise specially agreed, to be chosen from the general list of 
members in the following manner: — each party is to name two 
arbitrators, and these are to choose a chief arbitrator or umpire 
(sur-arbitre). If the votes are equally divided the selection of the 
chief arbitrator is to be entrusted to a third' power to be named by 
the parties. (Art. 26). The tribunal is to sit at the Hague when 
practicable, unless the parties otherwise agree. (Art. 27). " The 
signatory powers consider it a duty in the event of an acute conflict 
threatening to break out between two or more of them to remind 
these latter that the permanent court is open to them. This action 
is only to be considered as an exercise of good offices." Several of 
the powers nominated members of the permanent court pursuant 
to Art. 25, quoted above, those nominated on behalf of Great Britain 
being Lord Pauncefote, Sir Edward Malet, Sir Edward Fry and 
Professor Westlake. On the death of Lord Pauncefote, Major- 
General Sir John C. Ardagh was appointed in his place. 

Hague Cases. — (1) The first case decided by the Hague court was 
concerned with the " Pious Fund of the Calif ornias." A fund bearing 
this name was formed in the 1 8th century for the purpose 
of converting to the Catholic faith the native Indians of 
Upper and Lower California, both of which then belonged 
to Mexico, and of maintaining a Catholic priesthood there. 
By a decree of 1842 this fund was transferred to the 
public treasury of Mexico, the Mexican government undertaking to 
pay interest thereon in perpetuity in furtherance of the design of the 
original donors. After the sale of Upper California to the United 
States, effected by the treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo (1848), the 
Mexican government refused to pay the proportion of the interest 
to which Upper California was entitled. The question of liability 
was then referred to commissioners appointed by each state, and, on 
their failing to agree, to Sir Edward Thornton, British minister at 
Washington, who by his award, in 1875, found there was due from 
Mexico to Upper California, or rather to the bishops there as ad- 
ministrators of the fund, an arrear of interest amounting to nearly 
$100,000, which was directed to be paid in gold. This award was 
carried out, but payment of the current interest was again withheld 
as from the 24th of October 1868. Claim was thereupon made on 
Mexico by the United States on behalf of the bishops, but without 
success. Ultimately, in May 1902, an agreement was come to be- 
tween the two governments which provided for the settlement of the 
dispute by the Hague tribunal. The points to be determined were 
(1) whether the matter was res judicata by reason of Sir E. Thornton's 
award; (2) whether, if not, the claim for the interest was just. The 
arbitrators selected by the United States were Sir E. Fry and 
Professor F. de Martens, and by Mexico, Professor Asser and Pro- 
fessor de Savornin Lohman, both of Amsterdam. These four (none of 
whom, it will be observed, was of the nationality of either party in 
difference) chose for their umpire Professor Matzen, of Copenhagen, 
president of the Landsthing there. In October 1902, the court 
decided both questions in the affirmative, awarding the payment by 
Mexico of the annual sum claimed, not in gold, but en monnaie ayant 
cours legal au Mexique. The direction to pay in gold made by Sir 
E. Thornton was held to be referable only to the mode of the execu- 
tion of the award, and therefore not to be chose jugee. 

(2) The second arbitration before the Hague court was more 
important than the first, not only because so many of the great 
powers were concerned in it, but also because it brought Qrea< 
about the discontinuance of acts of war. The facts may BrWa y ffl 
be stated shortly thus. By three several protocols signed Q erma ' ny 
at Washington in February 1903, it was agreed that an 4jtaty 
certain claims by Great Britain, Germany and Italy, on versus 
behalf of their respective subjects against the Venezuelan Venezuela, 
government should be referred to three mixed commissions, 
and that for the purpose of securing the payment of these claims 
30 % of the customs revenues at the ports of La Guayra and Puerto 
Caballo should be remitted in monthly instalments to the repre- 
sentative of the Bank of England at Caracas. Prior to the date 
of these protocols, an attempt had been made by Great Britain, 
Germany and Italy to enforce their claims by blockade, and a 
further question arose as between these three powers on the one 
hand, and the United States of America, France, Spain, Belgium, 
the Netherlands, Sweden and Norway, and Mexico (all of whom had 
claims against Venezuela, but had abstained from hostile action) 
on the other hand, as to whether the blockading powers were entitled 
to preferential treatment. By three several protocols signed in May 



ARBITRATION, INTERNATIONAL 



329 



1903 this question was agreed to be submitted to the Hague court, 
three members of which were to be named as arbitrators by the 
tsar of Russia, but no arbitrator was to be a subject or citizen 
of any of the signatory or creditor powers. The arbitrators named 



Dates of 








Date 


agreement 


Parties. 


Arbitrating Authority. 


Subject-Matter. 


of 


to refer. 








award. 






Table I. 






Territorial Disputes {Ownership). 




1857 


Holland and Ven- 
ezuela 


Queen of Spain 


Island of Aves in Venezuela 


1865 


1869 


Great Britain and 


President of United 


Island of Bulama on West 


1870 




Portugal 


States 


Coast of Africa 




1872 


Great Britain and 


President of French 


Delagoa Bay (part of), Inyack 


1875 




Portugal 


Republic 


and Elephant Is. ,S.E. Africa 




1876 


Argentine Republic 


President of United 


Territory between the Verde 


1878 




and Paraguay 


States 


and the Pilcomayo river of 
Paraguay 
Islets and guano deposits on 




1885 


Great Britain and 


Mixed Commission 


1886 




Germany 




S.W. Coast of Africa 




1886 


Bulgaria and Servia 


Mixed Commission 


Territory near the village of 
Bregovo 


1887 


1902 


Austria and 


Mixed Commission 


Territory in the district of 


1902 




Hungary 


(with President of 
Swiss Federal tri- 
bunal as u/npire) 


Upper Tatra 








Table II. 








Delimitation of Frontiers. 




1869 


Great Britain and 


Lieutenant Governor 


The southern boundary of the 


1870 




the Transvaal 


of Natal 


S. African Republic 




1871 


Great Britain and 
the United States 


The German Emperor 


The San Juan water bound- 
ary 


1872 


1873 


Italy and Switzer- 
land 


Mixed Commission 
(with U. S. Minister 
at Rome as umpire) 


The Canton of Ticino 


1874 


1885 


Great Britain and 
Russia 


Mixed Commission 


North-western Afghanistan 


1887 


1890 


France and Holland 


Tsar of Russia 


French Guiana and Dutch 
Guiana 


1891 


1895 


Great Britain and 
Portugal 


President of the 
Italian Court of 
Appeal 


Manicaland 


1897 


1897 


France and Brazil 


President of the 
Swiss Confedera- 
tion 

King of Italy 


River Yapoe named in the 
Treaty of Utrecht 1813 


1900 


1901 


Great Britain and 

Brazil 
Great Britain and 


British Guiana 


1904 


1903 


King of Italy 


Barotseland 


1905 




Portugal 












Table III. 






Pecuniary 


Claims in respect of Seizures and Arrests. 




1851 


United States and 


President of French 


Seizure of the American priva- 


1852 




Portugal 


Republic 


teer " General Armstrong " 




1863 


Great Britain and 
Brazil 


King of the Belgians 


Arrest of three British officers 
of the ship " La Forte " 


1863 


1863 


Great Britain and 
Peru 


Senate of Hamburg 


Arrest at Callao of Capt. 
Melville White, a British 
subject 


1864 


1870 


United States and 
Spain 


Mixed Commission 


The American S.S. " Col. 
Lloyd Aspinwall " 


1870 


1873 


Japan and Peru 


Tsar of Russia 


The Peruvian barque " Maria 

Luz " 
The American S.S. "Montijo" 


1875 


1874 


United States and 


Mixed Commission 


1875 




Colombia 








1879 


France and Nica- 
ragua 


French Court of 
Cassation 


The French ship " Le Phare " 


1880 


1885 


United States and 


Italian Minister at 


The American S.S. " The 


1885 




Spain 


Madrid 


Masonic " 




1888 


United States and 


British Minister at 


The S.S. " Benjamin Frank- 


1890 




Denmark 


Athens 


lin " and the barque 
" Catherine Augusta " 




1895 


Great Britain and 


Tsar of Russia, who 


Arrest of the master of the 


1897 




the Netherlands 


delegated his duties 
to Professor F. de 


" Costa Rica " packet (a 
British subject) 








Martens 







Great 

Britain, 

France 

and 

Germany 

versus 

Japan. 

turned 



by the tsar were M. Muraviev, minister of justice and attorney- 
general of the Russian empire; Professor Lammasch, member of 
the Upper House of the Austrian parliament; and M. de Martens, 
then member of the council of the ministry of foreign affairs 
at St Petersburg. The arbitrators by their award in February 
1904 decided unanimously in favour of the blockading powers and 



ordered payment of their claims out of the 30 % of the receipts 
at the two Venezuelan ports which had been set apart to meet 
them. 

(3) The third case before the Hague court was heard in 1904- 

1905. A controversy not amenable 
to ordinary diplomatic methodsarose 
between Great Britain, 
France and Germany on 
the one hand and Japan 
on the other hand as to 
the legality of a house- 
tax imposed by Japan on 
certain subjects of those 
powers who held leases in 
perpetuity. The question 
upon the true construction of certain 
treaties between theEuropean powers 
and Japan which had been made a 
few years previously. By three 
protocols signed at Tokyo in August 
1902 this question was agreed to be 
submitted to arbitrators, members of 
the court at the Hague, one -to be 
chosen by each party with power to 
name an umpire. The arbitrators 
chosen were M. Renault, professor 
of the law faculty in Paris, and M. 
Montono, the Japanese envoy to the 
French capital. They named as 
their umpire and president M. Gram, 
ex-minister of the state of Norway. 
In May 1905, an award was pro- 
nounced by the majority (M. Gram 
and M. Renault) in favour of the 
European contention, M. Montono 
dissenting both from the conclusion 
of his colleagues and from the reasons 
on which it was based. 

(4) Barely two months had 
elapsed since the date of the last 
award when the Hague 
court was again called into 
requisition. The scene of 
dispute this time was on 
the S.E. coast of Arabia. 
Muscat, the capital of the 
kingdom of Oman on that 
coast, is ruled by a sultan, whose 
independence both Great Britain 
and France had, in March 1862, 
" reciprocally engaged to respect." 
Notwithstanding this, the French 
republic had issued to certain native 
dhows, owned by subjects of the 
sultan, papers authorizing them to 
fly the French flag, not only on the 
Oman littoral but in the Red Sea. 
A question thereupon arose as to 
the manner in which the privileges 
thereby purported to be conferred 
affected the jurisdiction of the sultan 
over such dhows, the masters of 
which, as was alleged, used their 
immunity from search for thepurpose 
of carrying on contraband trade in 
slaves, arms and ammunition. In 
October 1904 the two governments 
agreed to refer this question to the 
Hague court. Chief Justice Melville 
W. Fuller, of the Supreme Court of 
the United States, was named as 
arbitrator on the part of Great 
Britain, M. de Savornin Lohman, 
who had acted in the case of the 
Californias (No. 1), as arbitrator on 
the part of France. The choice of 
an umpire was entrusted to the king 
of Italy. He named Professor Lam- 
masch, who, as we have seen, had 
acted in the arbitration with 
Venezuela in 1903. 

A unanimous award was made in 
August 1905. It was held that 
although generally speaking every 
sovereign may decide to whom he will accord the right to fly his flag, 
yet in this case such right was limited by the general act of the Brussels 
conference of July 1890 relative to the African slave trade, an act which 
was ratified by France on the 2nd of June 1892 ; that accordingly the 
owners and master of dhows who had been authorized by France to fly 
the French flag before the last-named date retained this authorization 



Great 
Britain 
and the 
French 
Hag at 
Muscat. 



33° 



ARBITRATION, INTERNATIONAL 



so long as France chose to renew it, but that after that date such 
authorization was improper unless the guarantees could establish 
that they had been treated by France as her proteges within the 
meaning of that term as explained in a treaty of 1863 between France 
and Morocco. A further point decided was that the owners or 
master of dhows duly authorized to fly the French flag within the 
ruling of the first point, did not enjoy, in consequence of that fact, 
any such right of extra-territoriality as wouid exempt them from 
the sovereignty and jurisdiction of the sultan. Such exemption 
would be contrary to the engagement to respect the independence 
of the sultan solemnly made in 1862. 

Arbitral Procedure. — Not the least of the benefits of the Hague 
convention of 1899 (strengthened by that of 1907) is that it con- 
tains rules of procedure which furnish a guide for all arbitrations 
whether conducted before the Hague court or not. These may be 
summarized as follows: — The initial step is the making by the 
parties of a special agreement clearly defining the subject of the 
dispute. The next is the choice of the arbitrators and of an 
umpire if the number of arbitrators is even. Each party then by 
its agents prepares and presents its case in a narrative or argu- 
mentative form, annexing thereto all relevant documents. The 
cases so presented are interchanged by transmission to the opposite 
party. The hearing consists in the discussion of the matters 
contained in the several cases, and is conducted under the direction 
of the president who is either the umpire, or, if there is no umpire, 
one of the arbitrators. The members of the tribunal have the 
right of putting questions to the counsel and agents of the parties 
and to demand from them explanation of doubtful points. The 
arbitral judgment is read out at a public sitting of the tribunal, 
the counsel and agents having been duly summoned to hear it. 
Any application for a revision of the award must be based on the 
discovery of new evidence of such a nature as to exercise a 
decisive influence on the judgment and unknown up to the 
time when the hearing was closed, both to the tribunal itself 
and to the party asking for the revision. These general rules 
are universally applicable, but each case may require that 
special rules should be added to them. These each tribunal 
must make for itself. 

One special and necessary rule is in regard to the language to 
be employed. This rule must vary according to convenience and 
is therefore made ad hoc. In case No. 1 noted above, the court 
allowed English or French to be spoken according to the nation- 
ality of the counsel engaged. The judgment was delivered in 
French only. In case No. 2 it was agreed that the written and 
printed memoranda should be in English but might be accom- 
panied by a translation into the language of the power on whose 
behalf they were put in. The oral discussion was either in 
English or French as happened to be convenient. The judgment 
was drawn up in both languages. In case No. 3 French was the 
official language throughout, but the parties were allowed to 
make any communication to the tribunal, in French, English, 
German or Japanese. In case No. 4 French was again the 
official language, but the counsel and agents of both parties were 
allowed to address the tribunal in English. The protocols and 
the judgment were drawn up in French accompanied by an 
official English translation. 

Limits of International Arbitration. — Of the numerous treaties 
for general arbitration which have been made during the 20th 
century that between Great Britain and France (I903) is a type. 
This treaty contains reservations of all questions involving the 
vital interests, the independence or the honour of the contracting 
parties. The language of the reservation is open to more interpre- 
tations than one. What, for instance, is meant by the phrase 
"national independence" in this connexion? If it be taken 
in its strict acceptation of autonomous state sovereignty, the 
exception is somewhat of a truism. No self-respecting power 
would, of course, consent to submit to arbitration a question of 
life or death. This would be as if two men were to agree to draw 
lots as to which should commit suicide in order to avoid fighting a 
duel. On the other hand, if the exception be taken to exclude all 
questions which, when decided adversely to a state, impose a 
restraint on its freedom of action, then the exception would seem 
to exclude such a question as the true interpretation of an 
ambiguous treaty, a subject with which experience shows 



international arbitration is well fitted to deal. Again, we may 
ask, what is meant by the phrase " national honour "? It was 
thought at one time that the honour of a nation could only be 
vindicated by war, though all that had happened was the 
slighting of its flag, or of its accredited representative, during 
some sudden ebullition of local feeling. France once nearly 
broke off peaceful relations with Spain because her ambassador at 
London was assigned a place below the Spanish ambassador, and 
on another occasion she despatched troops into Italy because her 
ambassador at Rome had been insulted by the friends and 
partisans of the pope. The truth is that the extent to which 
national honour is involved depends on factors which have 
nothing to do with the immediate subject of complaint. So long 
as general good feeling subsists between two nations, neither will 
easily take offence at any discourteous act of the other. But 
when a deep-seated antagonism is concealed beneath an unruffled 
surface, the most trivial incident will bring it to the light of day. 
" Outraged national honour " is a highly elastic phrase. It may 
serve as a pretext for a serious quarrel whether the alleged 
" outrage " be great or small. 

The prospects of the expansion of international arbitration 
will be more clearly perceived if we classify afresh all state 
differences under two heads: — (1) those which have a legal 
character, (2) tjhose which have a political character. Under 
" legal differences" may be ranged such as are capable of being 
decided, when once the facts are ascertained, by settled, recog- 
nized rules, or by rules not settled nor recognized, but (as in- the 
" Alabama " case) taken so to be for the purpose in hand. Boun- 
dary cases and cases of indemnity for losses sustained by non-com- 
batants in time of war, of which several instances have already 
been mentioned, belong to this class. To the same class belong 
those cases in which the arbitrators have to adapt the provisions 
of an old treaty to new and altered circumstances, somewhat in 
the way in which English courts of justice apply the doctrine of 
" cy-pres." " Political differences " on the other hand, are such 
as affect states in their, external relations, or in relation to their 
subjects or dependants who may be in revolt against them. 
Some of these differences may be slight, while others may be 
vital, or (which amounts to the same thing) may seem to the 
parties to be so. All differences falling under the first of these 
two general heads appear to be suitable for international arbitra- 
tion. Differences falling under the second general head are, for 
the most part, unsuitable, and may only be adjusted (if at all) 
through the mediation of a friendly power. 

The interesting problem of the future is — are we to regard this 
classification as fixed or as merely transitory? The answer 
depends on several considerations which can only be glanced at 
here. It may be that, just as the usages of civilized nations have 
slowly crystallized into international law, so there may come a 
time when the political principles that govern states in relation to 
each other will be so clearly defined and so generally accepted as 
to acquire something of a legal or quasi-legal character. If they 
do, they will pass the line which at present separates arbitrable 
from non-arbitrable matter. This is the juridical aspect of the 
problem. But there is also an economic side to it by reason 
of the conditions of modern warfare. Already the nations are 
groaning under the burdens of militarism, and are for ever 
diverting energies that might be employed in the furtherance of 
useful productive work to purposes of an opposite character. 
The interruption of maritime intercourse, the stagnation of 
industry and trade, the rise in the price of the necessaries of life, 
the impossibility of adequately providing for the families of 
those — call them reservists, " landwehr," or what you will — who 
are torn away from their daily toil to serve in the tented field, — 
these are considerations that may well make us pause before we 
abandon a peaceful solution and appeal to brute force. Lastly, 
there is the moral aspect of the problem. In order that inter- 
national arbitration may do its perfect work, it is not enough to 
set up a standing tribunal, whether at the Hague or elsewhere, 
and to equip it with elaborate rules of procedure. Tribunals and 
rules are, after all, only machinery. If this machinery is to act 
smoothly we must improve our motive power, the source of 



ARBITRATION AND CONCILIATION 



33i 



which is human passion and sentiment. Although religious 
animosities between Christian nations have died out, although 
dynasties may now rise and fall without raising half Europe to 
arms, the springs of warlike enterprise are still to be found in 
commercial jealousies, in imperialistic ambitions and in the 
doctrine of the survival of the fittest which lends scientific support 
to both. These must one and all be cleared away before we can 
enter on that era of universal peace towards the attainment of 
which the tsar of Russia declared, in his famous circular of 1898, 
the efforts of all governments should be directed. Meanwhile it 
is legitimate to share the hope expressed by President Roosevelt 
in his message to Congress of December 1905 that some future 
Hague conference may succeed in making arbitration the custom- 
ary method of settling international disputes in all save the few 
classes of cases indicated above, and that — to quote Mr 
Roosevelt's words — " these classes may themselves be as sharply 
defined and rigidly limited as the governmental and social 
development of the world will for the time being permit." 

Authorities. — Among special treatises are: Kamarowsky, Le 
Tribunal international (traduit par Serge de Westman) (Paris, 1887) ; 
Rouard de Card, Les Destinees de I'arbitrage international, depuis la 
sentence vendue par le tribunal de Geneve (Paris, 1892) ; Michel Revon, 
V Arbitrage international (Paris, 1892); Ferdinand Dreyfus, U Arbi- 
trage international (Paris, 1894) (where the earlier authorities are 
collected) ; A. Merignhac, Traite de I'arbitrage international (Paris, 
1895) ; Le Chevalier Descamps, Essai sur I' organisation de I'arbitrage 
international (Bruxelles, 1896); Feraud-Giraud, Des Traites d 'arbi- 
trage international general et permanent, Revue de droit international 
(Bruxelles. 1897); Pasicrisie International, by Senator H. Lafon- 
taine (Berne, 1902) ; Recueils d'actes et protocols de la cour permanente 
d' Arbitrage, Langenhuysen Frercs, the Hague. 

Of works in English there is a singular dearth. The most important 
is by an American. J. B. Moore. History of the International Arbitra- 
tions to which the United States has been a Party (Washington, 1898). 
The appendices to this work (which is in six volumes) contain, with 
much other matter of great value, full historical notes of arbitrations 
between other powers. Arbitration and mediation will be found 
briefly noticed in Phillimore's International Law, in Sir Henry 
Maine's Lectures, delivered in Cambridge in 1887; in W. E. Hall's 
International Law, and more at length in an interesting paper 
contributed by John Westlake to the International Journal of Ethics, 
October 1896, which its author has reprinted privately. A London 
journal, The Herald of Peace and International Arbitration, issued 
some years ago a list of instances in which arbitration or mediation 
had been successfully resorted to during the 19th century. David 
Dudley Field, of New York, subsequently enlarged this list, which 
has b^een continued under the title International Tribunals, by Dr 
W. Evans Darby, and is published, along with the texts of several 
projects for general arbitration, at the offices of the Peace Society, 
47 New Broad Street, London. (M. H. C.) 

ARBITRATION AND CONCILIATION. The terms "arbitra- 
tion and conciliation " as employed in this article, are used to 
describe a group of methods of settling disputes between employers 
and work-people or among two or more sets of work-people, 
of which the common feature is the intervention of some outside 
party not directly affected by the dispute. If the parties agree 
beforehand to abide by the award of the third party, the mode of 
settlement is described as " arbitration." If there be no such 
agreement, but the offices of the mediator are used to promote 
an amicable arrangement between the parties themselves, the 
process is described as " conciliation." The third party may be 
one or more disinterested individuals, or a joint-board repre- 
sentative of the parties or of other bodies or persons. 

The process here termed " arbitration " is rarely an arbitra- 
tion in the strict legal sense of the term (at least in the United 
Kingdom), because of the defective legal personality of the 
associations or groups of individuals who are usually parties 
to labour disputes, and the consequent absence in the great 
majority of cases of a valid legal " submission " of the difference 
to arbitration. Whether or not trade unions of employers or 
workmen in the United Kingdom are capable of entering through 
their agents into contracts which are legally binding on their 
members it is fairly certain that the great majority of the agree- 
ments actually made by the representatives of employers and 
workmen to submit a dispute to the decision of a third party 
are of no legal force except as regards the actual signatories. 
Broadly speaking, therefore, the provisions of the Arbitration 
Act 1889, which consolidated ths law relating to arbitration 



in general, would as a rule have no application to the settlement 
of collective disputes between employers and workmen, even if 
the act had not been expressly excluded by section 3 of the 
Conciliation Act of 1896 in the case of disputes to which that act 
applies. Besides the absence of a legal "submission," labour 
arbitrations differ from ordinary arbitrations in the fact that 
the questions referred often (though by no means always) 
relate to the terms on which future contracts shall be made, 
whereas the vast majority of ordinary arbitrations relate to 
questions arising out of existing contracts. The defective " per- 
sonality " of the parties to labour disputes also prevents the 
enforcement of an award by legal penalties. Since, however, 
difficulties of enforcement affect not only settlements arrived at 
by arbitration, but all agreements between bodies of employers 
and work-people with regard to the terms of employment, 
they are most appropriately considered at a later stage of this 
article. 

The term "conciliation" is ordinarily used to cover a large 
number of methods of settlement, shading off in the one direction 
into " arbitration " and in the other into ordinary direct negotia- 
tion between the parties. In some cases conciliation only differs 
from arbitration in the absence of a previous agreement to accept 
the award. The German " Gewerbegerichten, " when dealing 
with labour disputes, communicate a decision to both parties, 
who must notify their acceptance or otherwise (see below). 
Some of the state boards in America take similar action. The 
conciliation boards established under the New Zealand Arbitra- 
tion Act of 1894 (see below) make recommendations, though either 
side may decline to accept them and may appeal to the court 
of arbitration, which in that colony has compulsory powers. 
Most frequently, however, in Great Britain, the mediating 
party abstains from pronouncing a definite judgment of his 
own, but confines himself to friendly suggestions with a view 
of removing obstacles to an agreement between the parties. 
On the other hand, it is not easy to define how far the " outside 
party " must be independent of the parties to the dispute, 
in order that the method of settlement may be properly described 
as " conciliation." There is a sense in which a friendly conversa- 
tion between an employer or his manager and a deputation of 
aggrieved workmen is rightly described as " conciliation," 
but such an interview would certainly not be covered by the 
term as ordinarily used at the present day. Again, when the 
parties are represented by agents (e.g. the officials of an employers' 
association an,d of a trade union) the actual negotiators or some 
of them may not personally be affected by the particular 
dispute, and may often exercise some of the functions of the 
mediator or conciliator in a manner not clearly to be distinguished 
from the action of an outside party. It seems best, however, to 
exclude such negotiations from our purview so long as those 
between whom they are carried on merely act as the authorized 
agents for the parties affected. In the same way, a meeting 
arranged ad hoc between delegates of an employers' association 
and a trade union, for the purpose of arranging differences 
as to the terms on which the members of the association shall 
employ members of the union is not usually classed as " con- 
ciliation," unless the meeting is held in the presence of an 
independent chairman or conciliator, or in pursuance of a 
permanent agreement between the associations laying down the 
procedure for the settlement of disputes. If, however, the 
dispute is considered and arranged not by a casual meeting 
between two committees and deputations appointed ad hoc, 
but by a permanently organized " joint committee " or board 
with a constitution, rules of procedure and officers of its own, 
the process of settlement is by ordinary usage described as 
"conciliation," even though the board be entirely representative 
of the persons engaged in the industry. Such joint boards, as will 
be seen, play a most important part in conciliation at the present 
day, and they almost always have attached to them some 
machinery for the ultimate decision by arbitration of questions 
on which they fail to agree. Another form of conciliation is that 
in which the mediating board represents a wider group of 
industries than those affected by the dispute (e.g. the London 



332 



ARBITRATION AND CONCILIATION 



and other " district " boards referred to below). Moreover, 
in some of the most important cases of settlement of disputes 
by conciliation, the mediating party has not been a permanent 
board but a disinterested individual, e.g. the mayor, county 
court judge, government official or member of parliament. As 
will be seen below, the Conciliation Act now provides for the 
appointment of " conciliators " by the Board of Trade. 

Voluntary trade boards, however (i.e. permanent joint boards 
representing employers and work-people in particular trades), 
are at once the most firmly established and the most important 
agencies in Great Britain for the prevention and settlement of 
labour disputes. Among the earliest of such bodies was the 
board of arbitration in the Macclesfield silk trade, formed in 
1849, in imitation of the French " Conseils de Prud'hommes," 
but which only lasted four years. The first board, however, 
which attained any degree of permanent success was that estab- 
lished for the hosiery and glove trade in Nottingham in i860, 
through the efforts of A. J. Mundella. In 1864 a board was 
established in the Wolverhampton building trades, with Rupert 
Kettle as chairman, and in 1868 boards were formed for the 
pottery trade, the Leicester hosiery trade and the Nottingham 
lace trade. In 1869 there was formed one of the most important 
of the still existing boards, viz. the board of arbitration and 
conciliation in the manufactured iron and steel trades of the 
north of England, with which the names of Rupert Kettle, 
David Dale and others are associated. In 1872 and 1873 joint 
committees were formed in the Durham and Northumberland 
coal trades to deal with local questions. The Leicester boot and 
shoe trade board, the first of an elaborate system of local boards 
in this trade, was founded in 1875. From about 1870 onwards 
there was a great movement for the establishment of " sliding 
scales " in the coal and iron and steel trades, which by regulating 
wages automatically rendered unnecessary the settlement of 
general wages by conciliation or arbitration. These sliding 
scales, however, usually had attached to them joint committees 
for dealing with disputed questions. A sliding scale arranged by 
David Dale was attached to the manufactured iron trade board 
in 1 87 1. A sliding scale for the Cleveland blast furnacemen 
came into force in 1879. Sliding scales were also adopted in the 
coal trade in many districts, e.g. South Wales (1875), Durham 
(1877) and Northumberland (1879). The movement was, 
however, followed by a reaction, and several of the sliding 
scales in the coal trade were terminated between 1887 and 1889. 
In 1902 the last surviving sliding scale in the coal trade, viz. in 
South Wales, ceased to exist and was replaced by a conciliation 
board. 

The formation on a large scale of conciliation boards in the 
coal trade to fix the rate of wages dates from the great miners' 
dispute of 1893, one of the terms of settlement agreed to at the 
conference held at the foreign office under Lord Rosebery being 
the formation of a conciliation board covering the districts 
affected. Northumberland followed in 1894, Durham in 1895, 
Scotland in 1900 and South Wales in 1903. 

In 1907 an important scheme for the formation of conciliation 
boards for railway companies and their employees was adopted 
as the result of the action taken by the president of the Board of 
Trade to prevent a general strike of railway servants in that year. 
Under this scheme separate boards (sectional and general) were 
to be formed for the employees of each railway company which 
adhered to the scheme, with provision for reference in case of a 
deadlock to an umpire. 

The first general district board to be formed was that estab- 
lished in London in 1890, through the London chamber of 
commerce, as a sequel to the Mansion House committee which 
mediated in the great London dock strike of 1889. The example 
was followed by several large towns, but the action taken by 
the boards in most of these provincial districts has been very 
limited. 

In addition there are two boards composed of representatives 
of co-operators and trade-unionists for the settlement of disputes 
arising between co-operative societies and their employees. 

The most typical form of machinery for the settlement of 



disputes by voluntary conciliation is a joint board consisting of 
equal numbers of representatives of employers and 
employed. The members of the board are usually Constitu- 
elected by the associations of employers and workmen, /unctions 
though in some cases (e.g. in the manufactured iron of voiun- 
trade board) the workmen's representatives are elected **pr conm 
not by their trade union but by meetings of workmen C u'^^ n 
employed at the various works. The chairman may be 
an independent person, or, more usually, a representative of the 
employers, the vice-chairman being a representative of the work- 
men. In the arbitration and conciliation boards in the boot and 
shoe trade, provision is made by which the chair may be occupied 
by representatives of the employers and workmen in alternate 
years. An independent chairman usually has a casting vote, 
which practically makes him an umpire in case of equal voting, 
but where there is no outside chairman there is often provision for 
reference of cases on which the board cannot agree to an umpire, 
who may either be a permanent officer of the board elected for a 
period of time (as in the case of several of the boards in the boot 
and shoe trade), or selected ad hoc by the board or appointed by 
some outside person or body. Thus the choice of the permanent 
chairman or umpire of the miners' conciliation board, formed in 
pursuance of the settlement of the coal dispute of 1893 by Lord 
Rosebery, was left to the speaker of the House of Commons. 
The nomination of umpires under the Railway Agreement of 
1907 was left to the speaker and the master of the rolls. Since the 
passing of the Conciliation Act, several conciliation boards have 
provided in their rules for the appointment of umpires by the 
Board of Trade. 

Conciliation boards constituted as described above usually 
have rules providing that there shall always be equality of voting 
as between employer and workmen, in spite of the casual absence 
of individuals on one side or the other. In order to expedite 
business it is sometimes provided that all questions shall be first 
considered by a sub-committee, with power to settle them by 
agreement before coming before the full board. Boards of con- 
ciliation and arbitration conforming more or less to the above 
type exist in the coal, iron and steel, boot and shoe and other 
industries in the United Kingdom. A somewhat different form of 
organization has prevailed in the cotton-spinning trade (since the 
dispute of 1892-1893) and in the engineering trade (since the 
engineering dispute of 1897-1898). In these important industries 
there are no permanent boards for the settlement of general 
questions, but elaborate agreements are in force between the 
employers' and workmen's organizations which among other 
things prescribe the mode in which questions at issue shall be 
dealt with and if possible settled. In the first place, if the 
question cannot be settled between the employer and his work- 
men, it is dealt with by the local associations or committees or 
their officials, and failing a settlement in this manner, is referred 
to a joint meeting of the executive committees of the two 
associations. In neither agreement is there any provision for the 
ultimate decision of unsettled questions by arbitration. The 
agreement in the cotton trade is known as the " Brooklands 
Agreement," and a large number of questions have been amicably 
settled under its provisions. In the building trade, it is very 
customary for the local " working rules," agreed to mutually by 
employers and employed in particular districts, to contain 
" conciliation rules " providing for the reference of disputed 
questions to a joint committee with or without an ultimate 
reference to arbitration. Yet another form of voluntary board is 
the " district board," consisting in most cases of representatives 
elected in equal numbers by the local chamber of commerce and 
trades council respectively. In the case, however, of the London 
Conciliation Board the workmen's representatives are elected, 
twelve by specially summoned meetings of trade union delegates 
and two by co-optation. The functions of district boards are to 
deal with disputes in any trade which may occur within their 
districts, and of course they can only take action with the 
consent of both parties to the dispute, in this respect differing 
from the majority of " trade " boards, which, as a rule, are 
empowered by the agreement under which they are constituted 



ARBITRATION AND CONCILIATION 



333 



to deal with 'jv'jstions on the application of either party. 
Another interesting type of board is that representing two or 
more groups of workmen and sometimes their employers, with 
tb». object of settling " demarcation " disputes between the 
groups of workmen (i.e. questions as to the limits of the work 
vhich each group may claim to perform). Examples of such 
boards are those representing shipwrights and joiners on the 
Clyde, Tyne and elsewhere. While the arrangements for volun- 
tary conciliation and arbitration differ in this way in various 
industries, there is an equally wide variation in the character and 
range of questions which the boards are empowered to determine. 
For example, some boards in the coal trade (e.g. the concilia- 
tion boards in Northumberland and the so-called " Federated 
Districts ") deal solely with the general rate of wages. Others, 
e.g. the " joint committee " in Northumberland and Durham, 
confine their attention solely to local questions not affecting the 
counties as a whole. The Durham conciliation board deals with 
any general or county questions. This distinction between 
"general" and "local" questions corresponds nearly, though not 
entirely, to the distinction often drawn between questions of the 
terms of future employment and of the interpretation of existing 
agreements. Some conciliation boards are unlimited as regards 
the scope of the questions which they may consider. This was 
formerly the case with the boards in the boot and shoe trade, but 
under the " terms of settlement " of the dispute in 1895 drawn up 
at the Board of Trade, certain classes of questions (e.g. the 
employment of particular individuals, the adoption of piece-work 
or time-work, &c.) were wholly or partially withdrawn from 
their consideration, and any decision of a board contravening the 
" terms of settlement " is null and void. A special feature in the 
procedure for conciliation and arbitration in the boot and shoe 
trade, is the deposit by each party of £1000 with trustees, as a 
financial guarantee for the performance of agreements and 
awards. A certain class of conciliation boards, mostly in the 
Midland metal trades, were attached to " alliances " of employers 
and employed, having for their object the regulation of produc- 
tion and of prices (e.g. the Bedstead Trade Wages Board). 
None of these alliances, however, have survived. 

At all events up to the year 1896, the development of arbi- 
tration and conciliation as methods of settling labour disputes 
Legisla- m tne United Kingdom was entirely independent of 
tioa in the any legislation. Previously to the Conciliation Act of 
United j ggg several attempts had been made by parliament to 
Kingdom. p romo ^ e arbitration and conciliation, but with little or 
no practical result, and the act of 1896 repealed all previous 
legislation on the subject, at the same time excluding the opera- 
tion of the Arbitration Act of 1889 from the settlement of "any 
difference or dispute to which this act applies." The laws repealed 
by the Conciliation Act need only a few words of mention. Dur- 
ing the 1 8th century the fixing of wages by magistrates under the 
Elizabethan legislation gradually decayed, and acts of 1745 and 
1757 gave summary jurisdiction to justices of the peace to 
determine disputes between masters and servants in certain 
circumstances, although no rate of wages had been fixed that 
year by the justices of the peace of the shire. These and other 
laws, relating specially to disputes in the cotton-weaving trade, 
were consolidated and amended by the Arbitration Act of 1824. 
This act seems chiefly to have been aimed at disputes relating to 
piece-work in the textile trades, though applicable to other 
disputes arising out of a wages contract. It expressly excluded, 
however, the fixing of a rate of wages or price of labour or work- 
manship at which the workmen should in future be paid unless 
with the mutual consent of both master and workmen. The act 
gave compulsory powers of settling the disputes to which it relates 
on application of either party to a court of arbitrators represent- 
ing employers and workmen nominated by a magistrate. The 
award could be enforced by distress or imprisonment. The act 
was subsequently amended in detail, and by the " Councils of 
Conciliation " Act of 1867 power was given to the home secretary 
to license "equitable councils of conciliation and arbitration", 
equally representative of masters and workmen, who should 
thereupon have the powers conferred by the act of 1824. The 



act contains provisions for the appointment of conciliation 
committees, and other details which are of little interest seeing 
that the act was never put into operation. Another amendment 
of the act of 1824 was made by the Arbitration (Masters and 
Workmen) Act of 1872, which contemplated the conclusion of 
agreements between employers and employed, designating some 
board of arbitration by which disputes included within the scope 
of the former acts should be determined. A master or workman 
should be deemed to be bound by an agreement under the act, if 
he accepted a printed copy of the agreement and did not re- 
pudiate it within forty-eight hours. Like the previous legislation, 
however, the act of 1872 was inoperative. The evidence given 
before the Royal Commission on Labour (1891-1894) disclosed 
the existence of a considerable body of opinion in favour of some 
further action by the state for the prevention or settlement of 
labour disputes, and some impetus was given to the movement by 
the settlement through official mediation of several important 
disputes, e.g. the great coal-miners' dispute of 1893 by a con- 
ference presided over by Lord Rosebery, the cab-drivers' dispute 
of 1894 by the mediation of the home secretary (H. H. Asquith), 
and the boot and shoe trade dispute of 1895 by a Board of Trade 
conference under the chairmanship of Sir Courtenay Boyle. In 
these, and a few other less important cases, the intervention of 
the Board of Trade or other department took place without any 
special statutory sancticn. The Conciliation Act passed in 1896 
was framed with a view to giving express authorization to such 
action in the future. 

This act is of a purely voluntary character. Its most import- 
ant provisions are those of section 2, empowering the Board of 
Trade in cases " where a difference exists or is apprehended 
between any employer, or any class of employers, and workmen, 
or between different classes of workmen," to take certain steps 
to promote a settlement of the difference. They may of their 
own initiative hold an inquiry or endeavour to arrange a meeting 
between the parties under a chairman mutually agreed on or 
appointed from the outside, and on the application of either 
party they may appoint a conciliator or a board of conciliation 
who shall communicate with the parties and endeavour to bring 
about a settlement and report their proceedings to the Board 
of Trade. On the application of both parties the Board of Trade 
may appoint an arbitrator. In all cases the Board of Trade 
has discretion as to the action to be taken, and there is no pro- 
vision either for compelling the parties to accept their mediation 
or to abide by any agreement effected through their intervention. 
There are other provisions in the act providing for the registration 
of voluntary conciliation boards, and for the promotion by the 
Board of Trade of the formation of such boards in districts and 
trades in which they are deficient. During the first eleven years 
after the passage of the act the number of cases arising under 
section 2 (providing for action by the Board of Trade for the 
settlement of actual or apprehended disputes) averaged twenty- 
one per annum, and the number of settlements effected fifteen. In 
the remaining'cases the Board of Trade either/efused to entertain 
the application or failed to effect a settlement, or the disputes 
were settled between the parties during the negotiations. About 
three-quarters of the settlements were effected by arbitration 
and one-quarter by conciliation. A number of voluntary con- 
ciliation boards formed or reorganized since the passing of the 
act provide in their rules for an appeal to the Board of Trade 
to appoint an umpire in case of a deadlock. At least thirty-six 
trade boards are known to have already adopted this course. 
The figures given above show that the Conciliation Act of 1896 
has not, like previous legislation, been a dead letter, though 
the number of actual disputes settled is small compared with 
the total number annually recorded. 

Arbitration and conciliation in labour disputes as practised 
in the United Kingdom are entirely voluntary, both as regards 
the initiation and conduct of the negotiations and the 
carrying out of the agreement resulting therefrom. torZom- 3 
In all these respects arbitration, though terminating pulsion. 
in what is called a binding award, is on precisely the 
same legal footing as conciliation, which results in a mutual 



334 



ARBITRATION AND CONCILIATION 



agreement. Various proposals have been made (and in some 
cases carried into effect in certain countries) for introducing 
an element of compulsion into this class of proceeding. There 
are three stages at which compulsion may conceivably be intro- 
duced, (i) The parties may be compelled by law to submit 
their dispute to some tribunal or board of conciliation; (2) the 
board of conciliation or arbitration may have power to compel 
the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents; 
(3) the parties may be compelled to observe the award of the 
board of arbitration. The most far-reaching schemes of com- 
pulsory arbitration in force in any country are those in force in 
New Zealand and certain states in Australia. Bills have been 
introduced into the British House of Commons for clothing 
voluntary boards of conciliation and arbitration, under certain 
conditions, with powers to require attendance of witnesses 
and production of documents, without, however, compelling 
the parties to submit their disputes to these boards or to abide 
by their decisions. In the United Kingdom, however, more 
attention has recently been given to the question of strengthen- 
ing the sanction for the carrying out of awards and agreements 
than of compelling the parties to enter into such arrangements. 
An interesting step towards the solution of the difficulty of en- 
forcement in certain cases is perhaps afforded by the provisions 
of the terms of settlement of the dispute in the boot and shoe 
trade drawn up at the Board of Trade in 1895. Under this agree- 
ment £1000 was deposited by each party with trustees, who 
were directed by the trust-deed to pay over to either party, out 
of the money deposited by the other, any sum which might be 
awarded as damages by the umpire named in the deed, for the 
breach of the agreement or of any award made by an arbitration 
board in consonance with it. Very few claims for damages have 
been sustained under this agreement. Nevertheless it cannot 
be doubted that the pecuniary liability of the parties has given 
stability to the work of the local arbitration boards, and the 
satisfaction of both sides with the arrangement is shown by the 
fact that the trust-deed which lapsed in 1900 has been several 
times renewed by common agreement for successive periods of 
two years, and is now in force for an indefinite period subject 
to six months' notice from either side. Theoretically a trust- 
deed of this kind can only offer a guarantee up to the point 
at which the original deposit on one side or the other is exhausted, 
as it is impossible to compel either party to renew the deposit. 
A proposal was made by the duke of Devonshire and certain of 
his colleagues on the Royal Commission on Labour for empower- 
ing associations of employers and employed to acquire, if they 
desired it, sufficient legal personality and corporate character to 
enable them to sue each other or their own members for breach 
of agreement. This would give the association aggrieved .by a 
breach of award the power of suing the defaulting organization 
to recover damages out of their corporate funds, while each 
association could exact penalties from its members for such a 
breach. For this reason the suggestion has met with a good deal 
of support by many interested in arbitration and conciliation, but 
has been steadily opposed by representatives of the trade unions. 
The question is not free from difficulties. The object of the 
change would be to convert what are at present only morally 
binding understandings into legally enforceable contracts. But 
apart from the possibility that some of such contracts would be 
held by the courts to be void as being " in restraint of trade," 
the tendency might be to give a strict legal interpretation to 
working agreements which might deprive them of some of their 
effectiveness for the settlement of the conditions of future con- 
tracts between employers and workmen, while possibly deter- 
ring associations from entering into such agreements for fear 
of litigation. Individuals, moreover, could avoid liability by 
leaving their associations. In practice the cases of repudiation 
or .breach of an award or agreement are not common. In 
countries like New Zealand, where the parties are compelled 
to submit their differences to arbitration, some of the above 
objections do not apply. 

The following statistics are based on the reports of the Labour 
department of the Board of Trade. The numter of boards of 



conciliation and arbitration known to be in existence in the 
United Kingdom is nearly 200, but a good many of 
these do little or no active work. Only about one-third 



Statistics 
of existing 



of these boards deal with actual cases in any one agencies. 
year, the active boards being mainly connected with 
mining, iron and steel, engineering and shipbuilding, boot and 
shoe and building trades. During the ten years 1897-1906 
the total number of cases considered by these boards averaged 
about 1500 annually, of which they have settled about half, 
the remainder having been withdrawn, referred back or other- 
wise settled. About three-quarters of the cases settled were 
determined by the boards themselves and only one-quarter by 
umpires. The great majority of the cases settled were purely 
local questions. Thus more than half the total were dealt with 
by the " joint committees " in the Northumberland and Dur- 
ham coal trades, which confine their action to local questions, 
such as fixing the " hewing prices " for new seams. The great 
majority of the cases settled did not actually involve stoppage 
of work, the most useful work of these permanent boards being 
the prevention rather than the settlement of strikes and lock- 
outs. A certain number of disputes are settled every year by 
the mediation or arbitration of disinterested individuals, e.g. 
the local mayor or county court judge. 

The extent to which the methods of arbitration and concilia- 
tion can be expected to afford a substitute for strikes and lock- 
outs is one on which opinions differ very widely. The 
difficulties arising from the impossibility of enforcing F ^^ and 
agreements or awards by legal process have already u m it s . 
been discussed. Apart from these, however, it is evident 
that both methods imply that the parties, especially the work- 
people, are organized at least to the extent of being capable of 
negotiating through agents. In some industries (e.g. agriculture 
or domestic service) this preliminary condition is not satisfied; 
in others the men's leaders possess little more than consultative 
powers, and employers may hesitate to deal either directly or 
through a third party with individuals or committees who have 
so little authority over those whom they claim to repi.esent. 
And even where the trade organizations are strong, some em- 
ployers refuse in any way to recognize the representative char- 
acter of the men's officials. The question of the " recognition " 
of trade unions by employers is a frequent cause of disputes 
(see Strikes and Lock-outs.) It may be observed, however, 
that it often occurs that in cases in which both employers and 
employed are organized into associations which are accustomed 
to deal with each other, one or both parties entertain a strong 
objection to the intervention of any outside mediator, or to the 
submission of differences to an arbitrator. Thus the engineering 
employers in 1897 were opposed to any outside intervention, 
though ready to negotiate with the delegates chosen by the men. 
On the other hand, the cotton operatives have more than once 
opposed the proposal of the employers to refer the rate of wages 
to arbitration, and throughout the great miners' dispute of 1893 
the opposition to arbitration came from the men. Naturally, 
the party whose organization is the stronger is usually the less 
inclined to admit outside intervention. , But there have also been 
cases in which employers, who refused to deal directly with trade 
union officials, have been willing to negotiate with a mediator 
who was well known to be in communication with these officials, 
e.g. in the case of the Railway Settlement of 1907. 

Apart, however, from the disinclination of one or both parties 
to allow of any outside intervention, we have to consider how 
far the nature of the questions in dispute may in any particular 
case put limits to the applicability of conciliation or arbitration 
as a method of settlement. Since conciliation is only a general 
term for the action of a third party in overcoming the obstacles 
to the conclusion of an agreement by the parties themselves, 
there is no class of questions which admit of settlement 
by direct negotiation which may not equally be settled by this 
method, provided of course that there is an adequate supply of 
sufficiently skilful mediators. As regards arbitration the case 
is somewhat different, seeing that in this case the parties agree 
to be bound by the ! award of a third party. For the success 



ARBITRATION AND CONCILIATION 



335 



of arbitration, therefore, it is important that the general principles 
which should govern the settlement of the particular question 
at issue should be admitted by both sides. Thus in the manu- 
factured iron trade in the north of England, it has throughout 
been understood that wages should depend on the prices realized, 
and the only question which an arbitrator has usually had to 
decide has been how far the state of prices at the time warranted 
a particular change of wage. On the other hand, there are many 
questions on which disputes arise (e.g. the employment of non- 
union labour, the restriction of piece-work, &c.) on which there 
is frequently no common agreement as to principles, and an 
arbitrator may be at a loss to know what considerations he is 
to take into account in determining his award. Generally speak- 
ing, employers are averse from submitting to a third party ques- 
tions involving discipline and the management of their business, 
while in some trades workmen have shown themselves opposed to 
allowing an arbitrator to reduce wages beyond a certain point 
which they wish to regard as a guaranteed " minimum." 

Another objection on the part of some employers and work- 
men to unrestricted arbitration is its alleged tendency to multiply 
disputes by providing an easy way of solving them without 
recourse to strikes or lock-outs, and so diminishing the sense 
of responsibility in the party advancing the claims. It is also 
sometimes contended that arbitrators, not being governed in 
their decisions by a definite code of principles, may tend to 
" split the difference," so as to satisfy both sides even when the 
demands on one side or the other are wholly unwarranted. 
This, it is said, encourages the formulation of demands purposely 
put high in order to admit of being cut down by an arbitrator. 
One of the chief practical difficulties in the way of the success- 
ful working of permanent boards of conciliation, consisting of 
equal numbers of employers and employed, with an umpire 
in case of deadlock, is the difficulty of inducing business men 
whose time is fully occupied to devote the necessary time to the 
work of the boards, especially when either side has it in its power 
to compel recourse to the umpire, and so render the work of the 
conciliation board fruitless. In spite of all these difficulties 
the practice of arranging differences by conciliation and arbitra- 
tion is undoubtedly spreading, and it is to be remembered that 
even in cases in which theoretically a basis for arbitration can 
scarcely be said to exist, recourse to that method may often 
serve a useful purpose in putting an end to a deadlock of 
which both parties are tired, though neither cares to own itself 
beaten. 

New Zealand. — The New Zealand Industrial Conciliation 
and Arbitration Act 1894 is important as the first practical 
attempt of any importance to enforce compulsory arbitration 
in trade disputes. The original act was amended by several 
subsequent measures, and the law has been more than once 
consolidated. The law provides for the incorporation of associa- 
tions of employers or workmen under the title of industrial 
unions, and for the creation in each district of a joint conciliation 
board, elected by these industrial unions, with an impartial 
chairman elected by the board, to which a dispute may be re- 
ferred by any party, a strike or lock-out being thenceforth illegal. 
If the recommendation of the conciliation board is not accepted 
by either party, the matter goes to a court of arbitration con- 
sisting of two persons representing employers and workmen 
respectively, and a judge of the supreme court. Up to 1901 
disputes were ordinarily required to go first to a board of con- 
ciliation except by agreement of the parties, but now either 
party may carry a dispute direct to the arbitration court. 
The amendment was adopted because it was found in practice 
that the great majority of cases went ultimately to the arbitra- 
tion court, and conciliation board proceedings were often mere 
waste of time. The award of the court is enforceable by legal 
process, financial penalties up to £500 being recoverable from 
defaulting associations or individuals. If the property of an 
association is insufficient to pay the penalty, its members are 
individually liable up to £10 each. It is the duty of factory 
inspectors to see that awards are obeyed. The law provides for 



the extension of awards to related trades, to employers entering 
the industry hereafter, and in some cases to a whole industry. 

The above is only an outline of the principal provisions of this 
law, under which questions of wages, hours and the relations of 
employers and workmen generally in New Zealand (q.v.) in- 
dustries became practically the subject of state regulation. 
The act must more properly be judged as a measure for the state 
regulation of industry, but as a method of putting an end to 
labour disputes its success has only been partial. 

Australia. — The laws which are practically operative in Aus- 
tralia with respect to arbitration and conciliation are all based 
with modifications on the New Zealand system. The first com- 
pulsory arbitration act passed in Australia was the New South 
Wales Act of 1901. The principal points of difference between 
this and the New Zealand act are that the conciliation procedure 
is entirely omitted, the New South Wales measure being 
purely an arbitration act. The arbitration court has greater 
power over unorganized trades than in New Zealand, and the 
scope of its awards is greatly enlarged by its power to declare 
any condition of labour to be common rule of an industry, 
and thus binding on all existing and future employers and 
work-people in that industry. In Western Australia laws 
were passed in 1900 and 1902 which practically adopted the 
New Zealand legislation with certain modifications in detail. 

In 1904 the commonwealth of Australia passed a compulsory 
arbitration law based mainly on those in force in New Zealand 
and New South Wales, and applicable to disputes affecting more 
than one Australian state. The arbitration court is empowered 
to require any dispute within its cognizance to be referred to it 
by the state authority proposing to deal with it. There are other 
Australian laws which, though unrepealed (e.g. the South Aus- 
tralian Act of 1894), are a dead-letter. Generally speaking, 
the Australasian laws on arbitration and conciliation are more 
stringent and far-reaching than any others in the world. 

Canada. — In 1900 a conciliation act was passed by the Domin- 
ion parliament resembling the United Kingdom act in most of its 
features, and in 1903 the Canadian Railway Labour Disputes Act 
made special provision for the reference, of railway disputes to a 
conciliation board and (failing settlement) to a court of arbitration. 

This act was consolidated with the Conciliation Act 1900 
during 1906 in an act respecting conciliation and labour, and 
in March 1907 the Industrial Disputes Investigation Act became 
law by which machinery is set up for the constitution of a board, 
on the application of either side to a dispute in mines and 
industries connected with public utilities, whenever a strike 
involving more than ten employees is threatened. The pro- 
visions of the act may be extended to other industries and rail- 
way companies, and their employees may take action under 
either the Conciliation and Labour Act or the Industrial Dis- 
putes Investigation Act. Under the Investigation Act it is 
unlawful for any employer to cause a lock-out, or for an em- 
ployee to go on strike on account of any dispute prior to or dur- 
ing a reference of such dispute to a board constituted under the 
act, or prior to or during a reference under the provisions con- 
cerning railway disputes under the Conciliation and Labour Act. 
There is nothing, however, in the act to prevent a strike or 
lock-out taking place after the dispute has been investigated. 

France. — The French Conciliation and Arbitration Law of 
December 1892 provides that either party to a labour dispute 
may apply to the juge de paix of the canton, who informs the 
other party of the application. If they concur within three days, 
a joint committee of conciliation is formed of not more than 
five representatives of each party, which meets in the presence 
of the juge de paix, who, however, has no vote. If no agreement 
results the parties are invited to appoint arbitrators. If such 
arbitrators are appointed and cannot agree on an umpire, the 
president of the civil tribunal appoints an umpire. In the case 
of an actual strike, in the absence of an application from either 
party it is the duty of the juge de paix to invite the parties to 
proceed to conciliation or arbitration. The results of the action 
of the juge de paix and of the conciliation committee are placarded 
by the mayors of the communes affected. The law leaves the 



33^ 



ARBOGAST 



parties entirely free to accept or reject the services of the juge 
de paix. 

During the ten years 1897-1906 the act was put in force 
in 1809 cases — viz. 916 on application of workmen; 49 of 
employers; 40 of both sides; and 804 without application. 
Altogether 616 disputes were settled — 549 by conciliation and 
67 by arbitration. 

Germany. — In several continental European countries, courts 
or boards are established by law to settle cases arising out of 
existing labour contracts, — e.g. the French " Conseils de Prud'- 
hommes," the Italian " Probi-Viri," and the German "Gewer- 
begerichten," — and some of the questions which come before 
these bodies are such as might be dealt with in England by 
voluntary boards or joint committees. The majority, however, 
are disputes between individuals as to wages due, &c, which 
would be determined in the United Kingdom by a court of 
summary jurisdiction. It is noteworthy, however, that the 
German industrial courts (Gewerbegerichten) are empowered 
under certain conditions to offer their services to mediate 
between the parties to an ordinary labour dispute. The main 
law is that of 1890 which was amended in 1901. In the case 
of a strike or lock-out the court must intervene on application 
of both parties, and may do so of its own initiative or on the 
invitation of one side. The conciliation board for this purpose 
consists under the amending law of 1901 of the president of the 
court and four or more representatives named by the parties 
in equal numbers but not concerned in the dispute. Failing 
appointment by the parties the president appoints them. Fail- 
ing a settlement at a conference between the parties in the 
presence of the president and assessors of the court, the court 
arrives at a decision on the merits of the dispute which is com- 
municated to the parties, who are allowed a certain time within 
which to notify their acceptance or rejection. The court has 
no power to compel the observance of its decision, but in certain 
cases it may fine a witness for non-attendance. In the first 
five years after the passage of the amending law of 1901 (viz. 
1902-1906) there were 1139 applications for the intervention 
of the industrial courts: 492 agreements were brought about 
and 107 decisions were pronounced by the courts, of which 64 
were accepted by both parties. ^ 

Switzerland. — The canton of Geneva enacted a law in 1900 
providing for the settlement by negotiation, conciliation or 
arbitration of the general terms of employment in a trade, 
subject, however, to special arrangements between employers 
and workmen in particular cases. The negotiations take place 
between delegates chosen by the associations of employers and 
employed, or failing them, by meetings summoned by the 
council of state on sufficient applications. Failing settlement, 
the council of state, on application from either party, is to 
appoint one or more conciliators from its members, and if this 
fail the central committee of the Prud'kommes, together with 
the delegates of employers and workmen, is to form a board of 
arbitration, whose decision is binding. Any collective sus- 
pension of work is illegal during the period covered by the award 
or agreement. Up to the end of 1904 only seven cases occurred 
of application of the law to industrial differences. In Basel 
(town) a law providing for voluntary conciliation by means of 
boards of employers and workmen with an independent chairman 
appointed ad hoc by the council of state of the canton, has been 
in force since 1897, but it remained practically unused until 1902. 
In the period from January 1902 to May 1905, 18 disputes were 
dealt with and 10 settled under this law. A similar law was 
adopted in St Gall in 1902. In the three years 1902-1904, 
10 disputes were dealt with and 3 settled. 

Sweden. — By a law which came into force on the 1st of January 
1907, Sweden was divided into seven districts and in each district 
a conciliator was appointed by the crown. The conciliator 
must reside within his district and his principal duty is to promote 
the settlement of disputes between employers and work-people or 
between members of either class among themselves. He is also 
on request to advise and otherwise assist employers and work- 
people in framing agreements affecting the conditions of labour 



if and so far as agreements are designed to promote good relations 
between the two classes and to obviate stoppages of work. 

United States. — In the United States several states have 
legislated on the subject of conciliation and arbitration, among 
the first of such acts being the " Wallace " Act of 1883, in 
Pennsylvania, which, however, was almost inoperative. Al- 
together, 24 states have made constitutional or statutory pro- 
vision for mediation in trade disputes, of which 17 contemplate 
the formation of permanent state boards. The only state laws 
which require notice are those of Massachusetts and New York 
providing for the formation of state boards of arbitration. The 
Massachusetts board, founded in 1886, consists of one employer, 
one employed and one independent person chosen by both. The 
New York board (1886) consists of two representatives of different 
political parties, and one member of a. bona fide trade organiza- 
tion within the state. In both states it is the duty of the board, 
with or without application from the parties, to proceed to the 
spot where a labour dispute has occurred, and to endeavour 
to promote a settlement. The parties may decline its services, 
but the board is empowered to issue a report, and on application 
from either side to hold an inquiry and publish its decision, 
which (in Massachusetts) is binding for six months, unless 
sixty days' notice to the contrary is given by one side to the 
other. Several states, including Massachusetts and New York, 
provide not only for state boards, but also for local boards. 

In Massachusetts, during 1906, the state board dealt with 
1 58 disputes. Of these the board was appealed to as arbitrator 
in 95 cases. Awards were rendered in 80 cases, 12 cases were 
withdrawn and 3 cases were still pending at the end of the year. 
In New York the number of cases dealt with is much smaller. 

Federal legislation can only touch the question of arbitration 
and conciliation so far as regards disputes affecting commerce 
between different states. Thus an act of June 1898 provides 
that in a dispute involving serious interruption of business on 
railways engaged in inter-state commerce, the chairman of the 
Inter-State Commerce Commission and the commissioner of 
labour shall, on application of either party, endeavour to effect 
a settlement, or to induce the parties to submit the dispute 
to arbitration. While an arbitration under the act is pending 
a strike or lock-out is unlawful. 

Authorities. — For the recent development of arbitration and 
conciliation in the United Kingdom, see the Annual Reports of the 
Labour Department of the Board of Trade on Strikes and Lock-outs 
from 1888 onwards. Since 1890 these reports have contained special 
appendices on the work of arbitration boards. See also the Labour 
Gazette (the monthly journal of the Labour Department) from 1893 
onward, and the Report on Rules of Voluntary Conciliation and 
Arbitration Boards and Joint Committees. The Reports of the Royal 
Commission on Labour (1 891-1894) contain much valuable informa- 
tion on the subject. For the working of the Conciliation Act see the 
Reports of the Board of Trade on their proceedings under the 
Conciliation Act 1896. For the earlier history in the United King- 
dom: Crompton, Industrial Conciliation (1876); Price, Industrial 
Peace (1887). For foreign and colonial developments: the third 
Abstract of Foreign Labour Statistics (1906), issued by the Board of 
Trade; Report on Government Industrial Arbitration, by L. W. Hatch 
(Bulletin of Bureau of Labour of United States Department of 
Commerce and Labour, September 1905); the report of the French 
Office du Travail, De la conciliation et de Varbitrage dans les conftits 
collectifs entre patrons et ouvriers en France et a I'etranger (1893); 
the Annual Reports of the same Department on Strikes, Lock- 
outs and Arbitration; the Reports of the Massachusetts and New 
York State Arbitration Boards, and of the New Zealand Depart- 
ment of Labour; and the Labour Gazette. See also the following 
general works: N. P. Gilman, Methods of Industrial Peace (Boston, 
1904) ; A. C. Pigou, Principles and Methods of Industrial Peace 
(1905)- (X.) 

ARBOGAST (d. 394), a barbarian officer in the Roman army, 
at the end of the 4th century. His nationality is uncertain, 
but Zosimus, Eunapius and Sulpicius Alexander (a Gallo- 
Roman historian quoted by Gregory of Tours) all refer to him 
as a Frank. Having served with distinction against the Goths in 
Thrace, he was sent by Theodosius in 388 against Maximus, who 
had usurped the empire of the west and had murdered Gratian. 
His complete success, which resulted in the destruction of Maximus 
and his sons and the pacification of Gaul, led Theodosius 
to appoint him chief minister for his young brother-in-law 



ARBOIS— ARBORETUM 



337 



Valentinian II. His rule was most energetic; but while he 
favoured the barbarians in the imperial service, and appointed 
them to high office, Valentinian, openly jealous of his minister, 
sought to surround himself with Romans. As an offset to this, 
Arbogast allied himself with the pagan element in Rome, while 
Valentinian was strictly orthodox. In 392 Valentinian was 
secretly put to death at Vienne (in Gaul), and Arbogast, naming 
as his successor Eugenius, a rhetorician, descended into Italy 
to meet the expedition which Theodosius was heading against 
him. He proclaimed himself the champion of the old Roman 
gods, and as a response to the appeal of Ambrose, is said to have 
threatened to stable his horses in the cathedral of Milan, and 
to force the monks to fight in his army. His defeat in the hard- 
fought battle of the Frigidus saved Italy from these dangers. 
Theodosius, after a two days' fight, gained the victory by the 
treachery of one of Arbogast's generals, sent to cut off his 
retreat. Eugenius was captured and executed, but Arbogast 
escaped to the mountains, where however he slew himself three 
days afterwards (8th of September 394). Although we have only 
most distorted narratives upon which to rely — pagan eulogy and 
Christian denunciation — Arbogast appears to have been one of 
the greatest soldiers of the later empire, and a statesman of 
no mean rank. His energy, and his apparent disdain for the 
effete civilization which he protected, but which did not affect 
his character, make his personality one of the most interesting 
of the 4th century. 

See T. Hodgkin, Italy and her Invaders (1880), vol. i. chap. ii. 

ARBOIS, a town of eastern France, in the department of Jura, 
on the Cuisance, 29 m. N.N.E. of Lons-le-Saunier by rail. Pop. 
(1906) 3454. The town is the seat of the tribunal of first 
instance of the arrondissement of Poligny, and has a communal 
college. The church of St Just, founded in the 10th century, 
.has good wood-carving. An Ursuline convent, built in 1764, 
serves as hotel de ville and law court, and a church of the 14th 
century is used as a market. There is an old chateau of the 
dukes of Burgundy. Arbois is well known for its red and white 
wines, and has saw-mills, tanneries and market gardens, and 
manufactures paper, oil and casks. 

ARBOIS DE JUBAINVILLE, MARIE HENRI D' (1827-1910), 
French historian and philologist, was born at Nancy on the 5th of 
December 1827. In 1851 he left the Ecole des Chartes with the 
degree of palaeographic archivist. He was placed in control 
of the departmental archives of Aube, and remained in that 
position until 1880, when he retired on a pension. He pub- 
lished several volumes of inventorial abstracts, a Repertoire 
archeologique du departement in 1861; a valuable Histoire des 
dues et comics de Champagne depuis le VI" siecle- jusqu'a la 
fin du XI', which was published between 1859 and 1869 (8 vols.), 
and in 1880 an instructive monograph upon Les Inlendants de 
Champagne. But already he had become attracted towards 
the study of the most ancient inhabitants of Gaul; in 1870 
he brought out an Elude sur la diclinaison des noms 
propres dans la langue franque a I'epoque merovingienne; 
and in 1877 a learned work upon Les Premiers Habitants de 
I'Europe (2nd edition in 2 vols. 1889 and 1894). Next he con- 
centrated his efforts upon the field of Celtic languages, literature 
and law, in which he soon became an authority. Appointed in 
1882 to the newly founded professorial chair of Celtic at the 
College de France, he began the Cours de litterature celtique 
which in 1908 extended to twelve volumes. For this he himself 
edited the following works: Introduction a l' etude de la litterature 
celtique (1883); L' Epopee celtique en Irlande (1892); Etudes 
sur le droit celtique (1895); ar >d Les Principaux Auteurs de 
I'antiquite a consulter sur I'histoire des Celtes (1902). He was 
among the first in France to enter upon the study of the most 
ancient monuments of Irish literature with a solid philological 
preparation and without empty prejudices. We owe to him 
also Les Celtes depuis les temps les plus recules jusqu'a I' an 100 
avant noire ere (1904), and a study of comparative law in La 
Famille celtique (1905). Numerous detailed studies upon the 
Gaulish names of persons and places took synthetic form in the 
Recherches sur Vorigine de la proprUU foncicre (1890), which 



illumined one of the most interesting aspects of the Roman 
occupation of Gaul. The Recueil de mimoires concernant 
la litterature et I'histoire celtiques, made by the most notable 
among his disciples on the occasion of his seventy-eighth birth- 
day (1906), was a well-deserved tribute to his persevering and 
fruitful industry. He died in February 1910. (C. B.*) 

ARBOR DAY, the name applied in the United States of 
America to a day appointed for the public planting of trees 
(see Arbour). Originating, or at least being first successfully 
put into operation, in Nebraska in 1872 through the instrument- 
ality of J. Sterling Morton, then president of the state Board of 
Agriculture, it received the official sanction of the state by the 
proclamation of Governor R. W. Furnas in 1874 and by the 
enactment in 1885 of a law establishing it as a legal holiday in 
Nebraska. The movement spread rapidly throughout the 
United States until with hardly an exception every state and 
territory celebrates such a day either as a legal or a school holiday. 
The time of celebration varies in different states — sometimes 
even in different localities in the same state — but April or early 
May is the rule in the northern states, and February, January 
and December are the months in various southern states. A 
like practice has been introduced in New Zealand. 

See N. H. Egleston, Arbor Day: Its History and Observance 
(Washington, 1896), Robert W. Furnas, Arbor Day (Lincoln, Neb., 
1888), and R. H. Schaufner (ed.), Arbor Day (New York, 1909). 

ARBORETUM, the name given to that part of a garden or park 
which is reserved for the growth and display of trees. The term, 
in this reitricted sense, was seemingly first so employed in 1838 
by J. C. Loudon, in his book upon arboreta and fruit trees. 
Professor Bayley Balfour, F.R.S., the Regius Keeper of the 
Royal Botanic Garden in Edinburgh, has described an arboretum 
as a living collection of species and varieties of trees and shrubs 
arranged after some definite method — it may be properties, or 
uses, or some other principle — but usually after that of natural 
likeness. The plants are intended to be specimens showing the 
habit of the tree or shrub, and the collection is essentially an 
educational one. According to another point of view, an 
arboretum should be constructed with regard to picturesque 
beauty rather than systematically, although it is admitted that 
for scientific purposes a systematic arrangement is a sine qua non. 
In this more general respect, an arboretum or woodland affords 
shelter, improves local climate, renovates bad soils, conceals 
objects unpleasing to the eye, heightens the effect of what is 
agreeable and graceful, and adds value, artistic and other, to the 
landscape. What Loudon called the " gardenesque " school of 
landscape naturally makes particular use of trees. By common 
consent the arboretum in the Royal Botanical Gardens at Kew 
is one of the finest in the world. Its beginnings may be traced 
back to 1762, when, at the suggestion of Lord Bute, the duke of 
Argyll's trees and shrubs were removed from Whitton Place, 
near Hounslow, to adorn the princess of Wales's garden at Kew. 
The duke's collection was famous for its cedars, pines and firs. 
Most of the trees of that date have perished, but the survivors 
embrace some of the finest of their kind in the gardens. The 
botanical gardens at Kew were thrown open to the public in 1841 
under the directorate of Sir W'illiam Hooker. Including the 
arboretum, their total area did not then exceed n acres. Four 
years later the pleasure grounds and gardens at Kew occupied by 
the king of Hanover were given to the nation and placed under 
the care of Sir William for the express purpose of being converted 
into an arboretum. Hooker rose to the occasion and, zealously 
reinforced by his son and successor, Sir Joseph, established a 
collection which rapidly grew in richness and importance. It is 
perhaps the largest collection of hardy trees and shrubs known, 
comprising some 4500 species and botanical varieties. A large 
proportion of the total acreage (288) of the Gardens is monopolized 
by the arboretum. Of the more specialized public arboreta in 
the United Kingdom the next to Kew are those in the Royal 
Botanic Garden in Edinburgh and the Glasnevin Garden in 
Dublin. The collection of trees in the Botanic Garden at Cam- 
bridge is also one of respectable proportions. There is a small 
but very select collection of trees at Oxford, the oldest botanical 



338 



ARBORICULTURE— ARBOS 



garden in Great Britain, which was founded in 1632. In the 
United States the Arnold Arboretum at Boston ranks with Kew 
for size and completeness. It takes its name from its donor, the 
friend of Emerson. It was originally a well-timbered park, 
which, by later additions, now covers 222 acres. Practically, 
it forms part of the park system so characteristic of the city, 
being situated only 4 m. from the centre of population. There is 
a fine arboretum in the botanical gardens at Ottawa, in Canada 
(65 acres). On the continent of Europe the classic example is 
still the Jardin des Planles in Paris, where, however, system lends 
more of formality than of beauty to the general effect. The 
collection of trees and shrubs at Schonbrunn, near Vienna, is an 
extensive one. At Dahlem near Berlin the new Kgl. Neuer 
Bolanischer Garten has been laid out with a view to the accom- 
modation of a very large collection of hardy trees and shrubs. 
There are now many large collections of hardy trees and shrubs 
in private parks and gardens throughout the British Islands, 
the interest taken in them by their proprietors having largely 
increased in recent years. Rich men collect trees, as they do 
paintings or books. They spare neither pains nor money in 
acquiring specimens, even from distant lands, to which they 
often send out expert collectors at their own expense. This, too, 
the Royal Horticultural Society was once, wont to-do, with 
valuable results, as in the case of David Douglas's remarkable 
expedition to North America in 1823-1824. It will be remembered 
that when the laird of Dumbiedikes lay dying (Scott's Heart of 
Midlothian, chap, viii.) he gave his son one bit of advice which 
Bacon himself could not have bettered. " Jock," said the old 
reprobate, " when ye hae naething else to do; ye may be aye 
sticking in a tree; it will be growing, Jock, when ye're sleeping." 
Sir Walter assures us that a Scots earl took this maxim so 
seriously to heart that he planted a large tract of country with 
trees, a practice which in these days is promoted by the English 
and Royal Scottish Arboricultural Societies. 

ARBORICULTURE (Lat. arbor, a tree), the science and art 
of tree-cultivation. The culture of those plants which supply 
the food of man or nourish the domestic animals must have 
exclusively occupied his attention for many ages; whilst the 
timber employed in houses, ships and machines, or for fuel, was 
found in the native woods. Hence, though the culture of fruit- 
trees, and occasionally of ornamental trees and shrubs, was 
practised by the Egyptians, Greeks and Romans, the cultivation 
of timber-trees on a large scale only took place in modern times. 
In the days of Charlemagne, the greater part of France and 
Germany was covered with immense forests; and one of the 
benefits conferred on France by that prince was the rooting up of 
portions of these forests throughout the country, and substituting 
orchards or vineyards. Artificial plantations appear to have been 
formed in Germany sooner than in any other country, apparently 
as early as the 15th century. In Britain planting was begun, 
though sparingly, a century later. After the extensive transfers 
of property on the seizure of the church lands by Henry VIII., 
much timber was sold by the new owners, and the quantity thus 
thrown into the market so lowered its price, as Hollingshed 
informs us, that the builders of cottages, who had formerly 
employed willow and other cheap and common woods, now 
built them of the best oak. The demand for timber constantly 
increased, and the need of an extended surface of arable land 
arising at the same time, the natural forests became greatly 
circumscribed, till at last timber began to be imported, and the 
proprietors of land to think, first of protecting their native woods, 
afterwards of enclosing waste ground and allowing it to become 
covered with self-sown seedlings, and ultimately of sowing acorns 
and mast in such enclosures, or of filling them with young plants 
collected in the woods — a practice which exists in Sussex and 
other parts of England even now. Planting, however, was not 
general in England till the beginning of the 17th century, when 
the introduction of trees was facilitated by the interchange of 
plants by means of botanic gardens, which, in that century, were 
first established in different countries. Evelyn's Sylva, the first 
edition of which appeared in 1664, rendered an extremely im- 
portant service to arboriculture; and there is no doubt that the 



ornamental plantations in which England surpasses all other 
countries are in some measure the result of his enthusiasm. In 
consequence of a scarcity of timber for naval purposes, and the 
increased expense during the Napoleonic war of obtaining foreign 
supplies, planting received a great stimulus in Britain in the 
early part of the 19th century. After the peace of 181 5 the rage 
for planting with a view to profit subsided; but there was a grow- 
ing taste for the introduction of trees and shrubs from foreign 
countries, and for their cultivation for ornament and use. The 
profusion of trees and shrubs planted around suburban villas and 
country mansions, as well as in town squares and public parks, 
shows how much arboriculture is an object of pleasure to the 
people. While isolated trees and old hedgerows are disappearing 
before steam cultivation, the advantages of shelter from well- 
arranged plantations are more fully appreciated; and more 
attention is paid to the principles of forest conservancy both at 
home and abroad. In all thickly peopled countries the forests 
have long ceased to supply the necessities of the inhabitants by 
natural reproduction; and it has become needful to form 
plantations either by government or by private enterprise, for 
the growth of timber, and in some cases for climatic amelioration. 
This subject is, however, dealt with more fully under Forests 
and Forestry (q.v.); and the separate articles on the various 
sorts of tree may be consulted for details as to each. 

ARBOR VITAE (Tree of Life), a name given by Clusius to 
species of Thuja. The name Thuja, which was adopted by 
Linnaeus from the Thuya of Tournefort, seems to be derived from 
the Greek word 6vos, signifying sacrifice, probably because the 
resin procured from the plant was used as incense. The plants 
belong to the natural order Coniferae, tribe Cupressineae 
(Cypresses). Thuja occidentalis is the Western or American 
arbor vitae, the Cupressus Arbor Vilae of old authors. It is a 
native of North America, and ranges from Canada to the moun- 
tains of Virginia and Carolina. It is a moderate-sized tree, and 
was introduced into Britain before 1597, when it was mentioned 
in Gerard's Herbal. In its native country it attains a height of 
about 50 ft. The leaves are small and imbricate, and are borne on 
flattened branches, which are apt to be mistaken for the leaves. 
When bruised the leaves give out an aromatic odour. The 
flowers appear early in spring, and the fruit is ripened about the 
end of September. In Britain the plant is a hardy evergreen, 
and can only be looked upon as a large shrub or low tree. It is 
often cut so as to form hedges in gardens. The wood is very 
durable and useful for outdoor work, such as fencing, posts, etc. 
Another species of arbor vitae is Thuja orientalis, known also as 
Biota orientalis. The latter generic name is derived from the 
Greek adjective ftiooros, formed from /3£os, life, probably in 
connexion with the name " tree of life." This is the Eastern or 
Chinese arbor vitae. It is a native of China. It was cultivated 
in the Chelsea Physick Garden in 1752, and was believed to have 
been sent to Europe by French missionaries. It has roundish 
cones, with numerous scales and wingless seeds. The leaves, 
which have a pungent aromatic odour, are said to yield a yellow 
dye. There are numerous varieties of this plant in cultivation, 
one of the most remarkable of which is the variety pendula, with 
long, flexible, hanging, cord-like branches; it was discovered in 
Japan about 1776 by Carl Peter Thunberg, a pupil of Linnaeus, 
who made valuable collections at the Cape of Good Hope, in the 
Dutch East Indies and in Japan. The variety pygmaea forms a 
small bush a few inches high. 

Thuja gigantea, the red or canoe cedar, a native of north-western 
America from southern Alaska to north California, is the finest 
species, the trunk rising from a massive base to the height of 1 50 to 
200 ft. It was not introduced to Britain till 1853. It is one of the 
handsomest of conifers, forming an elongated cone of foliage, 
which in some gardens has already reached 70 or 80 ft. in height. 
It thrives in most kinds of soils. The timber is easily worked and 
used for construction, especially where exposed to the weather. 

ARBOS, FERNANDEZ (1863- ), Spanish violinist and 
composer, was born in Madrid, and trained at the conservatoire 
there, and later at Brussels and at Berlin under Joachim. He 
became a professor at Hamburg and then at Madrid, becoming 



ARBOUR— ARBUTHNOT 



339 



famous meanwhile as one of the finest violinists of the day; and 
after visiting England in 1890 and establishing his reputation 
there, he became professor at the Royal College of Music in 
London. As a composer he is best known by his violin pieces, 
and by a comic opera, El Ccnlro de la Ticrra (1895). 

ARBOUR, or Arbor (originally " herber " or " erber," O. 
Fr. herbicr, from Lat. herbarium, a collection of herbs, herba, 
grass; the word came to be spelt " arber " through its pronuncia- 
tion, as in the case of Derby, and by the 16th century was 
written " arbour," helped by a confusion of derivation from Lat. 
arbor, a tree, and by change of meaning), a grass-plot or lawn, a 
herb-garden, or orchard, and a shady bower of interlaced trees, 
or climbing plants trained on lattice-work. The application of 
the word has shifted from the grass-covered ground, the proper 
meaning, to the covering of trees overhead. " Arbor " (from the 
Latin for " tree ") is a term applied to the spindle of a wheel, 
particularly in clock-making. 

ARBROATH, or Aberbrothock, a royal, municipal and 
police burgh, and seaport of Forfarshire, Scotland. It is situated 
at the mouth of Brothock water, 17 m. N.E. of Dundee by the 
North British railway, which has a branch to Forfar, via Guthrie, 
on the Caledonian railway. Pop. (1891) 22, 821; (1901) 22,398. 
The town is under the jurisdiction of a provost, bailies and 
council, and, with Brechin, Forfar, Inverbervie and Montrose, 
returns one member to parliament. The leading industries 
include the manufacture of sailcloth, canvas and coarse linens, 
tanning, boot and shoe making, and bleaching, besides engineer- 
ing works, iron foundries, chemical works, shipbuilding and 
fisheries. The harbour, originally constructed and maintained by 
the abbots, by an agreement between the burgesses and John 
Gedy, the abbot in 1394, was replaced by one more com- 
modious in 1725, which in turn was enlarged and improved in 
1844. The older portion was converted into a wet dock in 1877, 
and the entrance and bar of the new harbour were deepened. A 
signal tower, 50 ft. high, communicates with the Bell Rock (q.v.) 
lighthouse on the Inchcape Rock, 12 m. south-east of Arbroath, 
celebrated in Southey's ballad. The principal public buildings 
are the town-hall, a somewhat ornate market house, the gildhall, 
the public hall, the infirmary, the antiquarian museum (including 
some Valuable fossil remains) and the public and mechanics' 
libraries. The parish church dates from 1570, but has been much 
altered, and the spire was added in 1831. The ruins of a mag- 
nificent abbey, once one of the richest foundations in Scotland, 
stand in High Street. It was founded by William the Lion in 
1 1 78 for Tironesian Benedictines from Kelso, and consecrated in 
1197, being dedicated to St Thomas Becket, whom the king had 
met at the English court. It was William's only personal 
foundation, and he was buried within its precincts in 1214. Its 
style was mainly Early English, the western gable Norman. 
The cruciform church measured 276 ft. long by 160 ft. wide, and 
was a structure of singular beauty and splendour. The remains 
include the vestry, the southern transept (the famous rose 
window of which is still entire), part of the chancel, the southern 
wall of the nave, part of the entrance towers and the western 
doorway. It was here that the parliament met which on the 
6th of April 1320 addressed to the pope the notable letter, 
asserting the independence of their country and reciting in 
eloquent terms the services which their " lord and sovereign " 
Robert Bruce had rendered to Scotland. The last of the abbots 
was Cardinal Beaton, who succeeded his uncle James when the 
latter became archbishop of St Andrews. At the Reformation 
the abbey was dismantled and afterwards allowed to go to ruin. 
Part of the secular buildings still stand, and the abbot's house, or 
Abbey House as it is now called, is inhabited. Arbroath was 
created a royal burgh in 11 86, and its charter of 1599 is preserved. 
King John exempted it from " toll and custom" in every part of 
England excepting London. Arbroath is " Fairport " of Scott's 
A ntiquary, and Auchmithie, 3 m. north-east ('"' Musselcrag " of the 
same romance), is a quaint old-fashioned place, where the men 
earn a precarious living by fishing. On each side of the village 
the coast scenery is remarkably picturesque, the rugged cliffs — 
reaching in the promontory of Red Head, the scene of a thrilling 



incident in the Antiquary, a height of 267 ft. — containing many 
curiously shaped caves and archways which attract large numbers 
of visitors. At the 14th-century church of St Vigeans, 1 m. north 
of Arbroath, stands one of the most interesting of the sculptured 
stones of Scotland, with what is thought to be the only legible 
inscription in the Pictish tongue. The parish— originally called 
Aberbrothock and now incorporated with Arbroath for ad- 
ministrative purposes — takes its name from a saint or hermit 
whose chapel was situated at Grange of Conon, 35 m. north-west. 
Two miles west by south are the quarries of Carmyllie, the ter- 
minus of a branch line from Arbroath, which was the first light 
railway in Scotland and was opened in 1900. 

ARBUTHNOT, ALEXANDER (1538-1583), Scottish ecclesiastic 
and poet, educated at St Andrews and Bourges, was in 1569 
elected principal of King's College, Aberdeen, which office he 
retained until his death. He played an active part in the stirring 
church politics of the period, and was twice moderator of the kirk, 
and a member of the commission of inquiry into the condition 
of the university of St Andrews (1583). The " correctness " 
of his attitude on all public questions won for him the com- 
mendation of Catholic writers; he is not included in Nicol 
Burne's list of " periurit apostatis "; but his policy and influence 
were misliked by James VI. , who, when the Assembly had elected 
Arbuthnot to the charge of the church of St Andrews, ordered 
him to return to his duties at King's College. He had been for 
some time minister of Arbuthnott in Kincardineshire. His 
extant works are (a) three poems, " The Praises of Wemen " 
(224 lines), "On Luve" (iodines), and "The Miseries of a Pure 
Scholar" (189 lines), and (b) a Latin account of the Arbuthnot 
family, Originis et Incrementi Arbuthnoticae Familiae Descriptio 
Historica (still in MS.), of which an English continuation, by the 
father of Dr John Arbuthnot, is preserved in the Advocates' 
Library, Edinburgh. The praise of the fair sex in the first 
poem is exceptional in the literature of his age; and its geniality 
may help us to understand the author's popularity with his 
contemporaries. Arbuthnot must not be confused with his con- 
temporary and namesake, the Edinburgh printer, who produced 
the first edition of Buchanan's History of Scotland in 1582. 
Some have discovered in the publication of this work a false clue 
to James's resentment against the principal of King's College. 

The particulars of Arbuthnot's life are found in Calderwood, 
Spottiswood, and other Church historians, and in Scott's Fasti 
Ecclesiae Scoticanae. The poems are printed in Pinkerton's Ancient 
Scottish Poems (1786), i. pp. 138-155. 

ARBUTHNOT, JOHN (1667-1735), British physician and 
author, was born at Arbuthnott, Kincardineshire, and baptized 
on the 29th of April 1667. His father, Alexander Arbuthnot, 
was an episcopalian minister who was deprived of his living in 
1689 by his patron, Viscount Arbuthnott, for refusing to con- 
form to the Presbyterian system. After his death, in 1691, 
John went to London, where he lived in the house of a learned 
linen-draper, William Pate, and supported himself by teaching 
mathematics. In 1692 he published Of the Laws of Chance . . . , 
based on the Latin version, De Ratociniis in ludo aleae, of a Dutch 
treatise by Christiaan Huygens. In 1692 he entered University 
College, Oxford, as a fellow-commoner, acting as private tutor 
to Edward Jefferys; and in 1696 he graduated M.D. at St 
Andrews university. In An Examination of Dr Woodward's 
Account of the Deluge (1697) he confuted an extraordinary 
theory advanced by Dr William Woodward. An Essay on the 
Usefulness of Mathematical Learning followed in 1701, and in 1704 
he became a fellow of the Royal Society. He had the good fortune 
to be called in at Epsom to prescribe for Prince George of Denmark, 
and in 1705 he was made physician extraordinary to Queen Anne. 
Four years later he became royal physician in ordinary, and in 
171c he was elected fellow of the Royal College of Physicians. 
Arbuthnot's ready wit and varied learning made him very 
valuable to the Tory party. He was a close friend of Jonathan 
Swift and of Alexander Pope, and Lord Chesterfield says that 
even the generous acknowledgment they made of his assistance 
fell short of their real indebtedness. He had no jealousy of 
his fame as an author, and his abundant imagination was always 



34-0 



ARCACHON— ARCADE 



at the service of his friends. In 1712 appeared "Law is a 
Bottomless Pit, Exemplify'd in the case of the Lord Strutt, 
John Bull, Nicholas Frog and Lewis Baboon, who spent all they 
had in a law-suit. Printed from a Manuscript found in the 
Cabinet of the famous Sir Humphrey Polesworth." This was 
the first of a series of five pamphlets advocating the conclusion 
of peace. Arbuthnot describes the confusion after the death 
of the Lord Strutt (Charles II. of Spain) , and the quarrels between 
the greedy tradespeople (the allies). These put their cause into 
the hands of the attorney, Humphrey Hocus (the duke of Marl- 
borough), who does all he can to prolong the struggle. The 
five tracts are printed in two parts as the " History of John Bull " 
in the Miscellanies in Prose and Verse (1727, preface signed by 
Pope and Swift). Arbuthnot fixed the popular conception of 
John Bull, though it is not certain that he originated the character, 
and the lively satire is still amusing reading. It was often 
asserted at the time that Swift wrote these pamphlets, but 
both he and Pope refer to Arbuthnot as the sole author. In 
the autumn of the same year he published a second satire, 
" Proposals for printing a very Curious Discourse in Two 
Volumes in Quarto, entitled, tyevdoXoyia HoKmnri; or, 
A Treatise of the Art of Political Lying," best known by its 
sub-title. This ironical piece of work was not so popular as 
" John Bull." " 'Tis very pretty," says Swift, " but not so 
obvious to be understood." Arbuthnot advises that a lie should 
not be contradicted by the truth, but by another judicious lie. 
" So there was not long ago a gentleman, who affirmed that the 
treaty with France for bringing popery and slavery into .England 
was signed the 15th of September, to which another answered 
very judiciously, not by opposing truth to his lie, that there 
was no such treaty; but that, to his certain knowledge, there 
were many things in that treaty not yet adjusted." 

Arbuthnot was one of the leading spirits in the Scriblerus Club, 
the members of which were to collaborate in a universal satire 
on the abuses of learning. The Memoirs of the extraordinary 
Life, Works, and Discoveries of Martinus Scriblerus, of which only 
the first book was finished, first printed in Pope's Works (1741), 
was chiefly the work of Arbuthnot, who is at his best in the 
whimsical account of the birth and education of Martin. Swift, 
writing on the 3rd of July 1714 to Arbuthnot, says: — "To 
talk of Martin in any hands but yours, is a folly. You every 
day give better hints than all of us together could do in a twelve- 
month: and to say the truth, Pope who first thought of the 
hint has no genius at all to it, to my mind; Gay is too young: 
Parnell has some ideas of it, but is idle; I could put together, 
and lard, and strike out well enough, but all that relates to the 
sciences must be from you." 

The death of Queen Anne put an end to Arbuthnot's position 
at court, but he still had an extensive practice, and in 1727 he 
delivered the Harveian oration before the Royal College of 
Physicians. Lord Chesterfield and William Pulteney were his 
patients and friends; also Mrs Howard (Lady Suffolk) and 
William Congreve. His friendship with Swift was constant and 
intimate; he was friend and adviser to Gay; and Pope wrote (2nd 
of August 1 734) that in a friendship of twenty years he had found 
no one reason of complaint from him. Arbuthnot's youngest 
son, who had just completed his education, died in December 
1 73 1. He never quite recovered his former spirits and health 
after this shock. On the 17th of July 1734 he wrote to Pope: 
" A recovery in my case, and at my age, is impossible; the 
kindest wish of my friends is Euthanasia." In January 1735 
was published the " Epistle to Dr Arbuthnot," which forms the 
prologue to Pope's satires. He died on the 27th of February 
1735 at his house in Cork Street, London. 

Among Arbuthnot's other works are: — An Argument for 
Divine Providence, taken from the constant regularity observed 
in the Births of both sexes (Phil. Trans, of the Royal Soc, 1710); 
" Virgilius Restauratus," printed in the second edition of Pope's 
Dunciad (172Q); A n Essay concerning the Effects of A ir on Human 
Bodies (1733); An Essay concerning the Nature of Ailments . . . 
(1731); and a valuable Table of Ancient Coins, Weights and 
Measures (1727), which is an enlargement of an earlier treatise 



( 1 705) . He had a share in the unsuccessful farce of Three Hours 
after Marriage, printed with Gay's name on the title-page 
(171 7). Some pieces printed in A Supplement to Dr Swift's 
and Mr Pope's Works . . . ,1739) are there asserted to be Arbuth- 
not's. The Miscellaneous Works of the late Dr Arbuthnot were 
published at Glasgow in an unauthorized edition in 1751. This 
includes many spurious pieces. 

See The Life and Works of John Arbuthnot (1892), by George 
A. Aitken. 

ARCACHON, a coast town of south-western France, in the 
department of Gironde, 37 m. W.S.W. of Bordeaux on the 
Southern railway. Pop. (1906) 9006. Arcachon is situated on 
the southern border of the lagoon of Arcachon at the foot of 
dunes covered with splendid pine-woods. It comprises two 
distinct parts, the summer town, extending for 2\ m. along the 
shore, and bordered by a firm sandy beach, frequented by bathers, 
and the winter town, farther inland, consisting of numerous 
villas scattered amongst the pines. 

Owing to the mildness of its climate the winter town is a 
resort for consumptive patients. The principal industries are 
oyster-breeding, which is conducted on a very large scale, and 
fishing. The port has trade with Spain and England. 

ARCADE, in architecture, a range of arches, supported either 
by columns or piers; isolated in the case of those separating the 
nave of a church from the aisles, or forming the front of a covered 
ambulatory, as in the cloisters in Italy and Sicily, round the 
Ducal Palace or the Square of St Mark's, Venice, round the 
courts of the palaces in Italy, or in Paris round the Palais-Royal 
and the Place des Vosges. The earliest examples known are 
those of the Tabularium, the theatre of Marcellus, and the 
Colosseum, in Rome. In the palace of Diocletian at Spalato 
the principal street had an arcade on either side, the arches of 
which rested direct on the capital without any intervening 





Fig. 



Fig. 2.- 



-Arcade, St John's, 
Devizes. 



1. — Arcade, Westminster 
Abbey. 

entablature or impost block. The term is also applied to the 
galleries, employed decoratively, on the facades of the Italian 
churches, and carried round the apses where they are known as 
eaves-galleries. Sometimes these arcades project from the wall 
sufficiently to allow of a passage behind, and sometimes they are 

II 




From Rickman's Styles o] Architecture, by permission of Parker & Co. 

Fig. 3. — Triforium at Beverley, 
built into and form part of the wall; in the latter case, they are 
known as blind or wall arcades; and they were constantly 
employed to decorate the lower part of the walls of the aisles and 
the choir-aisles in English churches. Externally, blind arcades 
are more often found in Italy and Sicily, but there are examples in 



ARC ADELT— ARCADIUS 



34i 



England at Canterbury, Ely, Peterborough, Norwich, St John's 
(Chester), Colchester and elsewhere. Internally, the oldest 
example is that of the~old refectory in Westminster Abbey (fig. 1). 
Sometimes the design is varied with interlacing arches as in 
St John's, Devizes (fig. 2), and Beverley Minster (fig. 3). In 
Sicily and the south of Italy these interlacing arcades are the 
special characteristic of the Saracenic work there found, and 
their origin may be found in the interlaced arches of the Mosque of 
Cordova in Spain. In the cathedral of Palermo and at Monreale 
they are carried round the apses at the east end. At Caserta- 
Vecchia, in South Italy, they decorate the lantern over the 
crossing, and at Amalfi the turrets on the north-west campanile. 

The term is also applied to the covered passages which form 
thoroughfares from one street to another, as in the Burlington 
Arcade, London; in Paris such an arcade is usually called 
passage, and in Italy galleria. (R. P. S.) 

ARCADELT, or Archadelt, JACOB (c. 1514-c. 1556), a 
Netherlands composer, of the early part of the Golden Age. In 
1539 he left a position at Florence to teach the choristers of 
St Peter's, Rome, and became one of the papal singers in 1540. 
He was a prolific church composer, but the works published in 
his Italian time consist entirely of madrigals, five books of which, 
published at Venice, probably gave a great stimulus to the 
beginnings of the Venetian school of composition. In 1555 he 
left Italy and entered the service of Cardinal Charles of Lorraine, 
duke of Guise, and after this published three volumes of masses, 
besides contributing motets to various collections. The Ave 
Maria, ascribed to him and transcribed as a pianoforte piece by 
Liszt, does not seem to be traced to an earlier source than its 
edition by Sir Henry Bishop, which has possibly the same kind of 
origin in Arcadelt as the hymn tune " Palestrina " has in the 
delicate and subtle Gloria of Palestrina's Magnificat Quinli Toni, 
the fifth in his first Book of Magnificats. 

ARCADIA, a district of Greece, forming the central plateau 
of Peloponnesus. Shut off from the coast lands on all sides by 
mountain barriers, which rise in the northernpeaks of Erymanthus 
(mod. Olonos) to 7400, of Cyllene (Ziria) to 7900, in the southern 
corner buttresses of Parthenium and Lycaeum to more than 
5000 ft., this inland plateau is again divided by numerous 
subsidiary ranges. In eastern or " locked " Arcadia these 
heights run in parallel courses intersected by cross-ridges, 
enclosing a series of upland plains whose waters have no egress 
save by underground channels or zerethra. The western country 
is more open, with isolated mountain-groups and winding 
valleys, where the Alpheus with its tributaries the Ladon and 
Erymanthus drains off in a complex river-system the overflow 
from all Arcadia. The ancient inhabitants were a nation of 
shepherds and huntsmen, worshipping Pan, Hermes and Artemis, 
primitive nature-deities. The difficulties of communication and 
especially the lack of a seaboard seriously hindered intercourse 
with the rest of Greece. Consequently the same population, 
whose origins Greek tradition removed back into the world's 
earliest days, heH the land throughout historic times, without 
even an admixture of Dorian immigrants. Their customs and 
dialect persisted, the latter maintaining a peculiar resemblance 
to that of the equally conservative Cypriotes. Thus Arcadia 
lagged behind the general development of Greece, and its 
political importance was small owing to chronic feuds between 
the townships (notably between Mantineia and Tegea) and the 
readiness of its youth for mercenary service abroad. 

The importance of Arcadia in Greek history was due to its 
position between Sparta and the Isthmus. Unable to force 
their way through Argolis, the Lacedaemonians early set them- 
selves to secure the passage through the central plateau. The 
resistance of single cities, and the temporary union of the 
Arcadians during the second Messenian war, did not defer the 
complete subjugation of the land beyond the 6th century. In 
later times revolts were easily stirred up among individual cities, 
but a united national movement was rarely concerted. Most 
of these rebellions were easily quelled by Sparta, though in 469 
and again in 420 the disaffected cities, backed by Argos, formed 
a dangerous coalition and came near to establishing their inde- 



pendence. A more whole-hearted attempt at union in 371 after 
the battle of Leuctra resulted in the formation of a political 
league out of an old religious synod, and the foundation of a 
federal capital in a commanding strategic position (see Megalo- 
polis). But a severe defeat at the hands of Sparta in 368 (the 
" tearless battle ") and the recrudescence of internal discord 
soon paralysed this movement. The new fortress of Megalopolis, 
instead of supplying a centre of national life, merely accentuated 
the mutual jealousy of the cities. During the Hellenistic age 
Megalopolis stood staunchly by Macedonia; the rest of Arcadia 
rebelled against Antipater (330, 323) and Antigonus Gonatas 
(266) . Similarly the various cities were divided in their allegiance 
between the Achaean and the Aetolian leagues, with the result 
that Arcadia became the battleground of these confederacies, 
or fell a prey to Sparta and Macedonia. These conflicts seem to 
have worn out the land, which already in Roman times had 
fallen into decay. An influx of Slavonic settlers in the 8th 
century a.d. checked the depopulation for a while, but Arcadia 
suffered severely from the constant quarrels of its Frankish 
barons (1205-1460). The succeeding centuries of Turkish rule, 
combined with an Albanian immigration, raised the prosperity 
of the land, but in the Wars of Independence the strategic 
importance of Arcadia once more made it a centre of conflict. 
In modern times the population remains sparse, and pending 
the complete restoration of the water conduits the soil is unpro- 
ductive. The modern department of Arcadia extends to the 
Gulf of Nauplia with a sea-coast of about 40 m. 

Authorities.— Strabo pp. 388 sq. ; Pausanias viii. ; W. M. 
Leake, Travels in the Morea (London, 1830), chs. iii., iv., xi.-xviii., 
xxiii.-xxvi. ; E. Curtius, Peloponnesos (Gotha, 1851), i. 153-178; 
H. F. Tozer, Geography of Greece (London, 1873), pp. 287-292; E. A. 
Freeman, Federal Government (ed. 1893, London), ch. iv. § 3; B. V. 
Head, Historia Numorum (Oxford, 1887), pp. 372-373; B. Niese in 
Hermes (1899), pp. 520 f. (M. O. B. C.) 

ARCADIUS (378-408), Roman emperor, the elder son of 
Theodosius the Great, was created Augustus in 383, and suc- 
ceeded his father in 395 along with his brother Honorius. The 
empire was divided between them, Honorius governing the two 
western prefectures (Gaul and Italy), Arcadius the two eastern 
(the Orient and Illyricum). Both were feeble, and, in Gibbon's 
phrase, slumbered on their thrones, leaving the government to 
others. Arcadius submitted at first to the guidance of the 
praetorian prefect Rufinus, and, after his murder (end of 395) 
by the troops, to the counsels of the eunuch Eutropius (executed 
end of 399). His consort Eudoxia (daughter of a Frank general, 
Bauto), a woman of strong will, exercised great influence over 
him; she died in 404. In the last year of his reign, Anthemius 
(praetorian prefect) was the chief adviser and support of the 
throne. The first years of the reign were marked by the rav- 
aging of the Greek peninsula by the West Goths under Alaric 
(q.v.) in 395-396. The movement of the Goth Gainas (who held 
the post of master of soldiers) in 399-400 is less famous but was 
more dangerous. At that time there were two rival political 
parties at Constantinople, the " Roman " party led by Aurelian 
(son of Taurus), praetorian prefect, and supported by the em- 
press and a Germanizing and Arianizing party led by Aurelian's 
brother (possibly Caesarius, praetorian prefect in 400). Gainas 
entered into a close league with the latter; fomented a Gothic 
rebellion in Phrygia; and forced the emperor to put Eutropius 
to death. For some months he and the party which he supported 
were supreme in Constantinople. He was, however, finally 
forced to leave, and having plundered for some time in Thrace 
was captured and killed by the loyal Goth Fravitta. The Roman 
party recovered its power; Aurelian was again praetorian 
prefect in 402; and the Germanization which was to befall 
the western world was averted from the east. Another import- 
ant question was decided in this reign, the relation of the patriarch 
of Constantinople to the emperor. The struggle between the 
court and the patriarch John Chrysostom (q.v.), who assumed 
an independent attitude and gravely offended the empress by 
his sermons against the worldliness and frivolity of the court, 
with open allusions to herself, resulted in his fall and exile (404). 
This virtually determined the subordination of the patriarch 



342 



ARCADIUS— ARCH 



of Constantinople to the emperor. The rivalry of the see of 
Alexandria with Constantinople was also displayed in the con- 
test, Theophilus, patriarch of Alexandria, assisting the court 
in bringing about the fall of Chrysostom. Throughout the reign 
of Arcadius there was estrangement and jealousy between the 
two brothers or their governments. The principal ground of 
this hostility was probably dissatisfaction on both sides with 
the territorial partition. The line had been drawn east of 
Dalmatia. The ministers of Arcadius desired to annex Dalmatia 
to his portion, while the general Stilicho, who was supreme in 
the west, wished to wrest from the eastern realm the prefecture 
of Illyricum or a considerable part of it. His designs were un- 
successful, and during the reign of Theodosius II., son of Arcadius 
(who died in 408), Dalmatia was transferred to the dominion of 
the eastern ruler. 

Authorities. — Ancient: Fragments of Eunapius and Olympio- 
dorus (in Miiller's Fragmenta Historicorum Graecorum, vol. iv.) ; 
fragments of Philostorgius, Socrates, Sozomen, Zosimus, Synesius 
of Cyrene (" The Egyptian "), Claudian. Modern: Gibbon's Decline 
and Fall, vol. iii., ed. Bury; J. B. Bury, Later Roman Empire, vol. i. 
(1889); T. Hodgkin, Italy and her Invaders, vol. i. (ed. 2, 1892); 
Giildenpenning, Geschichte des ostrbmischen Reiches unter den Kaisern 
Arcadius und Theodosius II. (1885). 

ARCADIUS, of Antioch, Greek grammarian, flourished in 
the 2nd century a.d. According to Suidas, he wrote treatises 
on orthography and syntax, and an onomaticon (vocabulary), 
described as a wonderful production. An epitome of the great 
work of Herodian on general prosody in twenty books, wrongly 
attributed to Arcadius, is probably the work of Theodosius of 
Alexandria or a grammarian named Aristodemus. This epitome 
(Ilept Tbvccv) only includes nineteen books of the original 
work; the twentieth is the work of a forger of the 16th century. 
Although meagre and carelessly put together, it is valuable, 
since it preserves the order of the original and thus affords 
a trustworthy foundation for its reconstruction. 

Text by Barker, 1823; Schmidt, i860; see also Galland, De 
Arcadii qui fertur libro de accentibus (1882). 

ARCELLA (C. G. Ehrenberg), a genus of lobose Rhizopoda, 
characterized by a chitinous plano-convex shell, the circular 
aperture central on the flat ventral face, and more than one 
nucleus and contractile vacuole. It can develop vacuoles, or 
rather fine bubbles of carbonic acid gas in its cytoplasm, to float 
up to the surface of the water. 

ARCESILAUS (316-241 B.C.), a Greek philosopher and founder 
of the New, or Middle, Academy (see Academy, Greek). ' Born 
at Pitane in Aeolis, he was trained by Autolycus, the mathe- 
matician, and later at Athens by Theophrastus and Crantor, 
by whom he was led to join the Academy. He subsequently 
became intimate with Polemon and Crates, whom he succeeded 
as head of the school. Diogenes Laertius says that he died of 
excessive drinking, but the testimony of others (e.g. Cleanthes) 
and his own precepts discredit the story, and he is known to 
have been much respected by the Athenians. His doctrines, 
which must be gathered from the writings of others (Cicero, 
• Acad. i. 12, iv. 24; De Orat. iii. 18; Diogenes Laertius iv. 28; 
Sextus Empiricus, Adv. Math. vii. 150, Pyrrh. Hyp. i. 233), 
represent an attack on the Stoic <fro.VTa.oia. KarakriirTiKfi (Criterion) 
and are based on the sceptical element (see Scepticism) 
which was latent in the later writings of Plato. He held that 
strength of intellectual conviction cannot be regarded as valid, 
inasmuch as it is characteristic equally of contradictory con- 
victions. The uncertainty of sensible data applies equally to the 
conclusions of reason, and therefore man must be content with 
probability which is sufficient as a practical guide. " We know 
nothing, not even our ignorance "; therefore the wise man will 
be content with an agnostic attitude. He made use of the 
Socratic method of instruction and left no writings. His argu- 
ments were marked by incisive humour and fertility of ideas. 

See R. Brodeisen, De Arcesila philosopho (1821); Aug. Geffers, 
De Arcesila (1842); Ritter and Preller, Hist, phiios. grace. (1898); 
Ed. Zeller, Phil. d. Griech. (iii. 1448); and general works under 
Scepticism. 

ARCH, JOSEPH (1826- ), English politician, founder of 
the National Agricultural Labourers' Union, was born at Barford, 



a village in Warwickshire, on the 10th of November 1826. His 
parents belonged to the labouring class. He inherited a strong 
sentiment of independence from his mother; and his objections 
to the social homage expected by those whom the catechism 
boldly styled his " betters " made him an " agitator." Having 
educated himself by unremitting exertions, and acquired fluency 
of speech as a Methodist local preacher, he founded in 1872 the 
National Agricultural Labourers' Union, of which he was presi- 
dent. A rise then came in the wages of agricultural labourers, 
but this had the unforeseen effect of destroying the union; for 
the labourers, deeming their object gained, ceased to " agitate." 
Mr Arch nevertheless retained sufficient popularity to be re- 
turned to parliament for north-west Norfolk in 1885; and 
although defeated next year owing to his advocacy of Irish 
Home Rule, he regained his seat in 1892, and held it in 1895, 
retiring in 1900. He was deservedly respected in the House of 
Commons; seldom has an agitator been so little of a demagogue. 
A biography written by himself or under his direction, and edited 
by Lady Warwick (1898), tells the story of his career. 

ARCH, 1 in building, a constructional arrangement of blocks 
of any hard material, so disposed on the lines of some curve that 
they give mutua' support one to the other. 

The blocks, which are technically known as voussoirs, should be 
of a wedge shape, the_centre or top block (see fig. 1, A) being 
the keystone A; the lower blocks B B which rest on the support- 
ing pier are the springers, the upper surface of which is called the 




skewback, C C; the side blocks, as D, are termed the haunches. 
The lower surface or soffit of the arch is the intrados, E, and the 
upper surface the extrados, F. The rise of the arch is the distance 
from the springing to the soffit, G, the width between the 
springers is called the span, H, and the radius I. The triangular 
spaces between the arches are termed spandrils, K. 

The arch is employed for two purposes: — (1) to span an 
opening in a wall and support the superstructure; (2) when 
continuous to form a vault known as a barrel or waggon vault. 

The arch has been used from time immemorial by every 
nation, but owing to the tendency of the upper portion to sink, 
especially when bearing any superincumbent weight, it requires 
strong lateral support, and it is for this reason that in the earliest 
examples in unburnt brick at Nippur in Chaldaea, c. 4000 B.C., 
and at Rakakna (Requaqna) and Dendera in Egypt, 3500-3000 
B.C., it was employed only below the level of the ground which 
served as an abutment on either side. 

In the building of an arch, the voussoirs have to be temporarily 

1 The ultimate derivation of " arch " is the Latin arcus, a bow, or 
arch, in origin meaning something bent, from. which through the 
French is also derived " arc," a curve. In French there are two 
words arche, one meaning a chest or coffer, from Latin area (arcere, 
to keep close), hence the English "ark"; the other meaning a 
vaulted arch, such as that of a bridge, and derived from a Low Latin 
corruption of arcus, into area (du Cange, Glossarium, s.v.). The 
word "arch," prefixed to names of offices, seen in " archbishop," 
" archdeacon," " archduke," &c, means " principal " or " chief," 
and comes from the Greek prefix apx- or 6-pxi- from apxav, to 
begin, lead, or rule; it is also prefixed to other words, and usually 
with words implying hatred or detestation, such as " arch-fiend ", 
" arch-scoundrel " ; it is from an adaptation of this use, as seen in 
such expressions as " arch-rogue," extended to " arch-look," " arch- 
face," that the word comes to mean a mischievous, roguish expression 
of face or demeanour. 



ARCH 



343 



supported, until the keystone is inserted. This at the present 
day is effected by means of centreing an assemblage of timbers 
framed together, with its upper surface of the same form as the 
arch required; the voussoirs are laid on the centreing till the 
ring of the arch is completed. In the case of arches of small 
span, such as the early examples referred to, limited to about 
6 ft., such centreing might be dispensed with in various ways, 
but it is difficult to see how the arches of the great entrance 
gateways, shown in the Assyrian bas-reliefs, could have been 
built without temporary support of some kind. In those days, 
when any amount of labour could be obtained, even the erection 
of a temporary wall might have been less costly than the employ- 
ment of timber, of which there was great scarcity. 

The Assyrian tradition would seem to have descended first to 
the Parthian builders, who in the palace of El Hadr built semi- 
circular arches with regular voussoirs decoratively treated. The 
Sassanians who followed them employed the elliptical or egg- 
shaped arch, of which the lower part was built in horizontal 
courses up to about one-third of the height, which lessened the 
span of the arched portion. 

In Europe the earliest arches were those built by the Etruscans, 
either over canals (see article Architecture: Etruscan), or in 
the entrance gateways of their towns. The skew-arch in the 
gateway at Perugia shows great knowledge in its execution. 
From the Etruscans the adoption of the arch passed to the 
Romans, who certainly employed centreing of some kind, but 
always economized its use, as is clearly shown by Choisy. Al- 
though their walls from the Augustan age were built in concrete, 
arches of brick were always turned over their entrance doorways, 
sometimes in two or three rings. The Romans utilized the arch 
in other ways, sometimes burying it in their concrete construc- 
tion, as in their vaults, and sometimes introducing it as a veneer 
only, as in the Pantheon. In their monumental structures in 
stone, the arch was sometimes built with regular voussoirs, i.e. 
with a semicircular extrados, and sometimes with the joint 
carried far beyond. The latter was not done in the early ex- 
amples of the Tabularium and the Theatre of Marcellus, but in 
the Colosseum and all the arches of triumph the joints run 
through the spandrils, notwithstanding the recognition of the 
arch proper by its moulded archivolt. 

Although the value of the pointed arch as a stronger con- 
structional feature than the semicircular (owing to the tendency 
to sink in the keystone of the latter) had been recognized by the 
Assyrian builders, who employed it in their drains, it was not used 
systematically as an architectural feature till the 9th century, in 
the mosque of Tulun at Cairo; it seems to have been regarded 
by the Mahommedans as an emblem of their faith, and its use 
spread through Syria to Persia, was brought to Sicily from Egypt, 
and was taken back by the Sicilian masons to Palestine and em- 
ployed throughout theCrusaders'churches during thei 2th century. 
As the pointed arch had already, for constructional reasons, been 
employed in Perigord from the commencement of the nth 
century, it does not follow that the Crusaders brought it from 
Palestine, but there is no doubt that its universal employment in 
France early in the 1 2th century may have been partly due to its 
adoption in the Crusaders' churches. At first in Gothic work 
both the semicircular and pointed arches were used simultane- 
ously in the same building, the larger arches being pointed, the 
smaller ones and windows being semicircular. The great value 
of the pointed arch in vaulting is described in the article Vault. 

We have suggested that the pointed arch became an emblem 
of Mahommedan faith, and it was introduced in India but' not as 
a constructive feature, for the Hindus objected to the arch, 
which they say never sleeps, meaning that it is always exerting a 
thrust which tends to its destruction. In India therefore it was 
built in horizontal courses with vertical slabs leaning against one 
another to form the apex. The Moors of north Africa, however, 
never employed it, preferring the horseshoe arch which they 
brought into Spain and developed in the mosque of Cordova. 
In the additions made to this mosque the prayer chamber was 
enriched by the caliph Mansur, who, to eke out the height, raised 
arch upon arch. In the Alhambra it appears in the decorative 



plaster work, and travels northwards into the south of France, 
where at Le Puy and elsewhere it is found decorating doorways 
and windows; in England it was employed towards the end of 
the 12 th century. 

About the middle of the 14th century at Gloucester the four- 
centred pointed arch was introduced, which became afterwards 
the leading characteristic feature of the Tudor style. In France 
they adopted the three-centred arch in the 15th century. 

The ogee arch was the natural result of the development of 
tracery in the commencement of the 14th century, and in 
Gloucester (about 13 10) the foliations were run one into the 
other without the enclosing circles. About the middle of the 
14th century, in the arcade of the first storey of the ducal palace 
in Venice, flowing tracery is found, from which the ogee arch 
there was probably derived, as throughout Venice it becomes the 
favourite feature in domestic architecture of that and the 
succeeding century. 

The arches are of various forms as follows; — 



2. Semicircular arch, 
the centre of which is 
in the same line with 
its springers. 

3. Segmental arch, 
where the centre is be- 
low the springing. 

4. Horseshoe arch, 
with the centre above 
the springing ; em- 
ployed in Moorish 
architecture. 

5. Stilted arches, 
where the centre is 
below the springing, 
but the sides are carried 
down vertically. 

6. Equilateral point- 
ed arches, described 
from two centres, the 
radius being the whole 
width of the arch. 

7. Drop arches, with 
centres within the arch. 

8. Lancet arches, 
with centres outside 
the arch. 

9. Three centre 
arches, employed in 
French Flamboyant. 

10. Four centre 
arches, employed in 
the Perpendicular and 
Tudor periods. 

n. Ogee arches, with 
curves of counter flex- 
ure, found in English 
Decorated and French 
Flamboyant. 

12. Pointed horse- 
shoe arches, found in 
the mosque of Tulun, 
Cairo, 9th century. 

13. Pointed foiled 
arches, in the arcades 
of Beverley Minster 
(c. 1230) and Netley 
Abbey. 

14. Cusped arch; 
Christchurch Priory, 
Hants. 

15. Multifoil cusped 
arch, invented by the 
Moors at Cordova in 
the 10th century. 

16. Flat arch, where 
the soffit is horizontal 
and sometimes slightly 
cambered (dotted line). 

17. Upright elliptical 
arch, sometimes called 
the egg-shaped arch, 
employed in Egyptian 
and Sassanian archi- 
tecture. 






YTTT7 7 



16 




344 



ARCHAEOLOGY 




<^^^> 



20 



18. TheTuscanarch, 
where the extrados 
takes the form of a 
pointed arch. 

19. The joggled arch 
used in medieval 
chimneypieces and in 
Mahommedan archi- 
tecture. 

20. The discharging 
or relieving arch, built 
above the architrave or 
lintel to take off the 
weight of the super- 
structure. 

21. The relieving 
arch as used in Egypt, 
in the pyramid of 
Cheops; and in Saxon 
architecture, where it 
was built with Roman 
bricks or tiles, or con- 
sisted of two sloping 
slabs of stone. 



WWII/ 



19 




21 

(R. P. S.) 

ARCHAEOLOGY (from Gr. apxaia, ancient things, and "hoyos, 
theory or science), a general term for the study of antiquities. 
The precise application of the term has varied from time to time 
with the progress of knowledge, according to' the character of 
the subjects investigated and the purpose for which they were 
studied. At one time it was thought improper to use it in 
relation to any but the artistic remains of Greece and Rome, 
i.e. the so-called classical archaeology (now dealt with in this 
encyclopaedia under the headings of Greek Art and Roman 
Art) ; but of late years it has commonly been accepted as 
including the whole range of ancient human activity, from the 
first traceable appearance of man on the earth to the middle ages. 
It may thus be conceived how vast a field archaeology embraces, 
and how intimately it is connected with the sciences of geology 
(q.v .) and anthropology (q.v.) , while it naturally includes within its 
borders the consideration of all the civilizations of ancient times. 
In dealing with so vast a subject, it becomes necessary to 
distinguish. The archaeology of zoological species constitutes 
the sphere of palaeontology (q.v.), while that of botanical species 
is dealt with as palaeobotany (q.v.) ; and every different science 
thus has its archaeological side. For practical purposes it is 
now convenient to separate the sphere of archaeology in its 
relation to the study of the purely artistic character of ancient 
remains, from that of the investigation of these remains as an 
instrument for arriving at conclusions as to the political and 
social history of the nations of antiquity; and in this work the 
former is regarded primarily as " art " and dealt with in the 
articles devoted to the history of art or the separate arts, while 
" archaeology " is particularly regarded as the study of the 
evidences for the history of mankind, whether or not the remains 
are themselves artistically and aesthetically valuable. In this 
sense a knowledge of the archaeology is part of the materials 
from which every historical article in this encyclopaedia is 
constructed, and in recent years no subject has been more fertile 
in yielding information than " archaeology," as representing the 
work of trained excavators and students of antiquity in all parts 
of the world, but notably in the countries round the Mediterranean. 
It is for its services in illuminating the days before those of 
documentary history and for checking and reinforcing the 
evidence of the raw material (the " unwritten history " of 
architecture, tombs, art-products, &c.) , that recent archaeological 
work has been so notable. The work of the literary critic and 
historian has been amplified by the spade-work of the expert 
excavator and explorer to an extent undreamt of by former 
generations; and ancient remains, instead of being treated 
merely as interesting objects of art, have been forced to give up 
their secret to the historian, as evidence for the period, character 
and affiliations of the peoples who produced and used them. 
The increase of precise knowledge of the past, due to greater 
opportunities of topographical research, more care and observa- 
tion in dealing with ancient remains and improved methods of 
studying them in museums (q.v.) and collections, has led to 



nary 
period. 



more accurate reading of results by a comparison of views, under 
the auspices of learned societies and institutions, thus raising 
archaeology from among the more empirical branches of learning 
into the region of the more exact sciences. This change has 
improved not only the status of archaeology but also its material, 
for the higher standard of work now demanded necessarily acts 
as a deterrent on the poorly equipped worker, and the tendency 
is for the general result to be of a higher quality. 

The archaeological details concerning all subjects which have 
their " unwritten history " are dealt with in the separate articles 
in this work, including the ancient civilizations of Assyria, 
Egypt and other countries and peoples, while the articles on 
separate sites where excavations have been particularly note- 
worthy may be referred to for their special interest; see also 
Anthropology; Ethnology, &c. It remains here to deal 
generally with the early conditions of the prehistoric ancient 
world in their broader aspects, which constitute the starting- 
place for the archaeologist in various parts of the world at 
different times, and the foundations of our present understanding 
of the primitive epochs in the history of man. 

The beginning of archaeology, as the study of pre-documentary 
history, may be broadly held to follow on the last of the geological 
periods, viz., the Quaternary, though it is claimed, and 
with some reason, that traces of man have been found Quater- 
in deposits of the preceding or Tertiary period. 
Although there is no valid reason against the existence 
of Tertiary man, it must be confessed that the evidence in 
favour of the belief is of a very inconclusive and unconvincing 
kind. The discussion has been mainly confined to the two 
questions (1) whether the deposit containing the relics was 
without doubt of Tertiary times, and (2) whether the objects 
found showed undoubted signs of human workmanship. Vast 
quantities of material have been brought forward, and endless 
discussions have taken place, but hitherto without carrying 
entire conviction to the minds of the more serious and cautious 
students of prehistoric archaeology. A chronic difficulty, and 
one which can never be entirely removed, is our ignorance of the 
precise methods of nature's working. It is an obvious fact, 
that natural forces, such as glacial action, earthquakes, landslips 
and the like, must crush and chip flints and break up animal 
remains, grinding and scratching them in masses of gravel or 
sand. If it were possible to determine with precision what - were 
the peculiarities of the flint or bone, thus altered by natural 
agencies, it would be easy to separate them from others purposely 
made by man to serve some useful end. Our present knowledge, 
however, does not allow us to go so far in dealing with the ruder 
early attempts of man to fabricate weapons or implements. Even 
the one feature that is commonly held to determine human agency, 
the " bulb of percussion," cannot be considered satisfactory, with- 
out collateral evidence of some kind. Flint breaks with what is 
called a conchoidal fracture, as do many other substances, such 
as glass. Thus on the face of a flint flake, at the end where the 
blow was delivered to detach it from the nodule, is seen a lump 
or bulb, which is usually regarded as evidence of human work- 
manship. To produce such a bulb it is necessary to deliver a 
somewhat heavy blow of a peculiar kind at a particular point of a 
flattened surface; and the operation requires a certain amount 
of practice. The fulfilment of all the necessary conditions 
might well be a rare occurrence in nature, and the bulb of 
percussion has come to be regarded as the hall-mark of human 
manufacture; but recent investigations have shown that the 
intervention of man is not necessary and that natural forces 
frequently produce a similar result. When, therefore, it is a 
question whether or no a group of rude flints are of human 
workmanship, evidence of design or purpose in their forms must 
be established. If this be found, and in addition if a number of 
flints, all having this character of design, be found together, then 
and then only is it safe to admit them into the domain of archaeo- 
logy. There can be no doubt that much time and energy have 
been wasted, and a number of intelligent workers have been 
fruitlessly occupied in following up archaeological will-o'-the- 
wisps, through neglecting this elementary precaution. 



ARCHAEOLOGY 



345 



Whether or no man produced flint implements before Quater- 
nary times, it would seem to be a necessity that he should have 
BoMhic P asse d through an earlier stage, before arriving at 
the precision of workmanship and the fixed types 
found in the old Stone Age deposits known as palaeolithic. 
It is now claimed that this earlier and ruder stage has actually 
been discovered in what are known as the Plateau-gravels of 
Kent, in Belgium, and even in Egypt, and the name of eolithic 
(17&S, dawn, \i6os, stone) has been bestowed upon them. The 
controversy as to the human character has been very keen, some 
alleging that the fractured edges and even the definite and fairly 
constant types are entirely produced by natural forces. Sir 
Joseph Prestwich in England, and Alfred Rutot in Belgium, 
the latter arguing from his own discoveries in that country, 
have strongly supported the artificial character of the relics. 
On the other hand it is pointed out that the existence of these 
implements on the high levels of Kent furnished confirmation of 
Sir Joseph Prestwich's theory of the submergence of the district, 
and that his support was thus somewhat biassed, while the 
geological conditions in Belgium are not quite comparable with 
those of the Kent plateau; and the Belgian evidence, whatever 
it may be worth in itself, is of no avail as corroboration of the 
Kentish case. It is to be regretted that the conditions are not 
more convincing, for, as stated above, they agree fairly well 
with the evolution theory of man's handiwork, and if they 
could be accepted, would carry back the evidences to a more 
remote time when the physical features of Kent were of a very 
different character. The critics of eoliths have brought forward 
some facts that at first sight would seem to be of a very damag- 
ing nature. It was observed that in the process of cement 
manufacture the flints that had passed through a rotary machine 
in which they were violently struck by its teeth or knocked 
against each other, possessed just those features that were 
claimed as indisputable proof of man's handiwork, and that 
even the forms were the same. These statements have, of course, 
been met by counter-statements equally forcible, and the 
matter may still be considered to be in suspense. The great 
struggle, therefore, is now more closely restricted to the nature 
of the chipping than as to the quasi-geological question, and 
if the solution is ever to be found, it will be by means of a 
closer examination and a better understanding of the difference 
between intentional and accidental flaking. 

On reaching the Palaeolithic period we come to firmer ground 
and to evidence that is more certain and generally accepted. 
This evidence is fundamentally geological, inasmuch 
as the age of the archaeological remains is dependent 
upon that of the beds in which they are found. That 
they were deposited at the same time is now no longer ques- 
tioned. The flints are found to have the same colour and 
surface characteristics as the unworked nodules among which 
they lie, and are generally rolled and abraded in the same way. 
This in itself suffices to show that the worked and unworked 
flints were deposited in their present stratigraphical position 
at the same time. The remote age of the beds themselves is 
demonstrated by the presence of bones of animals either now 
extinct or found only in far distant latitudes, such as the 
mammoth, reindeer, rhinoceros, &c, and in some cases these 
bones are found in such relative positions as to prove they were 
deposited with the flesh still adhering to them, and also that 
the animal was contemporary with the makers of the flint 
implements. Evidence of a somewhat different kind is pro- 
vided for the palaeolithic period by certain caverns that have 
been discovered in England and on the continent. In these 
limestone caves palaeolithic man has lived, slept, eaten his 
food and made his tools and weapons. Much of his handiwork 
has been left, with the bones of animals on which he lived, 
scattered upon the floor of the cave, and has been sealed up by 
the infiltration of lime-charged water, so that the deposit re- 
mains, untouched to our own day, below an impermeable bed 
of stalagmite. In such circumstances there can be no doubt 
of the contemporaneous character of the remains, natural or 
artificial, if found on the same level. Moreover, so far as type 



Palaeo- 
lithic 



is a criterion of age, the flint tools found in the cave deposits 
tend to confirm the date assigned to those of the river-gravels. 

It is fairly certain that about the middle of the Tertiary period 
the northern hemisphere possessed a temperate climate, such that 
even the polar regions were habitable. But the physical aspect 
of northern Europe was very different from that of Quaternary 
times. North of a line drawn roughly from southern England 
to St Petersburg all was sea. It was during the latter half of 
the Tertiary period that the continent assumed its present 
general form, though even in Pleistocene (Quaternary) times 
England and Ireland formed part of it. The great change of 
climate from temperate to arctic conditions during the latter 
half of the Tertiary period has been interpreted in various ways, 
no one of which is yet universally accepted. There can be little 
doubt, however, that no single cause was responsible for so com- 
plete a change. There may have been some alteration in the 
relative positions of the earth and the sun, which would con- 
ceivably have produced it; but what is practically certain is 
that the physical geography of northern Europe was affected 
by considerable difference in level, and it is clear that the raising 
of mountain ranges and the general elevation of the continent 
must necessarily have reacted on the climatic conditions. If 
in the later Tertiary time we find that the Alps, the Carpathians 
and the Caucasus have come into existence, it is not surprising to 
find that these huge condensers have brought about a humid con- 
dition of the continent to such an extent that this phase has 
been called the Pluvial Age. The humidity, however, was in some 
ways only a secondary result of the protrusion of high mountain 
ranges. The primary cause of the physical conditions that we 
now find in the valleys and plains was the formation of glaciers. 
These rivers of ice descending far into the lower levels during 
the winter months, melted during the summer, causing enor- 
mous volumes of water to rush through the valleys and over 
the plains, carrying with it masses of mud and boulders which 
were left stranded sometimes at immense distances. The in- 
tensity and force of the rivers thus formed would depend upon 
two factors, first the extent of the watershed, and secondly, 
the height of the mountains from which the water was derived. 
The result of increasing cold was that in course of time the 
northern hemisphere was surmounted by a cap of ice, of immense 
thickness (about 6000 ft.) in the Scandinavian area and gradually 
becoming thinner towards the south, but at no time does it seem 
to have extended quite to the south of England. This is proved 
by the absence of boulder-clay (glacial mud) in the districts 
south of London. These arctic conditions were not, however, 
continuous, but alternated with periods of a much less rigorous 
temperature during what has been called the Ice Age. Remains 
both of mammals and plants have been found, under conditions 
that are held to prove this alternation. 

Such being the natural forces at work remodelling the surface 
of the earth,' forces of such gigantic power as to be almost 
inconceivable in these more placid times, it can easily be under- 
stood how, in the course of the many thousands of years before 
the Quaternary period, when the surface of the globe attained 
its present aspect, the powerful river-systems of Europe wore 
their beds deep into the solid rocks. In some cases in Europe 
tte erosive power of the river has worn through its bed to 
such an extent that the present stream is some hundreds of 
feet lower than its forerunner in palaeolithic times. From 
various causes, however, the rivers did not always wear for 
themselves a deep channel, but spread themselves over a wide 
area. This seems to have been the case with the Thames near 
London: the river-bed is not of any great depth, but at various 
periods it has occupied the space between Clapton on the north- 
east and Clapham on the south-west. It must not be assumed 
that the whole of this area of 7 m. or more was filled by the 
river at any one time, but rather that during the course of the 
palaeolithic period the river had its bed somewhere between 
these two limits. For instance, it is probable that at one period 
the bank of the Thames was at a point nearly midway between 
the northern and southern limits, where Gray's Inn Road now 
stands. It was here that the earliest recorded palaeolithic 



3+6 



ARCHAEOLOGY 



implement (now in the British Museum) was found towards the 
close of the 17th century in association with mammoth bones. 
But it is safe to say that the Thames was a very much wider 
and more imposing river in palaeolithic times than it is now, 
when its average width at London is under 300 yds. As, in the 
course of ages, it changed its bed and by degrees lessened in size 
and volume, it would leave, on the terraces formed on its banks, 
the deposits of brick-earth and gravel brought down by the 
Stream, and it is on these terraces that the relics of palaeolithic 
man are found, sometimes in great quantities. It will be obvious 
from the nature of the case that the highest terraces, and those 
farthest apart, should contain the earliest implements; but it 
is by no means easy in the present state of the land surface and 
with our present knowledge, to place the remains in their relative 
sequence. More accurate observation, and a better understand- 
ing of the conditions under which these deposits were made, 
should solve many such problems. Much light has been thrown 
upon many points by Worthington Smith, who has excavated 
with great care two palaeolithic floors at Clapton and at Cad- 
dington near Dunstable. The latter discovery was of quite 
exceptional interest as confirming the geological evidence by 
that of archaeology. In this case the original level at which 
palaeolithic man had worked was clearly defined, and was 
prolific of dark-grey implements, which had evidently been 
made on the spot, as Smith found that many of the flakes could 
be replaced on the blocks or cores from which they had been 
struck by palaeolithic man; there were also the flint hammers 
that had been used in the operation. Above the floor was a 
layer of brick-earth, again covered by contorted drift, in which 
also implements occurred, but of a very different kind from those 
found below. In place of being sharp and unabraded, and with 
the refuse flakes accompanying them, they were rolled and 
disfigured, of an ochreous tint, and evidently had been trans- 
ported in the drift from a much higher level now no longer 
existing, as the site where they occurred is the highest in the 
vicinity, about 500-600 ft. above sea-level. Here then we have 
a clear case of palaeolithic man being compelled to abandon 
his working place on the lower level by the descent of the waters 
containing the products of his own forerunners, probably then 
very remote. In this case the sequence of the various strata 
may be considered certain, and the remains thus accurately 
determined and correlated are naturally of extreme value and 
importance. But even this does not enable us to diagnose 
another discover}' unless the internal evidence is equally clear 
and conclusive. One point of importance that may be noted is 
that the older abraded implements were mostly of the usual 
drift type, while the more recent ones from the "floor" con- 
tained forms more highly developed and elaborated, such as 
occur in the French caves. Explorations of this kind, carefully 
conducted in a strictly scientific spirit by men of training and 
intelligence, are the only means by which real progress will be 
made in this puzzling branch of archaeology. 

Although many problems yet remain to be solved in England, 
its small area, and the relatively large number of workers, have 
together sufficed to put the main facts of the earlier stages of 
man's existence on a fairly satisfactory basis. In France, owing 
to the richness of the results, a great number of trained and 
ardent workers have made equal, if not better, progress. 
But unfortunately the real scientific spirit is not invariably 
found. Not so long ago an apparently serious writer in a 
well-known scientific magazine gave a detailed account of his 
studies in primitive methods and explained at great length 
his attempts at the manufacture of flint and stone implements. 
He found by the processes he adopted that it was much more 
easy for him to produce a polished implement than one merely 
flaked. From this fact he seriously argued that a great mistake 
had been made in the relative ages of the neolithic and palaeo- 
lithic periods, and that the former must necessarily be the older 
of the two. The evidence of geological position and of the 
mammalian remains accompanying the obviously older flints 
was entirely disregarded, just as on the other hand it was for- 
gotten that in regard to neolithic remains the proofs were in every 



way in favour of a relatively modern origin. Such attempts not 
only bring the serious study of early man into disrepute, but 
tend to retard the progress of real knowledge and are therefore 
to be deplored and when possible discouraged. 

Caves (<?.».) have been at all periods regarded as something 
uncanny and mysterious, with perhaps a tinge of the super- 
natural. In classical times they were associated with 
semi-divine beings, with oracles, and even with the Period 
gods themselves, while half the legends of dwarfs and 
gnomes that run through the folk-lore of medieval and modern 
Europe are associated with caves. They have been used as 
shelters or habitations at all times, and in examining them it is 
fully as necessary to sift the evidence of age as it would be in 
dealing with the river-gravels. Their exploration in the first 
instance may well have been due to chance, but it is fairly 
certain that during the 16th century the search for the horn of 
the unicorn as an antidote to disease, was responsible for the 
opening up of a certain number. Among the finds were no 
doubt the fossil bones of Quaternary animals to which mythical 
names and imaginary properties were attached, and the popular 
belief in such amulets naturally gave a great impetus to the 
search. It is, however, only a little more than a century ago 
that these investigations took anything like a scientific turn, 
and even then they had only a palaeontological end in view. 
The idea that archaeology entered into the matter was not at 
all realized for some years. The remains of many extinct or 
migrated animals, such as the hyena, grizzly bear, reindeer 
and bison, were found in quantities in the now famous cave 
at Gailenreuth in Franconia; and later, William Buckland 
explored the equally well-known hyena-cave at Kirkdale in 
Yorkshire, where he demonstrated that these animals had lived 
on the spot, feeding on the mammoth, rhinoceros and other 
creatures that had been their prey. The remains of man, 
however, had not been found, nor were they even looked for. 
It was not until Kent's cavern, near Torquay, was examined 
by the Rev. J. McEnery, that man was clearly proved to have 
been contemporary with these extinct beasts. So contrary 
was this contention to the ideas prevalent in the second quarter 
of the 19th century, that the pioneer in this work had died 
(in 1 841) before the immense importance of his discovery was 
admitted. To Godwin Austen in the first place and to W. 
Pengelley in the second, with the aid of the British Association, 
was due the vindication of McEnery's veracity and accuracy. 

Several circumstances conspire to give a special interest to 
Kent's cavern, and not the least is the fact that the age and 
appearance of the various strata indicate that it has been the 
home or the refuge of human beings at all ages even up to 
medieval times, and perhaps from a period even more remote 
than is the case elsewhere. In the black mould that formed the 
uppermost layer were found fragments of medieval pottery, 
and relatively in close proximity were ancient British and Roman 
remains as well as relics of the earliest days of metallurgy, in 
the shape of bronze fragments. The two thousand years or 
more that may have separated the oldest from the most modern 
of these later products, is as nothing in comparison with the 
immense intervals that lie between the earliest of them and the 
infinitely more remote period when gigantic mammals first 
inhabited the cave. Attempts have been made from time to 
time to express in years what the interval must have been: 
but as the computations have differed by hundreds of thousands 
of years, according to the method adopted, it is scarcely wise 
to do more than speculate. Beneath the black mould, containing 
what may be called the recent remains, was a layer of stalag- 
mite, some feet in thickness; and under this at one place was 
a great quantity of charcoal, which has been w r ith good reason 
assumed to show the site of fireplaces. A quantity of implements 
of palaeolithic type was found, but the main layer at this level 
consisted of a reddish clay known as cave-earth, and in this 
deposit were implements both of flint and horn, as well as bones 
of extinct animals. The flint implements were mostly of the 
usual river-drift type, but some were of types generally con- 
fined to cave-deposits of this period; while the barbed harpoon 



ARCHAEOLOGY 



347 



heads, and more especially a bone needle, were definitely of the 
cave class, so well represented in the caves of Dordogne. Again, 
below the cave-earth was a breccia formed of limestone and sand- 
stone pebbles cemented together by a calcareous paste. In 
this also were found implements and bones of bears. 

The succession of strata indicated above may be taken 
as typical of the caverns used by palaeolithic man, the 
breccia and stalagmite flooring being in themselves proof of 
a very considerable age, while the association in the former, or 
under the latter, of remains of human handiwork, with bones of 
extinct animals, may be safely taken to show contemporaneous 
existence. 

Once the mind has fairly grasped the fact that man was living 
at so remote a time, it is a simple and natural conclusion that he 
should have provided himself with weapons and tools more or 
less rudely fashioned from the stones he found ready to his hand. 
The analogy of the recently extinct Tasmanian is sufficient to 
show that even the meanest savage is not without such aids. 
But the caves of France, of the same palaeolithic period, and used 
by men theoretically in the same stage of culture, bring before 
us a race of artists of first-rate capacity, who for accuracy of 
observation, and for skill in indicating the character and peculiar- 
ities of the animals around them, have never been surpassed. 
Such a statement sounds like a contradiction in terms. We are 
dealing with human beings whose intellect, to judge by their 
physical characters, should be on a level with that of the Fuegian 
or the Australian black, and far below that of the Maori or the 
Sandwich Islander. Yet none of these gentle and relatively 
cultured brown races produced anything in the nature of art 
that can in any sense be compared with the masterly drawings 
or sculptures of the cave-men of France. The best-known of the 
engravings, that of the mammoth on a piece of ivory, is in the 
Jardin des Plantes in Paris. It is evidently intended to be nothing 
more than a sketch, the lines of the finely curved tusks being 
repeated several times in the desire for accuracy. But the heavy 
lumbering walk of the ponderous beast, his attitude, and even the 
character of the hairy hide, are all shown or suggested with a 
skill and freedom that not only denotes daily familiarity with the 
thing represented, but a most complete mastery of the art of 
translating the idea into simple line. This mammoth-drawing 
is probably the most important and monumental of its class, 
but there are many others that possess artistic qualities not less 
remarkable, while they have in addition a grace and beauty of 
line not less astonishing. One of these, in the British Museum, 
the head of an ibex-like creature, is outlined with a decision and 
refinement that can scarcely be surpassed, and many other 
sketches in horn or stone in the same collection show a keen 
appreciation of the characteristic features of the different 
animals as well as a masterly deftness in the handling of the 
graving-tool. If we are forced to marvel at the graphic skill 
of the cave-men, their sculptures in the round are on a still 
higher plane, as may be seen in the figures of reindeer in ivory 
in the British Museum. While they are not highly finished, 
they show a complete understanding of the animal's peculiar 
forms and contours, which are rendered in a direct, unhesitating 
way that should betoken a long period of artistic training and 
an executive power uncommon at any time. These drawings 
and sculptures have always been appreciated and even regarded 
as being of a much more advanced style than was to be expected 
among men who are always classed in the lower grades of culture. 
But enough stress has not hitherto been laid on the artistic 
quality of the work, which would be considered fine at any time 
in the world's history. This high artistic level was attained by 
a race of men whom we cannot credit with any great intellectual 
equipment; men, moreover, who were engaged in a daily 
struggle for the barest necessaries of life, in a trying climate and 
surrounded by a fauna whose means of attack and defence were 
infinitely superior to their own. There are many astonishing 
problems in archaeology, but none so badly in need of solution. 
Had the discovery been confined to a single drawing or even 
to a single site, fraud or a misreading of the conditions might 
have been alleged, but the case is very different. The drawings 



and sculptures have been found generally enough in France to 
demonstrate that such artistic power was fairly common, while 
the question of the authenticity and period of the discoveries 
has long since been satisfactorily settled. It is true that the 
climatic conditions in pleistocene France were more favourable 
to man than was the case farther north, but even an agreeable 
climate does not necessarily produce an artistic race; if it, 
were so, the Polynesians would probably be the greatest artists 
the world has ever seen. The physical remains of palaeolithic 
man, even when found under unquestionable conditions, are, 
however, so scanty, that it is unlikely that the important ques- 
tion of the race or races inhabiting central and northern 
Europe will ever be settled by their means. The evidence 
at present is in favour of two very different types, one dwarfish 
and brutal (Canstadt), the other more advanced and noble in 
physical character (Cro-Magnon). To the latter were due the 
artistic productions, and until further physical evidence is forth- 
coming recourse must be had to the most minute examination 
of the objects themselves and to accurate observation of the 
conditions under which they are found. So far as our present 
materials go, these are the only means by which more light may be 
thrown on the many problems of early man. 

In spite of the unquestioned and unquestionable character of 
palaeolithic discoveries in general, it must not be assumed that 
there has been an absence of falsification, forgery, and what the 
French call " mystification "; on the contrary, such attempts 
to meet the demand have been common enough. Apart from 
Edward Simpson, who was notorious as " Flint Jack " in the 
middle of the 19th century, many others, both in England and on 
the continent of Europe, have devoted themselves to this peculiar 
industry. Boucher de Perthes tried to conquer the scepticism 
of some of his friends who doubted the human origin of the 
Abbeville flints, by unwisely offering his workmen a reward for 
the discovery of human bones in the same beds. The Moulin 
Quignon jaw was accordingly produced, and became the subject 
of much controversy; but the evidence finally showed that it had 
originally come from elsewhere. The cave drawings also have 
found their imitators in modern times. One Meillet, a man of 
education, took a special pleasure in the production of spurious 
examples, and even published an account of his pretended 
discoveries. But here, as in all the attempts at imitation of 
the cave drawings, the modern efforts were betrayed by their 
poor artistic quality, and a comparison of the new discoveries 
with the old was generally enough to disclose the forgery. Two 
drawings on bone of a wolf and a bear, declared to have been 
found in a cave at Thayingen in Switzerland, were afterwards 
shown to have been copied from a child's picture-book. In 
Switzerland also a brisk trade was carried on some years ago in 
false antiquities said to come from the Lake-dwellings; and 
fantastic types of tools and implements were placed on the 
market. In Italy, too, a lively discussion has taken place 
of late years over the authenticity of curiously shaped flint 
implements from the neighbourhood of Verona; while America 
has provided similar food for discussion in the well-known 
Lenape stone and the Calaveras skull. The former bears 
drawings of the French cave type, while the latter if genuine 
would carry back the story of man in the American continent 
before Pliocene times. 

An apparent break in the continuity of man's history in 
Europe occurs at the end of the palaeolithic period. Attempts 
have been made to bridge the gap by means of a 
" mesolithic " period (yuecros, middle) ; but it would uthid 

not seem probable that the missing links will occur at 
all events so far north as Britain. We leave palaeolithic man in 
a cold climate, surrounded by a somewhat mixed fauna that 
formed his prey. We know him as a hunter and artist, but the 
remains show that he had no knowledge of pottery till towards 
the close of the period. Among the humbler arts he practised at 
least sewing, and lived in caves or took shelter at the base of 
overhanging rocks; but like the Australian, he frequently 
camped in the open. His successor of the later Stone Age 
(neolithic) we find to be a very different character and with very 



4 8 



ARCHAEOLOGY 



different surroundings. The configuration of the land in which 
he lived is practically the same as we now see it. The severe 
arctic conditions with the appropriate fauna had entirely dis- 
appeared, and the introduction of new arts must have radically 
changed his daily life. The most important of these are the 
training of domestic animals, agriculture, and the development 
of pottery. What were the burial rites of palaeolithic man we 
have at present no means of knowing, but for his neolithic 
successor we know that these were matters of great moment. 
The abundance of arrowheads of flint indicate the common use 
of the bow and arrow as a weapon, while the art of weaving marks 
an immense stride in the direction of comfort and civilization. 
Of the form and construction of his dwelling we have only a 
limited knowledge, derived with some uncertainty from the 
analogy of the dwellings for the dead (barrows) and more cer- 
tainly from the remains of the villages found erected on piles on 
the shores of lakes. 

A much-debated question arises here that cannot be passed 
over. The changes just mentioned are not such as would be 
produced by internal causes alone. Much of the evidence is in 
favour of neolithic man being an immigrant, coming into northern 
and central Europe long after palaeolithic man and his character- 
istic fauna had disappeared. Where did the earlier race go and 
who are its modern representatives, if any? The answers to 
this question are many. W. Boyd Dawkins is of opinion that 
the reindeer was followed by man in its journey to the north 
after the retreating glaciers, and that the modern representative 
of palaeolithic man is the Eskimo. His arguments are ingenious 
but unconvincing; they mainly consist in the similarity of the 
habits of both races in using harpoons and implements of similar 
form and make, their power of carving and drawing on bone, the 
absence of pottery, disregard of the dead, &c. As to the positive 
evidence, it is almost enough to say that the Eskimo, like the 
cave-men, used the material nearest to hand that served their 
purpose, and that nothing is more remarkable than the similarity 
of primitive weapons used by widely separated peoples; while 
the negative evidence as to the absence of pottery is of little 
value; their conditions of life would allow them neither to make 
it nor keep it. Till recently we had no evidence at all of the 
treatment of the dead by palaeolithic man, but this is no longer 
the case; the discoveries in the Grottes de Grimaldi, Monaco, 
show several methods of burial, near a hearth, or in rude stone 
cists (see Dr Verneau in V Anthropologic, xvii. 291). A stronger 
argument would be furnished if it could be shown that by his 
physical character the Eskimo is an intruder in his present 
home, and is unrelated to his neighbours. But this has not yet 
been done, and the skulls of the Eskimo do not resemble any of 
those hitherto found in the caves. In fact, what evidence there 
is on the subject is rather against than in favour of the wanderings 
northward of the inhabitants of the caves. There are indications, 
on the other hand, that in the south of France, in the Pyrenees, 
the reindeer was in existence, with man, at a later period than 
that of the caves, while the type of skull is that of Cro-Magnon. 
Here, therefore, it may be that something like a bridging of the 
gap between palaeolithic and neolithic times may be forthcoming. 
But it still remains to be found, and for the present we must be 
content with uncertainty. 

The neolithic period has often been loosely called the age of 
polished stone, from the fact that in no case has a polished or 
Neolithic g roun< l stone implement been found in a palaeolithic 
deposit. The term is not only loose but inaccurate. 
In the first place, there is no reason why the cave-men should 
not be found to have polished a stone implement on occasion, 
for they habitually polished their weapons of bone. Secondly, 
neolithic man was by no means uniform in his methods; he 
polished or ground the surfaces of such tools or weapons as would 
be improved by the process; but to take a common instance, he 
found that the efficacy of his arrow-point was sufficient when 
chipped only, and polishing is only occasionally found, as in 
Ireland. Many other implements also are found in neolithic 
times with no trace of grinding and yet with every appearance of 
being complete. 



The most trustworthy evidence with regard to this and the 
succeeding archaeological periods is to be found in the grave- 
mounds. For the earlier part of the neolithic age, however, 
these are by no means fruitful of relics. From their shape they 
are called in England " long barrows " to distinguish them from 
the round barrows which belong to a succeeding time, though 
evidence is being accumulated to show that this division is not of 
universal application. Long barrows are by no means of such 
frequent occurrence in Britain as the round variety; they are 
most common in Wiltshire, Gloucestershire and Dorset, and 
occur as far north as Caithness. Some of them contain within 
the mound a stone chamber, at times with a gallery leading to it, 
and in the chamber the interment or interments took place. 
Similar barrows have been found on the continent of Europe, and 
both in Britain and abroad have one feature in common, viz. 
that no metal, with possibly the exception of gold, has ever been 
found in them. This similarity of burial custom, though it may 
conceivably indicate intercourse, certainly does not prove 
identity of race, as has been sometimes claimed. The type of 
skulls found in the interment is clear evidence against such an 
assumption. 

In Britain, the burials were at times by inhumation only, and 
occasionally a great number of bodies were interred in the same 
barrow: at others, cremation had preceded burial. Another 
remarkable feature is that in many instances it is certain from 
the relative position of the bones of the unburnt burials that the 
corpse had been allowed to decay before the burial took place. 
This curious practice is known among many savage tribes of the 
present day. Its occurrence in Britain has been adduced in 
favour of the prevalence of cannibalism at this time, and not 
altogether without reason. While metal is entirely absent in the 
long barrows (and in fact relics of any kind are very rarely found), 
it is significant that in the succeeding round barrows also metal 
occurs but seldom, and then always of the types attributed to the 
earliest part of the Bronze Age. When, therefore, the mound 
pottery is of a class that may well be anterior to metal, and no 
metal is found with the burial, it is not unreasonable to assign such 
barrows to the Stone Age. A similar argument may be applied to 
the stone implements, but in the opposite direction. Many stone 
implements are found either isolated, or perhaps with no other 
relics that serve to fix their period. The material alone is often 
considered sufficient evidence of their being before the age of 
metals; but it is at any rate quite certain that a large number of 
stone axes, more particularly those with a socket for the handle, 
belong really to the Bronze Age. This uncertainty makes any 
account of the neolithic age difficult, unless the material is taken 
as the main basis. 

Neolithic man, like his forerunners, still recognized that flint 
and allied stones provided the best material for his cutting 
and piercing implements, though he made use to a great extent 
of other hard stones that came ready to his hand. The mining 
of flint was undertaken on a large scale, and great care was taken 
to get down to the layer containing the best quality. In Norfolk, 
at Grime's Graves, and in Sussex, at Cissbury near Worthing, 
the flint shafts have been carefully explored by William Green j 
well, General Pitt-Rivers and others. The system was to sink 
two shafts some little distance apart and deep enough to reach 
the desired flint-bed, and the two shafts were then joined by a 
gallery at the bottom. At Grime's Graves large numbers of 
deer's horns were found, which had evidently been used as picks, 
as is proved by the marks found in the chalk walls; and the 
horn had been trimmed for the purpose. Cups of chalk were 
also found in the galleries and were believed to have been used as 
lamps. At Cissbury great quantities of unfinished and defective 
implements were found in the work, as well as horn tools, as in 
Norfolk. At such factories the primitive appliances correspond 
very closely with those in use among existing savages. The 
pebble was used as a hammer or an anvil, and the more delicate 
flaking was done by pressure with a piece of horn rather than by 
blows. Naturally enough the number of completed implements 
found in these factories is small; the finished tools would be 
bartered at once and carried away from the factory. All th? 



ARCHAEOLOGY 



Plate L 




PALAEOLITHIC PERIOD, 
i. French Drift. 2. English Drift. 3. French transition (Le Moustier). 4. French Cave Period. 5. English Cave Period. 



Plate II. 



ARCHAEOLOGY 









SCULPTURE '.AND ENGRAVINGS OF THE CAVE PERIOD. 
FROM DORDOGNE, FRANCE. 



ARCHAEOLOGY 



Plate III. 





,l! 




WALL-PAINTINGS OF THE CAVE PERIOD, 
CAVERN OF ALTAMIRA, SANTANDER, SPAIN. 




&^9^isf 



■f^Cv: 










;>$Uv >-^i 






/i ai 






OUTLINE OF WALL-PAINTINGS, ALTAMIRA, LENGTH ABOUT 45* FT. 
(cf. Painting, Plate I.) 



By permission, from La Caverne d'Allamira by Cartailhac and Breuil, Monaco. 1006. 



Plate IV. 



ARCHAEOLOGY 




NEOLITHIC PERIOD. 



I. Flint and stone implements, England. 2. Flint arrow-heads, England. 3. Arrow-heads, Ireland. 
4. Flint and stone implements, Denmark. 5. Flint implements, France. 6. Flint implements, Egypt. 



ARCHAEOLOGY 



349 



animal remains found in these pits belong to present geological 
conditions, thus emphasizing what has been stated above, that 
the absence of polished implements is no evidence for great 
age. Many other factories have been found in Britain, in Ireland 
and on the continent of Europe: at Grovehurst in Kent, at 
Stourpaine near Blandford, at Whitepark Bay, county Antrim, 
and in Belgium at Spiennes. Among the North American 
Indians the method would seem to have been somewhat different. 
After journeying to the site of a suitable quality of stone, they 
did not always complete the implements on the spot, but made 
a number of oval chipped disks of good stone which they carried 
away and worked up into the required implements at their 
leisure. These disks bear a strong likeness to some of the 
ovate implements from the Drift in Europe; in fact, but for 
the difference of surface condition or patina, they would be 
identical. 

While the severe climatic conditions that preceded the neolithic 
age restricted the presence of man to the more temperate parts 
of the globe, it may be assumed that in neolithic times there was 
nothing to prevent him from occupying the greater part of the 
earth's surface, short of the neighbourhood of the two poles. 
Thus it may be expected that an age of stone will be found, 
if looked for, in every part of the globe. So far as our present 
knowledge goes, all is in favour of the use of stone before metals, 
in all countries. The one material requires no special treatment 
before being adapted to man's use, while the other demands 
considerable knowledge, even if reasoning power have but 
little place in the process. Thus the probabilities are here borne 
out by the facts. In the extensive " kitchen-middens " of Japan 
are found great numbers of chert implements mixed with pottery 
of a primitive type, recalling that of European early Bronze 
Age barrows, while the succeeding periods of metal are equally 
clear. Even in the Far East, therefore, the same sequence is to 
be observed. In China, the conditions are more obscure. The 
superstitious regard for ancestors has prevented the exploration 
of ancient tombs in that country, and thus systematic search 
has been impossible, while the precise details of the discovery 
of such relics as have come to light are difficult to obtain. In 
spite of the assertion that China had no Stone Age, it is surely 
more probable, in the absence of exact knowledge, that she fol- 
lowed the normal course. Modern territorial divisions, more 
especially if they are independent of the natural physical con- 
ditions of the land, such as mountain ranges, great rivers and the 
like, have but little value in considering the race problems 
of remote ages. If, therefore, we find that, in the countries 
bordering on what is now the Chinese empire, the ancient 
inhabitants followed the same broad lines of culture that are 
evident elsewhere, it is easy to believe that China too was normal 
in this respect. The negroes and Bantu races of Africa also were 
thought to have passed direct to the use of iron, perhaps owing 
to the existence on the Nile of a civilization of great antiquity, 
which enabled them to pass over the intervening stages. In- 
herently improbable, this is now known not to have been the 
case. Stone implements, whether ground or merely chipped, 
have been discovered on the Congo, and more recently on the 
Zambezi. It is quite true that in both cases they are found in 
superficial deposits, and may be of any age. But here again the 
probabilities are greatly in favour of their having been in use 
before iron was known. While stone tools, such as knives or 
arrow-heads, may possess qualities that render them superior to 
bronze or copper, it is certain that once the working of iron was 
understood, its superiority to stone would at once be perceived, 
and the stone tools be discarded. There can be little doubt that 
investigations in Central Africa will demonstrate that the same 
course was followed there as elsewhere. In South Africa, in 
Egypt and in Somaliland large quantities of stone implements 
have been discovered, and of the great age of most of them there 
can be no doubt. Some from the banks of the Nile have even 
been claimed as "eolithic"; but here, as in Europe, We can 
only say that the case is not proven: General Pitt-Rivers did 
good service in Egypt by discovering among the stratified 
gravels near Thebes a number of rude flints bearing unmistake- 



able signs of human workmanship, but he described them 
merely as of " palaeolithic type," and deplored the absence of 
mammalian remains in the gravels. At the same time he pointed 
out that the bulk of the implements claimed as palaeolithic (and, 
it may be, correctly) are found on the surface, and therefore 
cannot be dissociated from the surface types; hence form alone 
cannot be trusted to determine age. Further, we are by no means 
well informed as to the value of patination in flints found on 
the surface in Egypt. The depth and intensity of the patina- 
tion would no doubt have a direct relation to the age of the 
implement, if only it could be proved that all of them had been 
equally subjected to the conditions that produced the discolora- 
tion. But this is clearly impossible. Some implements may 
conceivably have been continuously on the surface of the desert 
from the time they were made, and have been acted upon by the 
sun and air for many thousands of years, while others, though 
of equal age, may have been covered by sand or otherwise 
protected for a large part of the intervening centuries. Patina- 
tion, therefore, like form, can only claim a conditional value. 
It is at the best an uncertain indication of age, as great age 
may be possible without it. Similarly, in Somaliland, the 
condition of the implements is very curious, and in some re- 
spects puzzling, while their forms resemble those from the 
Drift in Europe. But as to the climatic conditions we know 
nothing, and it is therefore useless to speculate on the condition 
of the stones; as to the geology we know next to nothing, and 
no mammalian remains give us a helping hand, while the form 
alone is a dangerous foundation for argument. 

Investigations in the more remote parts of the world, though 
they may occasionally produce some startling novelty in the 
history of mankind, can scarcely be expected to 
furnish the same trustworthy continuous story as is to Europe 
be found in the European area. Here history provides America. 
us with a fairly truthful account of what has happened 
for a period varying from two to three thousand years, or in 
some places even longer, and we are thus able to judge whether 
particular discoveries come into the historical stage or not. In 
more primitive lands where history (if there be any) partakes 
more of the character of mythical tradition, the task of defining 
the period to which particular discoveries belong is rendered much 
more difficult. In America, where history may be said to have 
begun five hundred years ago, such a feat is of course impossible, 
until a great deal of work on comparative lines has been accom- 
plished. The accounts of the civilization of Mexico and Peru at 
the time of the Spanish conquest show a state of culture which in 
some respects must have put the Spaniards to shame, while in 
others it was primitive in the extreme. As regards internal 
communications, the working of gold and copper, and the 
manufacture and decoration of pottery, these American kingdoms 
were on a level with all but the most advanced nations; but of 
history in the true sense of the word they have none. In spite 
of this, it is by no means a hopeless task to disentangle the 
apparent confusion of their archaeology. It is now fairly well 
known what were the races or tribes that inhabited particular 
districts, and it is thus easy to make a corpus of the types adopted 
by the various peoples. This is the first certain step in the 
application of archaeological method. By degrees, as these 
types become familiar to the trained eye, it will not be difficult 
to arrange them in a progressive series, from the earliest in style 
to the latest. That this will be done by the archaeologists of the 
American continent, even with the present scanty materials, 
there can be little doubt. Numbers of young and enthusiastic 
workers have now had a good training in exploration in historical 
lands, and will usefully employ their experience on the antiquities 
of their own country. But if once a key be found to the andent 
Mexican inscriptions, so plentifully scattered through the 
ancient monuments, it may be that enlightenment will come 
even more suddenly and more surely. The one problem that is 
of the greatest interest still awaits solution, viz. whether there 
is any relation, in culture or more remotely in race, between the 
inhabitants of ancient America and those of Europe or Asia. 
One thing is certain, that if there be any connexion, it is of 



35° 



ARCHAEOLOGY 



infinite remoteness. But it is at any rate noteworthy that the 
same designs, patterns and even games are found in ancient 
Mexico and in India or China; and whether these resemblances 
arise from relations between the peoples using them or from 
accident, is a problem well worth investigation. 

In countries like Scandinavia or Switzerland, the story of the 
early ages is clear and comparatively free from complications. 
The one by its remoteness was left to develop with but little help 
from the rest of Europe up to historical times; the other, 
protected on so many sides by its mountain ranges, seems to 
have enjoyed a peaceful existence during the Stone and Bronze 
Ages. A community of fishermen and agriculturists, they led a 
calm domestic life on the edges of their many lakes where they 
constructed dwellings on piles with only a gangway to the shore, 
to prevent the attacks of predatory animals. The practice of 
building houses in lakes was a common one not only in Switzerland, 
but also in Britain and in Ireland, as in modern times among 
the natives of New Guinea. Besides securing the safety of the 
inhabitants, it had the not unimportant advantage of being more 
healthy; all refuse of food and other useless matter could at 
once be thrown into the water where it would be harmless. A 
similar form of dwelling is the Irish " crannog," constructed on 
an island or shoal in a lake, in some cases artificially heightened 
so as to bring it above water. These crannogs were probably 
inhabited in Ireland up to comparatively recent times, if one 
may judge by the remains found on the sites. 

It must not be forgotten that although the neolithic period had 
many phases, yet its duration is in no way comparable to the 
incalculable length of the palaeolithic age. For a variety of 
reasons it is thought that one of the earliest stages of neolithic 
times is represented by the now well-known kitchen-middens 
(refuse-heaps) of Denmark. These heaps are often of great size, 
sometimes reaching 10 ft. in height, and nearly 350 yds. in 
length. Here along the coast line the natives of Denmark lived, 
apparently building their huts upon the mounds and cooking 
their food upon hearths of stone. The conditions of their daily- 
life would seem to have resembled those of the natives of Tierra 
del Fuego. Their implements of flint seem to have been chipped 
only, and it is conjectured that the few polished and more highly 
finished implements that have been found in the middens are 
importations from more cultured tribes living inland. Their 
food was in very great part composed of shell-fish, though they 
evidently caught and ate various kinds of deer, boar and a 
variety of carnivorous animals. The race which made these 
mounds is believed to have been akin to the Lapps, and their 
dwellings can hardly have been anything more than the rudest 
protection from the weather. The Swiss lake-dwellers were far 
more advanced, even in the Stone Age; their dwellings were 
elaborately planned and constructed, and remains of them have 
been plentifully found in the various Swiss lakes. Various forms 
of construction were adopted: in one the foundations consisted 
of poles driven into the bed of the lake; in others a kind of 
framework simply rested on the bottom, and in a third, the 
substructure was formed of layers of sticks reaching from the 
bottom of the lake up to the surface. The walls were of wattle, 
closed up with clay to keep out the weather; the hearths were 
of stone slabs, and the floors of clay well trodden down. Practi- 
cally the same type of dwelling seems to have continued through 
the Stone and Bronze Ages, though on some sites no metal 
whatever is found and it is therefore assumed that these are of 
the earlier period. These people cultivated the land, growing 
wheat and barley; they were also hunters and fishermen, 
capable of manufacturing pottery without the aid of the wheel, 
which had not yet come into use so far north; and they wove 
mats and garments, while ropes and netting are plentiful. Their 
tools and weapons were made of stone, and to a great extent of 
deer's horn. Human remains are hardly ever found on the sites 
of the lake-dwellings, and it is therefore uncertain what were the 
social affinities of the people; but the evidence of the sites is in 
favour of the same race being continuous into the Bronze Age, 
when their condition was more comfortable, as is shown by the 
abundant remains of domesticated animals. 



Among the most notable and obvious relics of pre-historic 
times, both in Britain and in many other countries such as Spain, 
Portugal, France and even India, are gigantic circles 
and avenues of stone and dolmens (see Stone Monu- „%"* ** 
ments). These enduring monuments have excited 
the wonder of countless generations, and lent themselves to 
superstitious practices down to modern times. But the precise 
purpose for which they were erected and even the period to 
which they belonged, had never been definitely settled. They 
had been called burial places of great chiefs, and not unnaturally 
had been thought by others to have been temples or places of 
primitive worship used by the Druids, who moreover were often 
credited with their erection. Obviously such a question called 
for settlement, and the British Association in the year 1898 
appointed a committee to investigate these stone circles with a 
view to ascertaining their age. Operations were begun at the 
well-known circle of Arbor Low, south of Buxton in Derbyshire; 
careful excavations were made through the ditch and the 
encircling mound and also within the circle, and although the 
evidence was not of the most complete kind, yet the committee 
came to the conclusion that the circle belonged to the end of the 
neolithic age. At Arbor Low all the stones are now lying on the 
ground (although, to judge from the other circles in England, 
they were certainly once upright), and the opportunities for 
surveying were thereby much diminished. It is a fortunate 
circumstance, therefore, that the fall of one of the stones at 
Stonehenge (q.v.) at the end of the 19th century, and the increas- 
ingly perilous state of some of the others, caused the owner, with 
the advice of the Society of Antiquaries of London, to undertake 
the raising of the great leaning stone in the interior of the circle. 
The work was superintended by W. Gowland, F.S.A., who made 
special investigations during the necessary digging, for the 
purpose of recovering any remains of man's handiwork that had 
been left by the builders of the monument. In this he was very 
successful, finding in the course of the very limited excavation 
at the base of the monolith, a great number of stone mauls or 
hammers that corresponded so nearly with the bruised surfaces 
of the monoliths, that there can be no doubt of their having been 
used to dress the standing stones. 

From a review of all the evidence of an archaeological nature 
that was to be obtained, Gowland came to the conclusion that 
the construction of Stonehenge belonged to the latter part of 
the neolithic age. No trace of a metal implement occurred 
in any of the debris. This would of itself be an interesting fact, 
but it became infinitely more interesting from researches in quite 
another direction, which brought corroborative evidence of a 
curious kind. For many years Sir Norman Lockyer and Prof. 
Penrose were engaged in examining the orientation of temples 
in Egypt and Greece, with a view to determining on what 
astronomical principle, if any, the plans had been laid down. 
With a rectangular plan, and with portions of the interior still 
well defined, they were able by elaborate calculation to deter- 
mine that the temples had been definitely planned with relation 
to the rising or setting of the sun or of a particular star. Having 
been successful in these investigations they proceeded to apply 
the test to Stonehenge. The experiment was made on the longest 
day in the year 1901 . Owing to a gradual change in the obliquity 
of the earth's orbit, the point of sunrise on corresponding days 
of each year is not constant; and though the difference is 
hardly perceptible from year to year, in the course of centuries 
it becomes great enough for use as a measure of time. Enough 
remains of the monument to show the direction of sunrise at 
the time that Stonehenge was erected, it being always assumed 
that the coincidence of the main axis with the central line of 
the Avenue was designed with reference to sunrise on the longest 
day of the year. At the date of the experiment it was found 
that the sun had shifted nearly two diameters in the interval, 
and this variation gives a date of about 1680 B.C., which practi- 
cally confirms the verdict of archaeology and seems to prove, 
moreover, that Stonehenge was a temple of the sun. 

Stonehenge therefore may be taken as marking for Britain 
the close of the neolithic period and heralding the dawn of a new 



ARCHAEOLOGY 



35i 



era, in which the inhabitants of the British Isles first acquired 
the art of working metal. 

There is reason to believe that the transition from the use of 
stone to that of bronze was not due to the peaceful advance 
of civilization, but rather to the irruption of an Aryan 
A race from the south-east of Europe into the countries 

to the west and north. Of these people the Celts are to 
someextent the representatives at a somewhat more recentperiod. 
Here, however, we are dealing with terms the precise meaning 
of which is not yet generally admitted, and which, moreover, 
have too intimate a relation to the problems of philology to be 
fully discussed here (see Indo-European). The term Aryan (q.v.) 
itself is not free from objections. It was held by Max Miiller 
to relate to a language and a civilization that took its rise in 
Central Asia, while others now contend that, although it is the 
mother language of the Sanskrit, Greek, Latin, Teutonic and 
Celtic languages, it might equally well have originated in Europe. 
However this may be, and even this brief statement shows 
how wide a field the arguments would cover, there can be little 
doubt that the Bronze Age Celts were of this stock, and that in 
course of time they gradually spread their language and culture 
over a large part of Europe. Whether or no the knowledge of 
bronze started from one or more centres, it gradually spread 
from the south-east of Europe until it reached Scandinavia; 
the dates being roughly in Crete, 3000 B.C.; in Sicily, 2500 B.C.; 
in central France, 2000 B.C.; in Britain and in Scandinavia 
1800 B.C. The appearance of the Celts in Britain is indicated 
by the presence of the round barrows. They were a fairly tall, 
short-headed race, using cremation and also inhumation in their 
burials, skilful in the manufacture of pottery and of the simpler 
forms of bronze implements, and freely using bone, jet, and 
at times amber, while gold was well known and evidently 
greatly esteemed. In the early centuries of the Bronze Age, 
swords, spears and shields were apparently quite unknown, 
the principal metallic products being flat axes, simple knives 
or daggers, and small tools or ornaments. In the burial places 
the bodies, if unburnt, are nearly always found in a crouching 
position, as if in the attitude of sleep; if cremated, the burnt 
bones are generally enshrined in an urn under the tumulus, the 
burial being sometimes in a cist formed of large stones. The 
pottery vessels are remarkable in more ways than one. In 
the first place they would seem to have been specially made 
for the burial rites, for whenever domestic pottery has been 
found, it is of quite a different character, unornamentcd and 
simple in outline. It must be confessed, however, that this 
latter is by no means common. The sepulchral vessels are at 
times highly decorated, and sometimes of great size. They are 
invariably hand made, and though they are by no means well 
fired they are never sun-dried, as is often said to be the case. 
A common kind of decoration is produced by impressing twisted 
cords in the damp clay, and this is believed with some reason 
to have had its origin in the practice of winding cords round 
the unbaked vessel to prevent distortion before or during the 
process of firing. That operation would of course burn away 
the cord and leave only its impression on the urn. Other forms 
of ornament are also used, incised lines in rudely geometrical 
designs, impressions of the end of a stick, and at times rows 
of hollows produced by the finger or thumb. The method of 
the burial, beyond giving an insight into the art of the period, 
also helps us to realize to some extent the ideas of primitive 
man. The underlying reason for careful and ceremonial burial 
is not always readily understood, apart from a knowledge of 
the ritual, such as existed in ancient Egypt. But in the Bronze 
Age in Britain it was the custom to bury with the dead not only 
carefully made vessels which doubtless contained food for the 
journey to the lower world, but also the ornaments and weapons 
of the deceased. Often the bones of a pig have been found in 
the grave, doubtless representing part of the provender which 
could not conveniently be placed in the so-called food-vessel. 
Such practices indicate with a fair amount of certainty a belief 
in a future life in another world, where probably the conditions 
were thought to be much the same as in this. The burial of 



the weapons and other property of a dead man is, however, not 
always due to the belief that he may need them in some future 
state. The reason may well be that it would be thought un- 
lucky for a survivor to use them. 

Just as the neolithic age was immeasurably shorter than the 
palaeolithic, but was notable for great improvements in the 
arts of life, so the Bronze Age in its turn was shorter than the 
neolithic age, and again witnessed even more marked advance 
in culture. It is in fact an illustration of the truism that each 
step in knowledge renders all that follow less laborious; but it 
is not easy to understand how the transition from stone to 
metal came about, nor why bronze came to be the chosen metal 
rather than iron. Bronze, in the first place, is a composite 
metal, a mixture of copper and tin, while iron can be at once 
reduced from its ores; indeed, in the form of meteoric iron, it 
is already metallic, and needs but a hammer to produce what- 
ever form may be wanted. From the archaeological point of 
view, there is, however, good reason for believing that bronze 
preceded iron. The forms of axes that are without doubt the 
earliest, are in outline much the same as the stone prototype, 
b.eing only thinner in proportion. Then again, iron implements 
are never found on the earlier sites, and if they had been in 
existence some of them certainly would remain: further, at 
the end of the Bronze Age it is found that the forms of weapons 
in that metal are exactly copied in iron, as, for instance, at Hall- 
statt (q.v.) in the Salzkammergut, the famous cemetery which 
best illustrates the passage from the use of bronze to that of iron. 
It has been claimed that bronze was preceded by copper, a 
sequence which seems inherently probable; and whether or no 
it was general enough or enduring enough to constitute a period, 
there can be no reasonable doubt that in the Mediterranean 
area, and in central Europe, as well as in Ireland, great numbers 
of implements were made of copper alone without any appreci- 
able admixture of tin. The casting of pure copper presents 
certain difficulties, in that the metal is not adapted for anything 
but a mould open to the air, and this would limit its utility, 
until the discovery that tin in a certain proportion (roughly 1 : 9) 
not only made the resulting metal much harder and better fitted 
for cutting-tools and weapons, but at the same time rendered 
possible the use of closed moulds. 

There are thus two problems in connexion with the history 
of the Bronze Age. How was the metal discovered ? And 
by whom or where ? As to the first, it must be remembered 
that in some parts of the world, e.g. in China and in Cornwall, 
copper and tin are found together, and it may well be that tin 
was first accidentally included as an impurity, which, had it 
been noticed, would have been eliminated. Once it was found 
to produce a more useful metal, the blend would be deliberately 
made, and repeated trials would eventually demonstrate the 
most suitable proportion of one metal to the other. The question 
of where it was first discovered is one that is not likely to be 
answered with certainty, but the one essential is the presence 
of the two metals in one and the same locality. Tin does not 
exist in either Egypt or Mesopotamia, although bronze articles 
from the fourth and third millennium respectively B.C. have been 
found in these countries. The tin to produce the mere metal 
must have come from some foreign country; and the choice 
seems to be very small. Spain at the other end of the Mediter- 
ranean is unlikely, and Britain still more so; central Asia, Asia 
Minor, or China again seem too remote; for the spread of 
metallurgy from these centres would imply a trade connexion 
nearly 4000 B.C. In later times, later perhaps by 3000 years, 
Spain and Britain were undoubtedly among the chief sources 
of the tin supply of Europe and of the Mediterranean generally; 
but it will long remain a problem where bronze was first pro- 
duced. There is indeed, no real necessity for confining its origin 
to a single locality; it is easily conceivable that the invention 
occurred independently in more places than one. 

The history of early metallurgy has been carefully studied 
by W. Gowland, who communicated the results of his researches 
to the Society of Antiquaries of London in 1899. In his opinion 
the ores from which copper was first obtained by smelting were 



352 



ARCHAEOLOGY 



originally found as pebbles or boulders in the beds of streams, 
where man in the Stone Age had been accustomed to search 
for stones to convert into implements; and in the same way 
the beds of rivers were for a long subsequent period the only 
sources of tin. Actual mining belongs in his opinion to a far 
later period, and naturally had its origin in the discovery of 
outcrops of the metal on the surface. By the simple application 
of fire, lumps of ore were reduced to a smaller size, and were 
then prepared for smelting by further reduction to the condition 
of a coarse powder. This latter process was carried out in the 
same way that grain was crushed between two stones; and 
stone-mills, doubtless used for the purpose, have been found 
in ancient workings in Wales. The next stage would be the 
furnace, and there can be little doubt that this would be of the 
simplest kind, merely a hole in the ground with the fire covering 
the metal, and with nothing but a natural draught. But Gow- 
land holds that even with these singularly inadequate appliances, 
copper could be smelted from the surface ores, though the output 
would naturally be of the most uncertain and intermittent 
character, depending, as it must have done, on the wind. And 
until the discovery of bellows or some other method of increasing 
the draught of air, no progress could be made in this direction. 
With regard to the resulting metal, viz. copper, we have certain 
knowledge. From time to time there are found in the earth 
in Britain and elsewhere, hoards of fragmentary or imperfect 
bronze implements, portions of axes, swords, rings, &c, all of 
which have been failures in castings. These hoards are assumed 
to have been gathered together by the bronze founders to be 
recast into perfect and useful implements. Now, frequently 
associated with these hoards are portions of cakes of pure 
copper, originally circular in shape, flat on one face and convex 
on the other, like a lens with one flat face. The form of these 
cakes is in itself a fair proof of the prevalence of the method 
of smelting described above, as it is quite clear that the convex 
face of the cake followed the contour of the hole in the ground 
above which the fire was placed. The cakes are generally found 
broken up into small handy blocks. This can only be done in 
one way, viz. by watching the cake, after the fire and slag has 
been raked off it, until it is on the point of becoming solid, when 
it is quickly pulled out of the hole and broken up. It will be 
noted that while the implements in these founders' hoards are 
invariably of bronze, the cakes are as invariably of copper. 
This is at first sight puzzling, until it is realized that these 
founders probably carried the tin necessary for forming bronze 
m the form of ore, and that tin ore in its pure state is a snuff- 
coloured powder very easily overlooked when lying on the earth, 
which it might very nearly resemble in colour, though it would 
be much heavier. Thus it is probable that in many such dis- 
coveries the tin ore has accompanied the copper cakes and bronze 
fragments, but has hitherto eluded the eyes of the finder. Not 
only have we this conclusive evidence of the methods by which 
Bronze Age man produced his raw material, but the discovery 
of crucibles and moulds takes us a step further towards the 
finished implements. The crucibles are generally simple bowls 
of thick clay with an extension of the lip at one side to pour out 
the molten metal. Several of these, with plentiful traces of 
metal still remaining in them, were found by the brothers Siret 
in the Bronze Age settlement at El Argar in Murcia. In the 
same place also were found moulds of stone for the casting of 
simple triangular axes. These were of the class known as open 
moulds, one stone being hollowed to the desired form, the other 
half being simply a flat cover, with no relation to the form 
of the implement to be produced. From the nature of the 
metal, such a mould is the only kind in which the casting of 
an efficient copper implement would be possible; and among 
the objects discovered by the Sirets were articles in plenty of 
pure copper. 

Much has been written in support of the theory that the 
bronze tools and implements found in this or that country must 
have been importations from southern and more highly civilized 
lands. More particularly has this been alleged with regard to 
Britain, which, lying as it did on the extreme limit of the ancient 



world, was regarded as being dependent on the continent for 
the more complex weapons. The constant discovery, however, 
of these hoards of rough metal, as well as of moulds of the highest 
finish for casting swords, daggers, celts, and almost every kind 
of ancient bronze implement and weapon known to us, provides 
a conclusive proof of the contrary. The occurrence of a foreign 
type of implement is so rare as to be a source of especial grati- 
fication to the collector who secures it; and it may be taken 
that, in general terms, all the bronze swords, daggers and spears 
found in Britain were of home manufacture. Relations with the 
continent, however, did exist, as is shown by the occurrence of 
an Irish type of gold ornament in France and Scandinavia, and 
by the similarity of ornamental motives in the British Isles and 
elsewhere. Among the continental races it is natural to find 
intercommunication more common, owing to the absence of 
natural barriers. The weapons of the Bronze Age were swords, 
spears, daggers and axes (celts), though the last would be 
equally well adapted for more peaceful purposes. The swords 
were usually of a narrow leaf shape, cast with the handle in one 
piece, the mounting of the grip and the pommel being added. 
For perfection of workmanship the weapons of this period have 
never been surpassed, and the skill of adjustment in the moulds, 
the fine and equal quality of the metal, and the flawless con- 
dition of the surfaces still excite wonder among the most expert 
of modern founders. The cutting edges of swords and " celts " 
were often, if not always, hammered to serve the double purpose 
of hardening that part of the weapon and sharpening the edge. 
In the case of the axe-heads (celts), this hammering had a dis- 
tinct influence on the evolution of the form of the implement. 
The earliest celts, whether of copper or bronze, were in form, 
copies of their stone prototypes, and curiously enough exactly 
like the ordinary woodman's axe of to-day, but of course without 
the socket for the handle. Hammering rendered the cutting edge 
both broader and thinner, giving it at the same time a curved 
outline. This widened curve eventually became an ornamenta\ 
feature, the two ends of the cutting edge becoming curved 
points and adding greatly to the elegance of the outline. Later, 
the other edges were finished by hammering also, at times in a 
simple ornamental fashion; and whether for greater rigidity 
or for some other reason, flanges were produced in the same way 
on those edges, which again affected the ultimate form of the 
celt. The early flat celt was no doubt simply fixed in a per- 
forated wooden handle, which would naturally tend to split if 
wielded with any vigour. The side-flanges were in course of 
time utilized to prevent this, by allowing the use of a different 
form of handle. In place of the simple straight handle, a branch 
was cut with an elbow-joint, and its shorter limb then divided 
into two prongs, between which the metal passed, while the 
flanges, beaten up from the edges, overlapped the two forks; 
and no doubt a lashing of sinew was added to render the whole 
secure. This made a good serviceable tool or weapon, and 
prevented the splitting of the handle; but still another step 
was taken. The flanges on the edges met over the prong of the 
handle on either side, while the upper end of the celt itself 
eventually became a mere septum dividing the two openings. 
This septum was finally judged to be useless, and done away 
with; and the celt was cast with one hollow only for the re- 
ception of the ends of the handle; thus the flat celt became, 
by a natural process of evolution and improvement, a socketed 
celt. It is a curious fact, however, that the modern form of 
axe where the handle passes through a socket in the metal itself 
does not seem to have been much in favour in the Bronze Age, 
although it was a stone form that certainly survived into the 
succeeding period. 

This and other shortcomings in what must have been the 
universal weapon and implement of the race, were remedied 
from time to time by various improvements in the form of the 
bronze axe-head and the method of hafting; and the various 
stages of development, from the flat blade of copper or bronze 
to the socketed implement and even to a pattern now in use, can 
still be traced in the Bronze Age specimens that have come down 
to us. 



ARCHAEOLOGY 



Plate V. 





SEPULCHRAL POTTERY, BRITISH ISLES 

(BRONZE AGE). 

1-3, Drinking cups or beakers. 4-9, Food vessels. 

10-12, Cinerary urns. 



SEPULCHRAL POTTERY FROM THE CONTINENT OF 
EUROPE (NEOLITHIC, BRONZE, AND IRON AGES). 






STAGES IN THE EVOLUTION OF THE CELT OR IMPLEMENT OF CHISEL FORM. 
(1) From stone to metallic form. (2) Growth of the stop ridge to palstave. (3) Growth of the wings to socket-celt. 



IT. 352- 



By permission, from the British Museum Guide to (lie Bronze A&c. 



Plate VI. 



ARCHAEOLOGY 




I. Bronze shield with red enamel 
ornaments, found in the Thames 
near Battersea; about 31 in. 
long. 





Chariot burial of a Gaulish chief, Somme Bionne, Marne, France. 



Bronze mounted wooden bucket found in a pit burial 
at Aylesford. 

Early Iron Age. 

The objects here represented are all in the 

British Museum. 

By permission, from the British Museum Guide to Ike Early Iron Age. 




Horned bronze helmet with traces of enamel ornament, found in the 
Thames near Waterloo Bridge. 



ARCHAEOLOGY 



353 



Ireland. 



With the discovery of iron as the ideal metal for cutting 
implements and weapons, we enter into the millennium before 
the Christian era; for roughly speaking, the develop- 
ronage. mcn {. f tne civilization associated with the gradual 
substitution of iron for bronze began about iooo B.C. Again we 
look towards the south-east of Europe for the earliest evidence 
of this great advance; from that quarter it gradually spread 
over the whole continent, reaching the more northern parts 
about five hundred years later. In Egypt, the home of a mar- 
vellous civilization at a very early time, the conditions were 
different, and there is reason to suppose that iron was known 
there long before it was in use on the northern side of the Medi- 
terranean. Our knowledge of the dates at which iron was first 
known in parts of Asia is still very limited, and further discoveries 
must be awaited. 

The archaeology of Ireland presents features in many respects 
different from those of the rest of the British Islands in the Stone 
and Bronze Ages. Such affinities in style as are 
traceable connect it rather with Scotland than with 
any part of the south, a fact doubtless due to proximity as well 
as in part to race connexions. A special feature is the astonishing 
quantity of gold that was produced in Ireland during the early 
Bronze Age. The frequent discovery of gold ornaments of this 
time has enriched to a surprising degree the museum of the 
Royal Irish Academy in Dublin, while many private and public 
collections both in Ireland and elsewhere contain a considerable 
number of similar relics. If these represented the total wealth 
of gold of the Bronze Age the amount would probably exceed 
that of any ancient period in any country, except perhaps the 
republic of Colombia in South America. But the known remains 
can only be a small proportion of the original wealth. Vast 
quantities must have been discovered from medieval times 
onwards, nearly all of which would be melted down, owing to 
the ignorance of the finders or to the uncertainty of ownership. 
Further, it may be taken as certain that there still remains in the 
earth a great mass of the metal which may or may not be dis- 
covered at some future time. If it were by any means possible 
to estimate what these united categories would amount to, the 
result would scarcely be credited. It is well known that gold has 
been, and still is, found in Ireland; but it is hard to believe that 
there were no richer deposits than are now known. It is at any 
rate certain that the rivers were worked as late as the opening 
centuries of our era. In the Bronze Age the most characteristic 
ornaments were penannular objects of all sizes from a small 
finger ring up to an armlet, generally known as " ring money " 
from the difficulty of assigning a definite use to the whole series; 
and the flat, crescent-shaped, diadem-like objects called "lunulae," 
which are perhaps even more definitely characteristic of Ireland. 
Such objects of gold, if ornamented at all, are, like some of the 
flat axe-heads, engraved with simple geometrical patterns, 
lozenge-shaped chequers and the like, a type of decoration in 
itself easily determined as being of the Bronze Age, but bearing 
at the same time an interesting and very curious analogy to 
remains of the same period from the Iberian Peninsula, more 
especially from Portugal. If any overland culture-relations 
existed between the two countries, it would be only reasonable 
to expect the occurrence of the objects in question in the inter- 
vening districts. But so far nothing of the kind has been 
discovered. Moreover, had it been an isolated instance of 
resemblance it might be negligible, but an equally odd similarity 
is found in the fact that the Irish were in the habit of grinding 
the faces of their flint arrow-heads, an apparently useless refine- 
ment, while the Portuguese of the early Bronze Age did the same. 
Again, the dolmens of Ireland bear a distinct resemblance to 
those of Spain and Portugal, while the French dolmens, with 
few exceptions in the north, have a different character. These 
curious points are in favour of the tradition that the original 
inhabitants of Ireland were of Iberian origin, and further, that 
they did not come overland but by sea, and there are indeed 
signs of extensive navigation in the Bronze Age of northern 
Europe. It was perhaps in the middle of our Bronze Age, say 
about iooo B.C., that this Iberian race was supplanted by the 



Celts, who took a considerable time to emerge from their native 
barbarism. It is, at any rate, fairly certain that for some 
hundreds of years previous to this Celtic invasion, Ireland was an 
enormously rich country, supplying not only herself, but also 
Britain and part of the Atlantic seaboard with gold. The fact 
became eventually an ingrained tradition in the history of the 
country, subsisting in Irish literature for centuries after the 
Christian era. Such natural wealth must have produced in these 
early times a marked effect on the relations and culture of these 
Iberian Irish, and one might reasonably expect a much higher 
level of luxury and wealth than is indicated by the remains 
commonly found. With the opportunities provided by communi- 
cation with the continent, and the interchange of goods, with all 
the chances of benefiting by ideas current among other races, 
it is astonishing that Ireland did not play a more prominent part 
in Europe, more than a thousand years before the Christian era. 

While gold as a metal was known in Europe, even before 
copper, it is a curious fact that silver was almost unknown, and 
hardly ever used. One of the most interesting sites for 
the metal, at about the same period of which we have Medi- 
just been speaking in Ireland, was the Mediterranean ^^ 
coast of Spain. Here in the neighbourhood of Almeria 
have been found remains of a large and apparently prosperous 
population ranging from the Stone Age to the end of the Bronze 
Age, with houses and tombs, besides the fortifications rendered 
necessary, in the later period, by their possession of the rare and 
precious metal, silver. Rare it certainly was, for the quantity 
found was exceedingly small, tiny slender rings for the fingers 
or the ears, and rivets to hold the axe-blade in its handle; but 
nothing to compare with the lavish richness of the American 
mines. The interesting race who occupied these dwellings and 
finally were laid to rest in the adjoining graves were evidently 
connected more or less closely with the peoples inhabiting the 
eastern coasts of the Mediterranean. 

Recent discoveries in the central Mediterranean area not only 
furnish new and trustworthy (though none the less surprising) 
dates in ancient history, but may also bridge the distance 
between the Levant and the Pillars of Hercules. The results 
achieved by Arthur Evans and other distinguished explorers in 
Crete (q.v.) opened a new chapter in the history of European 
civilization, and may fitly be compared with the excavation of 
Troy, Mycenae and Tiryns by Schliemann some thirty years 
before. The progress of archaeology in the interval can be well 
tested by a comparison of the discussions to which the two series 
of discoveries gave rise. The mistaken attributions and unfor- 
tunate animosities in connexion with earlier excavations are 
almost forgotten, while the brilliant discoveries in the island of 
King Minos have not only themselves been made on scientific 
principles, but are illumined by the splendid revelation of the 
civilizations of the Mycenaean and the pre-Mycenaean era. 

A great change indeed took place in the methods of classical 
study during the last decade of the 19th century, a change 
which affected the entire character of future classical classical 
research. It was formerly the common habit among 
students and professors of archaeology to confine their attention 
and their interests entirely to classical texts and even to classical 
sites, rejecting as outside the scope of their studies anything 
that was not manifestly beautiful as art. Whatever was primi- 
tive in its aspect, or wanting in the familiar characteristics that 
had for centuries been associated with Greek art, was either 
rejected entirely or at any rate relegated to a second place, as 
having but a poor claim to be classed with objects of the finer 
periods. The result was necessarily misleading. The unin- 
structed majority very naturally regarded the art of Pheidian 
times as a thing of supernatural growth, which had been be- 
stowed by divine favour upon a chosen spot on the earth, without 
a human parentage, and almost without leaving any descendants. 
The evolutionary methods of other branches of science, however, 
were by degrees brought to bear upon the sacred precincts of 
pure Greek art. It was found that the crude products of the 
second millennium B.C., the formless images evolved by the 
uncultured dwellers in the Mediterranean area more than a 

11 



354 



ARCHAEOPTERYX 



thousand years before the time of Pheidias, were in truth the 
prototypes of the creations of himself and his contemporaries. 
This step being taken, the rest became easy. The most common- 
place and ordinary relics were collected with as much avidity 
as they had formerly been rejected, in the belief that their simple 
forms would aid in the elucidation of their more complex and 
highly elaborated descendants. This minute attention, more- 
over, was not only given to the works of man, but even the 
remains of humanity received the attention . they merited. It 
has been rightly thought, during recent years, that the question 
of race was a factor that deserved treatment in dealing with 
works of art of early times; and that natural evolution due to 
man's tendency to change with time, might not be sufficient 
to account for the differences of type observed in human remains 
from the same country. For this reason, not only the objects 
associated with the burial have been preserved, but also the 
skeleton itself. This has been examined, measurements taken 
and recorded for comparison, and inferences made, sometimes 
of a surprising character. For example, if a cemetery be found 
with a preponderance of tall, long-headed skeletons in a district 
where the prevailing , type of skeleton is short and brachy- 
cephalic (short-headed), the observer may reasonably expect 
a different kind of burial-furniture, and suspect an intruding 
race. In this particular respect, archaeology owes a signal 
debt to physical anthropology and to anthropological methods 
in general. The combination of the two is far more likely to 
lead to a reasonable and satisfactory conclusion than would be 
possible if the one branch of science had been pursued alone. 

When once the existence of abundant remains of prehistoric 
man had been admitted, and their study had received recog- 
nition as a branch of science, the evidence supplied 
ethnology. ^Y tne relics themselves and by their relation to 
extinct or existing animals would have sufficed to give 
a considerable insight into the conditions of primitive life. 
But, fortunately, corroborative evidence of the most useful 
kind was at hand, and has been of the greatest service in solving 
what might otherwise have been insoluble problems. Though 
the progress of civilization, and more especially the ever in- 
creasing rapidity of communication, are rapidly changing the 
habits of life among the primitive peoples in various parts of the 
world, yet till past the middle of the ioth century, a certain 
number of tribes, if not races, were still in the Stone Age. Even 
at the present day stone-using tribes still exist, although by 
chance metal may be known to them. The importance of the 
study of their conditions of life and their technical processes, 
and of the collecting of their implements for the express purpose 
of illustrating prehistoric man, was recognized by Henry Christy 
(1810-1865), who had made extensive investigations and col- 
lected relics in conjunction with Edouard Lartet in the now 
famous caverns of the Dordogne, at a time when such explora- 
tions were somewhat of a novelty; and concurrently he formed 
a large collection of the productions of existing savage peoples, 
both collections after his death passing to the British Museum, 
his intention being that the one should elucidate the ether. (It 
is only fair to his memory, however, to state here that, by his 
express wish, the most important of the relics that he had 
obtained from the Dordogne caves were returned to France 
where they now are. Such instances of international courtesy 
are rare enough to deserve mention.) The value and interest 
of such a series can scarcely be over-rated. Almost till the 
20th century, the Indians of North America, the Australian 
and Tasmanian natives, as well as those of New Zealand and 
the many archipelagoes of the Pacific, were, if not ignorant of 
the use of metals, at least habitually using stone where civilized 
man would use metal. The Maori made his war club of jade 
and the pounders for preparing his food of stone. The Australian 
had his stone axe-blade; and low as he stands in the culture 
scale, his spear-heads are chipped with an exquisite precision. 
The Papuan of inland New Guinea is still making his weapons 
of stone and wood; while until quite recently the North 
American Indian was making his delicate stone arrow-points, 
and the Solomon islander his beautiful polished stone axe-blades. 



The knowledge gained by the study of a large series of such 
objects enables us to fill up very many gaps in the story of early 
man as told by his own remains. In fact, in this respect, the 
value of the comparison is much greater than could reasonably 
be expected; for, whatever may be the reason, nothing is more 
marked than the extraordinary similarity of stone implements 
at all times and over the whole world. An arrow-point made by 
a Patagonian Indian, one from a Japanese shell mound, and a 
third of the Stone Age from Ireland, are found to be practically 
identical. Whether it is that the same material and the same 
necessity naturally produce a like result, or whether there has 
existed throughout a continuity of type, is a question that will 
never be satisfactorily answered. The results, however, are of 
eminently practical value. The arrow-heads of neolithic man, 
which arc found by hundreds all over Europe, may be seen fixed 
in their shafts in the hands of an American Indian; rude pieces 
of quartz, which unmounted would escape notice as implements, 
are seen to make excellent tools when mounted in a handle by 
the Australian black, while flakes of slate find a use when 
mounted as skinning -knives by the Eskimo. 

Now that the narrower conception of archaeology as a minor 
branch of classical studies has been given up, the new science 
has gradually won its way to universal recognition; 
and anthropology, a still wider subject but in many s< ^jL 
points closely allied to the scientific study of ancient 
remains, has still more recently found favour at all the leading 
universities, and practical measures have been taken to establish 
the study on a firm and scientific basis. Apart from this official 
encouragement, much has been done towards the systema- 
tization and teaching of archaeology by practical . excavators, 
whose pupils have attained considerable numbers and celebrity. 
Something has been done, too, in the national and provincial 
museums, to present the relics of past ages in an intelligible 
manner, so that the collections no longer consist of curiosities 
but of documents rich in instruction and interest even to the 
general visitor.- The progress of photography, as well as the 
improvement and cheapening of methods of illustration, have 
also assisted enormously in the advance of archaeology; and 
similarly, the antiquities exhibited in museums and private 
collections to illustrate and amplify written records, . have in 
the last generation received much attention on their own account, 
and have reacted in various ways on the teaching of ancient 
history. In some countries a further step in general education 
has been taken, and the lamentable waste of archaeological 
material arrested to some extent by the distribution of pictures 
and diagrams among schools and institutions, to call attention 
to the more ordinary local types, and to encourage those who are 
likely to discover them in the soil to save them from destruction 
and render them available for scientific study. A certain 
familiarity on the part of the young with the mere appearance 
of antiquities that come to light continually and are almost as 
often discarded or destroyed, would probably result in valuable 
additions being made to the available data. 

Bibliography. — The most useful general works are thef ollowing:— 
Salomon Reinach, Epoque des alluvions el des cavernes (Musee de 
St Germain); Hoernes, Der diluviale Mcnsch in Europa; Sir John 
Evans, Stone Implements of Great Britain, and Bronze Implements of 
Great Britain; Boyd Dawkins, Cave-hunting, and Early Man in 
Britain; Greenwell, British Barrows; W. G. Smith, Man the 
Primeval Savage; James Geikie, Prehistoric Europe; Mortillet, 
Le Prehislorique; Robert Munro, Lake Dwellings of Europe; Ridge- 
way, Early Age of Greece; Jos. Anderson, Scotland in Pagan Times; 
the works of Oscar Montelius and Sophus Miiller; L'Anthropologie, 
Materiaux pour I'histoire primitive de I'homme; Christy and Lartet, 
Reliquiae Aquitanicae; A. Michaelis, A Century of Archaeological Dis- 
covery (Eng. trans., 1908). See also Anthropology, and authorities 
mentioned there; Stone Age; Bronze Age; Iron Age, &c. ; 
Geology ; and the articles on different countries and sites. 

(C. H. Rd.) 

ARCHAEOPTERYX. The name of Arckaeopteryx lithographica 
was based by Hermann von Meyer upon a feather (Gr.7rrepu£, wing) 
found in 1861 in the lithographic. slate quarries of Solenhofen 
in Bavaria, the geological horizon being that of the Kimmeridge 
clay of the Upper Oolite or Jurassic system. In the same year 
and at the same place was discovered the specimen (figs. 1 and 3) 



ARCHAEOPTERYX 



355 



now in the British Museum, named by Andreas Wagner Gripho- 
saurus. Sir R. Owen has described it as A . macroura. Stimu- 
lated by the high price paid by the British Museum, the quarry 
owners diligently searched, and in 1872 another, much finer, 
preserved specimen was found. This was bought by K. W. 




Fig. I. — The British Museum specimen. 

v. Siemens, who presented it to the Berlin Museum. The late 
W. Dames has written an excellent monograph on it. 

Archaeopteryx was a bird, without any doubt, but still with so 
many low, essentially reptilian characters that it forms a link 
between these two classes. About the size of a rook, its most 



iWWK'liH. 1 



ww. 



::;f'ij'ii;iii: , |i!iifc! i !!i| i iif ,, »i | s , sHsii 



!i»P!J!ii;!i;R 




Fig. 2. — The specimen in the Museum fiir Naturkunde, Berlin. 
After a photograph taken from a cast. 

obvious peculiarity is the long reptilian tail, composed of 20 
vertebrae and not ending in a pygostyle. The last dozen verte- 
brae each carry a pair of well-developed typical quills. Upon 
these features of the tail E. Kaeckel established the subclass 
Saururae, containing solely Archaeopteryx, in opposition to the 
Ornithurae, comprising all the other birds. Herein he has been 
followed by raany zoologists. However, the fact that various 



recent birds possess the same kind of caudal skeleton, likewise 
without a pygostyle, although reduced to at least 13 vertebrae, 
shows that the two terms do not express a fundamental difference. 
The importance of Archaeopteryx justifies the following 
descriptive detail. Vertebral column composed of about 50 
vertebrae, viz. 10-11 cervical, 12-n thoracic, 2 lumbar, 5-6 
sacral, and 20 or 21 caudal, with a total caudal length of the 
Berlin specimen of 7 in. The cervical and thoracic vertebrae 
seem to be biconcave; the cervical ribs are much reduced 
and were apparently still movable; the thoracic ribs are devoid 
of uncinate processes. Paired abdominal ribs are doubtful. 
Scarcely anything is known of the sternum, and little of the 
shoulder-girdle, except the very stout furcula; scapula typically 
bird-like. Humerus about 2-| in. long, with a strong crista 
lateralis, which indicates a strongly developed great pectoral 
muscle and hence, by inference, the presence of a keel to the 
sternum. Radius and ulna typically avine, 2-1 in. in length. 
Carpus with two separate bones. The hand skeleton consists 
of 3 completely separate metacarpals, each carrying a com- 




Fig. 3. — Tail of British Museum specimen. 

plete, likewise free, finger; the shortened thumb with 2, the 
index with 3, the third with 4 phalanges; each finger with a 
curved claw. The whole wing is consequently, although 
essentially avine, still reptilian in the unfused state of the 
metacarpals and the numbers of the phalanges. The pelvis is 
imperfectly known. The preacetabular portion of the ilium is 
shorter than the posterior half. The hind-limb is typically 
avine, with intertarsal joint, distally reduced fibula, and the 
three elongated metatarsals which show already considerable 
anchylosis; reduction of the toes to four, with 2, 3, 4 and 5 
phalanges; the hallux is separate, and as usual in recent birds 
posterior in position. Skull bird-like, except that the short 
bill cannot have been enclosed in a horny rhamphotheca, since 
the upper jaw shows a row of 13, the lower jaw 3 conical teeth, 
all implanted in distinct sockets. 

The remiges and rectrices indicate perfect feathers, with shaft 
and complete vanes which were so neatly finished that they must 
have possessed typical radii and hooklets. Some of the quills 
measure fully 5 in. in length. Six or seven remiges were attached 
to the hand, ten to the ulna. 

It is idle to speculate on the habits of this earliest of known 
birds. That it could fly is certain, and the feet show it to have 



35 6 



ARCHAISM— ARCHBISHOP 



been well adapted to arboreal life. The clawed slender fingers 
did not make Archaeopteryx any more quadrupedal or bat-like 
in its habits than is a kestrel hawk, with its equally large, or 
even larger thumb-claw. 

Bibliography. — H. v. Meyer, Neues Jahrb.f. Mineralog. (1861), 
p. 679; Sir R. Owen, " On the Archaeopteryx von Meyer ..." 
Phil. Trans., 1863, pp. 33-47, pis. i.-iv. ; T. H. Huxley, " Remarks on 
the Skeleton of the Archaeopteryx and on the relations of the bird 
to the reptile," Ceol. Mag. i., 1864, pp. 55-57; C. Vogt, " L'Archaeo- 
pteryx macrura," Revue sclent, de la France et de Vetranger, 1879, 
pp. 241-248; VV. Dames, " fiber Archaeopteryx," Palaeontol. 
Abhandl. ii. (Berlin, 1884); Idem, " fJber Brustbein Schulter- und 
Beckengiirtel der Archaeopteryx," Math, naturw. Milth. Berlin, 
vii. (1897), pp. 476-492. (H. F. G.) 

• ARCHAISM (adj. "archaic"; from Gr. apxcuos, old), an 
old-fashioned usage, or the deliberate employment of an out-of- 
date and ancient mode of expression. 

ARCHANGEL (Archangelsk), a government of European 
Russia, bounded N. by the White Sea and Arctic Ocean, W. 
by Finland and Olonets, S. by Vologda, and E. by the Ural 
mountains. It comprehends the islands of Novaya-Zemlya, 
Vaygach and Kolguev, and the peninsula of Kola. Its area is 
331,505 sq. m., and its population in 1867 was 275,779 an d in 
1897, 349,943. The part which lies within the Arctic Circle is 
very desolate and sterile, consisting chiefly of sand and reindeer 
moss. The winter is long and severe, and even in summer the 
soil is frozen. The rivers (Tuloma, Onega, Dvina,- Mezen and 
Pechora) are closed in September and scarcely thaw before July. 
The Kola peninsula is, however, diversified by hills exceeding 
3000 ft. in altitude and by large lakes (e.g. Imandra), and its 
coast enjoys a much more genial climate. South of the Arctic 
Circle the greater part of the country is covered with forests, 
intermingled with lakes and morasses, though in places there is 
excellent pasturage. Here the spring is moist, with cold, frosty 
nights; the summer a succession of long foggy days; the 
autumn again moist. The rivers are closed from October to 
April. The inhabitants of the northern districts — nomad tribes 
of Samoyedes, Zyryans, Lapps, and the Finnish tribes of Karelians 
and Chudes — support themselves by fishing and hunting. In the 
southern districts hemp and flax are raised, but grain crops are 
little cultivated, so that the bark of trees has often to be ground 
up to eke out the scanty supply of flour. Potatoes are grown as 
far north as 65 . Shipbuilding is carried on, and the forests 
yield timber, pitch and tar. Excellent cattle are raised in the 
district of Kholmogory on the Dvina, veal being supplied to St 
Petersburg. Gold is found in the districts of Kola, naphtha and 
salt in those of Kem and Pinega, and lignite in Mezen. Sulphurous 
springs exist in the districts of Kholmogory and Shenkursk. 
The industry and commerce are noticed below in the article on 
the town Archangel, which is the capital. The government is 
divided into nine districts, the chief towns of which are — ■ 
Alexandrovsk or Kola (pop. 300), Archangel (q.v.), Kem (1825), 
Kholmogory (1465), Mezen (2040), Novaya-Zemlya (island), 
Pechora, Pinega (1000) and Shenkursk (1308). 

See A. P. Engelhardt, A Russian Province of the North (Eng. trans., 
by H. Cooke, 1899). 

ARCHANGEL (Archangelsk), chief town of the government 
of Archangel, Russia, at the head of the delta of the Dvina, on 
the right bank of the river, in lat. 64 32' N. and long. 4o°33' E. 
Pop. (1867) 19,936; (1897) 20,933. As early as the 10th century, 
if not earlier, the Norsemen frequented this part of the world 
(Bjarmeland) on trading expeditions; the best-known is that 
made by Ottar or Othere between 880 and 900 and described 
(or translated) by Alfred the Great, king of England. The 
modern town dates, however, from the visit of the English 
voyager, Richard Chancellor, in 1553. An English factory was 
erected on the lower Dvina soon after that date, and in 1584 a 
fort was built, around which the town grew up. Archangel was 
for long the only seaport of Russia (or Muscovy). The tsar 
Boris Godunov (1598-1605) threw the trade open to all nations; 
and the chief participants in it were England, Holland and 
Germany. In 1668- 1684 the great bazaar and trading hall was 
built, principally by Tatar prisoners. In 1691-1700 the exports 
to England averaged £112,210 annually. After Peter the Great 



made St Petersburg the capital of his dominions (1702), he 
placed Archangel' under vexatious commercial disabilities, and 
consequently its trade declined. In 1762 it was granted the 
same privileges as St Petersburg, and since then it has gradually 
recovered its former prosperity. It is the seat of a bishop, and 
has a cathedral (1709-1743), a museum, the monastery of the 
Archangel Michael (whence the city gets its name), an ecclesi- 
astical seminary, a school of navigation and a naval hospital. 
Linen, leather, canvas, cordage, mats, tallow, potash and beer 
are manufactured. There is a lively trade with St Petersburg, 
and the sea-borne exports, which consist chiefly of timber, flax, 
linseed, oats, flour, pitch, tar, skins and mats, amount in value 
to about 1 J millions sterling annually (82! % for timber), but 
the imports (mostly fish) are worth only about^ 200,000. A fish 
fair is held every year on the 1st (15th) of Septe^- 1^:. Archangel 
communicates with the interior of Russia by ri "j.nd-'canal, and 
has a railway line (5 2 2 m.) to Yaroslavl. The Labour, deepened 
to 18 j ft., is about a mile below the city, and is accessible from 
May to October. About 12 m. lower down there are a government 
dockyard and merchants' warehouses. A new military harbour, 
Alexandrovsk or Port Catherine, has been made on Catherine 
(Ekaterininsk) Bay, on the Murman coast of the Kola peninsula. 
The shortest day at Archangel has only 3 hrs. 12 min., the 
longest 2r hrs. 48 min. of daylight. 

ARCHBALD, a borough of Lackawanna county, Pennsylvania, 
U.S.A., in the N.E. part of the state, 10 m. N.E. of Scranton. 
Pop. (1890) 4032; (1900) 5396; (1869 foreign-born); (1910) 
7194. It is served by the Delaware & Hudson, and the New 
York, Ontario & Western railways, and by an interurban electric 
fine. It is about 900 ft. above sea-level; in the vicinity are 
extensive deposits of anthracite coal, the mining and breaking 
of which is the principal industry; silk throwing and weaving is 
another industry of the borough. At Archbald is a large glacial 
" pot hole," about 20 ft. in diameter and 40 ft. in depth. Arch- 
bald, named in honour of James Archbald, formerly chief 
engineer of the Delaware & Hudson railway, was a part of 
Blakely township (incorporated in 1818) until 1877, when it 
became a borough. 

ARCHBISHOP (Lat. archiepiscopus, from Gr. apxi&rlffKoiros) , 
in the Christian Church, the title of a bishop of superior rank, 
implying usually jurisdiction over other bishops, but no superi- 
ority of order over them. The functions of the archbishop, as 
at present exercised, developed out of those of the metropolitan 
(q.v.); though the title of archbishop, when it first appeared, 
implied no metropolitan jurisdiction. Nor are the terms inter- 
changeable now; for not all metropolitans are archbishops, 1 
nor all archbishops metropolitans. The title seems to have been 
introduced first in the East, in the 4th century, as an honorary 
distinction implying no superiority of jurisdiction. Its first 
recorded use is by Athanasius, bishop of Alexandria, who applied 
it to his predecessor Alexander as a mark of respect. In the 
same way Gregory of Nazianzus bestowed it upon Athanasius 
himself. In the next century its use would seem to have been 
more common as the title of bishops of important sees ; for 
several archbishops are stated to have been present at the council 
of Chalcedon in 4 5 1 . In the Western Church the title was hardly 
known before the 7th century, and did not become common 
until the Carolingian emperors revived the right of the metro- 
politans to summon provincial synods. The metropolitans now 
commonly assumed the title of archbishop to mark their pre- 
eminence over the other bishops; at the same time the obligation 
imposed upon them, mainly at the instance of St Boniface, to 
receive the pallium (q.v.) from Rome, definitely marked the 
defeat of their claim to exercise metropolitan jurisdiction 
independently of the pope. 

At the present day, the title of archbishop is retained in 
the Roman Catholic Church, the various oriental churches, 
the Anglican Church, and certain branches of the Lutheran 
(Evangelical) Church. 

1 In the Roman Church it is safe to say that all metropolitans are 
archbishops. In, e.g., the Scottish and American episcopal churches, 
however, the metropolitan is the senior bishop pro tern. 



ARCHBISHOP 



357 



In the Roman Catholic Church the powers of the archbishop 
are considerably less extensive than they were in the middle ages. 

According to the medieval canon law, based on the 
Catholic decretals, and codified in the 13 th century in the 
Church. Corpus juris canonici, by which the earlier powers 

of metropolitans had been greatly curtailed, the powers 
of the archbishop consisted in the right (1) to confirm and 
consecrate suffragan bishops; (2) to summon and preside over 
provincial synods; (3) to superintend the suffragans and visit 
their dioceses, as well as to censure and punish bishops in the 
interests of discipline, the right of deprivation, however, being 
reserved to the pope; (4) to act as a court of appeal from the 
diocesan courts; (5) to exercise the jus devolutionis , i.e. present 
to benefices in the gift of bishops, if these neglect their duty 
in this respect. These rights were greatly curtailed by the 
council of Trent. The confirmation and consecration of bishops 
(q.v.) is now reserved to the Holy See. The summoning of 
provincial synods, which was made obligatory every three years 
by the council, was long neglected, but is now more common 
wherever the political conditions, e.g. in the United States, Great 
Britain and France, are favourable. The disciplinary powers of 
the archbishop, on the other hand, can scarcely be said to 
survive. The right to hold a visitation of a suffragan's diocese 
or to issue censures against him was, by Sess. xxiv. c. 3 de ref., 
of the council of Trent, made dependent upon the consent of the 
provincial synod after cause shown (causa cognita et probata) ; 
and the only two powers left to the archbishop in this respect 
are to watch over the diocesan seminaries and to compel the 
residence of the bishop in his diocese. The right of the arch- 
bishop to exercise a certain disciplinary power over the regular 
orders is possessed by him, not as archbishop, but as the delegate 
ad hoc of the pope. Finally, the function of the archbishop 
as judge in a court of appeal, though it still subsists, is of little 
practical importance now that the clergy, in civil matters, are 
universally subject to the secular courts. 

Besides archbishops who are metropolitans there are in the 
Roman Catholic Church others who have no metropolitan 
jurisdiction. Such are the titular archbishops in partibus, 
and certain archbishops of Italian sees who have no bishops under 
them. Archbishops rank immediately after patriarchs and have 
the same precedence as primates. The right to wear the pallium 
is confined to those archbishops who are not merely titular. 
It must be applied for, either in person or by proxy, at Rome 
by the archbishop within three months of his consecration or 
enthronement, and, before receiving it, he must take the oaths of 
fidelity and obedience to the Holy See. Until the pallium is 
granted, the archbishop is known only as archbishop-elect, 
and is not empowered to exercise his potestas ordinis in the 
archdiocese nor to summon the provincial synod and exercise 
the jurisdiction dependent upon this. He may, however, exer- 
cise his purely episcopal functions. The special ensign of his 
office is the cross, crux erecta or gestatoria, carried before him on 
solemn occasions (see Cross). 

In the Orthodox and other churches of the East the title of 
archbishop is of far more common occurrence than in the West, 

and is less consistently associated with metropolitan 
Church. functions. Thus in Greece there are eleven archbishops 

to thirteen bishops, the archbishop of Athens alone 
being metropolitan; in Cyprus, where there are four bishops and 
only one archbishop, all five are of metropolitan rank. 

In the Protestant churches of continental Europe the title of 
archbishop has fallen into almost complete disuse. It is, however, 

still borne by the Lutheran bishop of Upsala, who is 
Church!" metropolitan of Sweden, and by the Lutheran bishop 

of Abo in Finland. In Prussia the title has occasionally 
been bestowed by the king on general superintendents of the 
Lutheran church, as in 1829, when Frederick William III. gave 
it to his friend and spiritual adviser, the celebrated preacher, 
Ludwig Ernst Borowski (1740-1831), general superintendent of 
Prussia (181 2) and bishop (1816). 

In the Church of England and its sister and daughter 
churches the position of the archbishop is defined by the medieval 



canon law as confirmed or modified by statute since the 
Reformation. It is, therefore, as regards both the potestas 
ordinis and jurisdiction, substantially the same as 
in the Roman Catholic Church, save as modified on the EaSand! 
one hand by the substitution of the supremacy of the 
crown for that of the Holy See, and on the other by the restric- 
tions imposed by the council of Trent. 

The ecclesiastical government of the Church of England is 
divided between two archbishops — the archbishop of Canterbury, 
who is " primate of all England " and metropolitan of the pro- 
vince of Canterbury, and the archbishop of York, who is " primate 
of England " and metropolitan of the province of York. The 
jurisdiction of the archbishop of Canterbury as primate of all 
England extends in certain matters into the province of York. 
He exercised the jurisdiction of legatus natus of the pope through- 
out all England before the Reformation, and since that event 
he has been empowered, by 25 Hen. VIII. c. 21, to exercise 
certain powers of dispensation in cases formerly sued for in the 
court of Rome. Under this statute the archbishop continues 
to grant special licences to marry, which are valid in both pro- 
vinces; he appoints notaries public, who may practise in both 
provinces; and he grants dispensations to clerks to hold more 
than one benefice, subject to certain restrictions which have 
been imposed by later statutes. The archbishop also continues 
to grant degrees in the faculties of theology, music and law, 
which are known as Lambeth degrees. His power to grant 
degrees in medicine, qualifying the recipients to practise, was 
practically restrained by the Medical Act 1858. 

The archbishop of Canterbury exercises the twofold juris- 
diction of a metropolitan and a diocesan bishop. As metro- 
politan he is the guardian of the spiritualities of every vacant 
see within the province, he presents to all benefices which fall 
vacant during the vacancy of the see, and through his special 
commissary exercises the ordinary jurisdiction of a bishop 
within the vacant diocese. He exercises also an appellate juris- 
diction over each bishop, which, in cases of licensed curates, 
he exercises personally under the Pluralities Act 1838; but his 
ordinary appellate jurisdiction is exercised by the judge of the 
Arches court (see Arches, Court or). The archbishop had 
formerly exclusive jurisdiction in all causes of wills and intes- 
tacies, where parties died having personal property in more than 
one diocese of the province of Canterbury, and he had concurrent 
jurisdiction in other cases. This jurisdiction, which he exercised 
through the judge of the Prerogative court, was transferred 
to the crown by the Court of Probate Act 1857. The Arches 
court was also the court of appeal from the consistory courts 
of the bishops of the province in all testamentary and matri- 
monial causes. The matrimonial jurisdiction was transferred 
to the crown by the Matrimonial Causes Act 1857. The court 
of Audience, in which the archbishop presided personally, 
attended by his vicar-general, and sometimes by episcopal 
assessors, has fallen into desuetude. The vicar-general, however, 
exercises jurisdiction in matters' of ordinary marriage licences 
and of institutions to benefices. The master of the faculties 
regulates the appointment of notaries public, and all dispen- 
sations which fall under 25 Hen. VIII. c. 21. 

A right very rarely exercised by the archbishop of Canterbury, 
but one of great importance, is that of the visitation and de- 
privation of inferior bishops. Since there is no example of the 
archbishop of York exercising or being reputed to have such 
disciplinary jurisdiction over his suffragans, 1 and this right 
could, according to the canon law cited above, in the middle ages 
only be exercised normally in concert with the provincial synod, 
it would seem to be a survival of the special jurisdiction enjoyed 
by the pre-Reformation archbishop as legatus natus of the pope. 
It was somewhat freely exercised by Cranmer and his successors 
immediately after the Reformation; but the main precedent 
now relied upon is that of Dr Watson, bishop of St Davids, who 
was deprived in 1695 by Archbishop Tennison for simony and 

1 Unless the case of the claim of Mark, bishop of Carlisle, to be 
tried by his ordinary instead of by a temporal court, be a precedent 
(Phillimore, Eccles. Law, p. 74, ed. 1895). 



358 



ARCHCHANCELLOR— ARCHDEACON 



other offences, the legality of the sentence being finally confirmed 
by the House of Lords on the 25th of January 1705. It was 
proved in the course of the long argument in this case that the 
archbishop of Canterbury had undoubtedly exercised such inde- 
pendent power of visitation both before and after the Refor- 
mation; and it was on this precedent that in 1888 the judicial 
committee of the privy council mainly relied in deciding that 
the archbishop had the right to cite before him the bishop of 
Lincoln (Dr Edward King), who was accused of certain irregular 
ritual practices. The trial began on the 12th of February 1889 
before the archbishop and certain assessors, the protest of Dr 
King, based on the claim that he could only be tried in a pro- 
vincial synod, being overruled by Archbishop Benson on the 
grounds above stated. The main importance of the " Lincoln 
Judgment," delivered on the 21st of November 1890, is that 
it set a new precedent for the effective jurisdiction of the arch- 
bishop, based on the ancient canon law, and so did something 
towards the establishment of a purely " spiritual " court, the 
absence of which had been one of the main grievances of a large 
body of the clergy. 

It is the privilege of the archbishop of Canterbury to crown 
the kings and queens of England. He is entitled to consecrate 
all the bishops within his province and was formerly entitled, 
upon consecrating a bishop, to select a benefice within his 
diocese at his option for one of his chaplains, but this practice 
was indirectly abolished by 3 and 4 Vict. c. in, § 42. He is 
entitled to nominate eight chaplains, who had formerly certain 
statutory privileges, which are now abolished. He is ex officio 
an ecclesiastical commissioner for England, and has by statute 
the right of nominating one of the salaried ecclesiastical com- 
missioners. 

The archbishop exercises the ordinary jurisdiction of a bishop 
over his diocese through his consistory court at Canterbury, the 
judge of which court is styled the commissary-general of the 
city and diocese of Canterbury. The archbishop holds a 
visitation of his diocese personally every' three years, and he 
is the only diocesan who has kept up the triennial visitation 
of the dean and chapter of his cathedral. 1 The archbishop 
of Canterbury takes precedence immediately after princes of 
the blood royal and over every peer of parliament, including the 
lord chancellor. 

The archbishop of York has immediate spiritual jurisdiction as 
metropolitan in the case of all vacant sees within the province 
of York, analogous to that which is exercised by the archbishop 
of Canterbury within the province of Canterbury. He has also 
an appellate jurisdiction of an analogous character, which he 
exercises through his provincial court, whilst his diocesan 
jurisdiction is exercised through his consistorial court, the 
judges of both courts being nominated by the archbishop. 
His ancient testamentary and matrimonial jurisdiction was 
transferred to the crown by the same statutes which divested 
the see of Canterbury of its jurisdiction in similar matters. It 
is the privilege of the archbishop of York to crown the queen 
consort and to be her perpetual chaplain. The archbishop of 
York takes precedence over all subjects of the crown not of royal 
blood, but after the lord high chancellor of England. He is 
ex officio an ecclesiastical commissioner for England (see further 
England, Church of). 

" The Church of Ireland had at the time of the Act of Union 
four archbishops, who took their titles from Armagh, Dublin, 
Cashel and Tuam. By acts of 1833 and 1834, the metropolitans 
of Cashel and of Tuam were reduced to the status of diocesan 
bishops. The two archbishoprics of Armagh and Dublin are 
maintained in the disestablished Church of Ireland. 

The title archbishop has been used in certain of the colonial 
churches, e.g. Australia, South Africa, Canada, and the West 
Indies, since 1893, when it was assumed by the metropolitans 
of Canada and Rupert's Land (see Anglican Communion). 

1 The court of Peculiars is no longer held, inasmuch as the peculiars 
have been placed by acts of parliament under the ordinary juris- 
diction of the bishops of the respective dioceses in which they are 
situated. 



Archbishops have the title of His (or Your) Grace and Most 
Reverend Father in God. 

See Hinschius, System des kaiholischen Kirchenrechts (Berlin, 
1869), also article " Erzbischof," in Hauck, Realencyklopddie (1898) ; 
Phillimore, The Ecclesiastical Law of the Church of England, and 
authorities there cited. (W. A. P.) 

ARCHCHANCELLOR (Lat. Archicancellarius; Ger. Erz- 
kanzler), or chief chancellor, a title given to the highest 
dignitary of the Holy Roman Empire, and also used occasion- 
ally during the middle ages to denote an official who supervised 
the work of chancellors or notaries. 

In the 9th century Hincmar, archbishop of Reims, in his work, 
De ordine palatii et regni, speaks of a summus cancellarius, 
evidently an official at the court of the Carolingian emperors 
and kings. A charter of the emperor Lothair I. dated 844 refers 
to Agilmar, archbishop of Vienne, as archchancellor, and there 
are several other references to archchancellors in various 
chronicles. This office existed in the German kingdom of Otto 
the Great, and about this time it appears to have become an 
appanage of the archbishopric of Mainz. When the Empire was 
restored by Otto in 962, a separate chancery seems to have been 
organized for Italian affairs, and early in the nth century the 
office of archchancellor for the kingdom of Italy was in the hands 
of the archbishop of Cologne. The theory was that all the imperial 
business in Germany was supervised by the elector of Mainz, 
and for Italy by the elector of Cologne. However, the duties, 
of archchancellor for Italy were generally discharged by deputy, 
and after the virtual separation of Italy and Germany, the title 
alone was retained by the elector. When the kingdom of 
Burgundy or Aries was acquired by the emperor Conrad II. in 
1032 it is possible that a separate chancery was established for 
this kingdom. However this may be, during the 12th century 
the elector of Trier took the title of archchancellor for the king- 
dom of Aries, although it is doubtful if he ever performed any 
duties in connexion with this office. This threefold division 
of the office of imperial archchancellor was acknowledged in 
1 356 by the Golden Bull of the emperor Charles IV., but the 
duties of the office were performed by the elector of Mainz. The 
office in this form was part of the constitution of the Empire 
until 1803 when the archbishopric of Mainz was secularized. 
The last elector, Karl Theodor von Dalberg, however, retained 
the title of archchancellor until the dissolution of the Empire in 
1806. H. Reincke in Der alte Reichstag und der neue Bundesrai 
(Tubingen, 1906) points out a marked resemblance between the 
medieval archchancellor and the German imperial chancellor of 
the present day. 

See du Cadge, Glossarium, s. "Archicancellarius"; and Chan- 
cellor. 

ARCHDEACON (Lat. archidiaconus, Gr. apxifoanovos) , a high 
official of the Christian Church. The office of archdeacon is of 
great antiquity. So early as the 4th century it is mentioned as 
an established office, and it is probable that it was in existence 
in the 3rd. Originally the archdeacon was, as the name implies, 
the chief of the deacons attached to the bishop's cathedral, his 
duty being, besides preaching, to supervise the deacons and their 
work, i.e. more especially the care of the sick and the arrangement 
of the externals of divine worship. Even thus early their close 
relation to the bishop and their employment in matters of 
episcopal administration gave them, though only in deacons' 
orders, great importance, which continually developed. In the 
East, in the 5th century, the archdeacons were already charged 
with the proof of the qualifications of candidates for ordination ; 
they attended the bishops at ecclesiastical synods, and sometimes 
acted as their representatives; they shared in the administration 
of sees during a vacancy. In the West, in the 6th and 7th 
centuries, besides the original functions of their office, arch- 
deacons had certain well-defined rights of visitation and super- 
vision, being responsible for the good order of the lower clergy, 
the upkeep of ecclesiastical buildings and the safe-guarding of the 
church furniture — functions which involved a considerable discip- 
linary power. During the 8th and 9th centuries the office tended 
to become more and more exclusively purely administrative, 



ARCHDUKE 



359 



the archdeacon by his visitations relieving the bishop of the 
minutiae of government and keeping him informed in detail of 
the condition of his diocese. The archdeacon had thus become, 
on the one hand, the oculus episcopi, but on the other hand, 
armed as he was with powers of imposing penance and, in case 
of stubborn disobedience, of excommunicating offenders, his 
power tended more and more to grow at the bishop's expense. 
This process received a great impulse from the erection in the 
nth and 12th centuries of defined territorial jurisdictions for the 
archdeacons, who had hitherto been itinerant representatives 
of the central power of the diocese. The dioceses were now 
mapped out into several archdeaconries {archidiaconatus) , which 
corresponded with the political divisions of the countries; and 
these denned spheres, in accordance with the prevailing feudal 
tendencies of the age, gradually came to be regarded as inde- 
pendent centres of jurisdiction. 1 The bishops, now increasingly 
absorbed in secular affairs, were content with a somewhat 
theoretical power of control, while the archdeacons rigorously 
asserted an independent position which implied great power and 
possibilities of wealth. The custom, moreover, had grown up of 
bestowing the coveted office of archdeacon on the provosts, 
deans and canons of the cathedral churches, and the archdeacons 
were thus involved in the struggle of the chapters against the 
episcopal authority. By the 12th century the archdeacon had 
become practically independent of the bishop, whose consent 
was only required in certain specified cases. 

The power of the archdeacon reached its zenith at the outset of 
the 13th century. Innocent III. describes him as judex ordinarius, 
and he possesses m his own right the powers of visitation, of 
holding courts and imposing penalties, of deciding in matrimonial 
causes and cases of disputed jurisdiction, of testing candidates 
for orders, of inducting into benefices. He has the right to 
certain procurations, and to appoint and depose archpriests and 
rural deans. And these powers he may exercise through delegated 
officiates. His jurisdiction has become, in fact, not subordinate 
to, but co-ordinate with that of the bishop. Yet, so far as orders 
were concerned, he remained a deacon; and if archdeacons were 
often priests, this was because priests who were members of 
chapters were appointed to the office. 

From the 13th century onward a reaction set in. The power 
of the archdeacons rested upon custom and prescription, not 
upon the canon law; and though the bishops could not break, 
they could circumvent it. This they did by appointing new 
officials to exercise in their name the rights still reserved to them, 
or to which they laid claim. These were the officiates: the 
officiates Joranei, whose jurisdiction was parallel with that of the 
archdeacons, and the officiates principales and vicars-general, 
who presided over the courts of appeal. The clergy having thus 
another authority, and one moreover more canonical, to appeal to, 
the power of the archdeacons gradually declined; and, so far 
as the Roman Catholic Church is concerned, it received its 
death-blow from the council of Trent (1564), which withdrew all 
matrimonial and criminal causes from the competence of the 
archdeacons, forbade them to pronounce excommunications, 
and allowed them only to hold visitations in connexion with 
those of the bishop and with his consent. These decrees were 
not, indeed, at once universally enforced; but the convulsions 
of the Revolutionary epoch and the religious reorganization 
that followed completed the work. In the Roman Church to-day 
the office of archdeacon is merely titular, his sole function being 
to present the candidates for ordination to the bishop. The 
title, indeed, hardly exists save in Italy, where the archdeacon 
is no more than a dignified member of a chapter, who takes rank 
after the bishop. The ancient functions of the archdeacon are 
exercised by the vicar-general. In the Lutheran church the 
title Archidiakonus is given in some places to the senior assistant 
pastor of a church. 

1 Archdeaconries were, indeed, sometimes treated as ordinary fiefs 
and were held as such by laymen. Thus Ordericus Vitalis says that 
" (Fulk) granted to the monks the archdeaconry which he and his 
predecessors held in fee of the archbishop of Rouen " {Hist. Eccl. 
iii. 12). 



In the Church of England, on the other hand, the office of 
archdeacon, which was first introduced at the Norman conquest, 
survives, with many of its ancient duties and prerogatives. 
Since 1836 there have been at least two archdeaconries in each 
diocese, and in some dioceses there are four archdeacons. The 
archdeacons are appointed by their respective bishops, and they 
are, by an act of 1840, required to have been six full years in 
priest's orders. The functions of the archdeacon are in the 
present day ancillary in a general way to those of the bishop of 
the diocese. It is his especial duty to inspect the churches 
within his archdeaconry, to see that the fabrics are kept in 
repair, and to hold annual visitations of the clergy and church- 
wardens of each parish, for the purpose of ascertaining that the 
clergy are in residence, of admitting the newly elected church- 
wardens into office, and of receiving the presentments of the 
outgoing churchwardens. It is his privilege to present all 
candidates for ordination to the bishop of the diocese. It is his 
duty also to induct the clergy of his archdeaconry into the 
temporalities of their benefices after they have been instituted 
into the spiritualities by the bishop or his vicar-general. Every 
archdeacon is entitled to appoint an official to preside over his 
archidiaconal court, from which there is an appeal to the con- 
sistory court of the bishop. The archdeacons are ex officio 
members of the convocations of their respective provinces. 

It is the privilege of the archdeacon of Canterbury to induct 
the archbishop and all the bishops of the province of Canterbury 
into their respective bishoprics, and this he does in the case of a 
bishop under a mandate from the archbishop of Canterbury, direct- 
ing him to induct the bishop into the real, actual, and corporal 
possession of the bishopric, and to install and to enthrone him; 
and in the case of the archbishop, under an analogous mandate 
from the dean and chapter of Canterbury, as being guardians of 
the spiritualities during the vacancy of the archiepiscopal see. 
In the colonies there are two or more archdeacons in each 
diocese, and their functions correspond to those of English 
archdeacons. In the Episcopal church of America the office of 
archdeacon exists in only one or two dioceses. 

See Hinschius, Kirchenrecht, ii., §§ 86, 87; Schroder, Die Entwick- 
lung des Archdiakonats bis zum 11. Jahrhundert (Munich, 1890); 
Wetzer and Welte, Kirchenlexikon (Freiburg-im-Breisgau, 1882- 
1901); Herzog-Hauck, Realencyklopiidie (ed. 1896); Phillimore, 
Ecclesiastical Law, part ii. chap. v. (London, 1895). (W. A. P.) 

ARCHDUKE (Lat. archidux, Ger. Erzherzog), a title peculiar 
now to the Austrian royal family. According to Selden it 
denotes " an excellency or pre-eminence only, not a superiority 
or power over other dukes, as in archbishop it doth over other 
bishops." Yet in this latter sense it would seem to have been 
assumed by Bruno of Saxony, archbishop of Cologne, and duke 
of Lorraine (953-965), when he divided his duchy into the duke- 
doms of Upper and Lower Lorraine. The designation was, 
however, exceedingly rare during the middle ages. The title 
of archduke of Lorraine ceased with the circumstances which 
had produced it. The later dynasties of Brabant and Lorraine, 
when these fiefs became hereditary, bore only" the title of duke. 
The house of Habsburg, therefore, did not acquire this title 
with the inheritance of the dukes of Lorraine. Nor does it occur 
in any of the charters granted to the dukes of Austria by the 
emperors; though in that creating the first duke of Austria the 
archiduces palatii, i.e. the principal dukes of the court, are men- 
tioned. The " Archidux Au striae, seu Austriae inferioris 'i 
is spoken of by Abbot Rudolph (d. 1138) in his chronicles of the 
abbey of St Trond (Gesta Abbalum Trudonensium) but this is no 
more than a rhetorical flourish, and the title of " archduke 
palatine " (Pfalz-Erzherzog) was, in fact, assumed first by 
Duke Rudolph IV. (d. 1365), and was one of the rights and 
privileges included in his famous forgery of the year 1358, the 
privilegium maius, which purported to have been bestowed 
by the emperor Frederick I. on the dukes of Austria in extension 
of the genuine privilegium minus of n 56, granted to the margrave 
Henry II. Rudolph IV. used the title on his seals and charters 
till he was compelled to desist by the emperor Charles IV. The 
title was also assumed for a time, probably on the strength of the 
privilegium maius, by Duke Ernest of Styria (d. 1424) ; but it 



3 6 ° 



ARCHEAN SYSTEM 



did not legally belong to the house of Habsburg until 1453, 
when Duke Ernest's son, the emperor Frederick III. (Frederick 
V., duke of Styria and Carinthia, 1424-1493, of Austria, 1463- 
1493), confirmed the privilegium mains and conferred the title of 
archduke of Austria on his son Maximilian and his heirs. The 
title archduke (or archduchess) is now borne by all members of 
the Austrian imperial house. 

See John Selden, Titles of Honor (1672) ; Antonius Matthaeus, 
De nobiiitate, de principibus, de ducibus, &c, libri quatuor (Amsterdam 
and Leiden, 1696, lib. i. cap. 6) ; Pfeffel, Abrege chronologique de I'hist. 
el du droit public d' Allemagne (Paris, 1766) ; Brinckmeier, Glossarium 
diplomaticum, &c. (1850-1863, 2 vols.); J. F. Joachim, " Abhand- 
lung von dem Titel ' Erzherzog,' welchen das HausOesterreich fiihrt," 
in Prufende Gesellschaft zu Halle, 7; F. Wachter, art. " Erzherzog," 
in Allgetn. Encykl. der Wissenschaften u. Kilnste (1842, pub. by 
Ersch and Gruber) ; A. Huber, Ueber die Entstehungszeit der oester- 
reichischen Freiheitsbriefe (Vienna, i860); W. Erben, Das Privi- 
legium Friedrichs I. fur das Herzogtum Osterreich (Vienna, 1902). 

ARCHEAN SYSTEM (from apxn, beginning), in geology. 
Below the lowest distinctly fossiliferous strata, that is, below 
those Cambrian rocks which bear the Olenellus fauna, there 
lies a great mass of stratified, metamorphic and igneous rock, 
to which the non-committal epithet " pre-Cambrian " is often 
applied; and indeed in not a few instances this general term 
is sufficiently precise for the present state of our knowledge. 




Distribution 6f 

Archean Rocks 



.Emery Valker «C 

Nevertheless there are large tracts, both in the Old World and 
in the New, in which a subdivision of this assemblage of ancient 
rocks is not only possible but desirable. It is quite clear in 
certain regions that there is a lowermost group with a prevailing 
granitoid, gneissic and schistose facies, mainly of igneous origin, 
above which there are one or several groups bearing a distinctly 
sedimentary aspect. It is to this lowermost gneissic group that 
the term " Archean " may be conveniently limited. 

Thus, while the name " pre-Cambrian " may be used to 
indicate all these very old rocks whenever there is still any 
difficulty in subdividing them further, it is an advantage to 
have a special appellation for the oldest group where this can 
be distinguished. 

* It must be pointed out that the term " Archean " has- been 
used as a synonym for pre-Cambrian; and that the expressions 
Azoic (from a-, privative; foji7, life), Eozoic (from t)ws, daWn), 
and Fundamental Complex, have been employed in somewhat 
the same sense. Archeozoic has been proposed by American 
writers to apply to the lowest pre-Cambrian rocks with the same 
significance as " Archean " in the restricted sense employed 
here; but it is perhaps safer to avoid any reference to the 
supposed stage of life development where all direct evidence 
is non-existent. The so-called " Azoic " rocks have already 
been made to yield evidence of life, and there is no reason to 
presuppose the impossibility of finding other records of still 
earlier organisms. 

The prevailing rocks of the Archean system are igneous, with 



metamorphosed varieties of the same; sedimentary rocks, 
distinctly recognizable as such, are scarce, though highly meta- 
morphosed rocks supposed to be sediments, in some regions, take 
an important place. 

There are several features which are peculiarly characteristic 
of the Archean rocks: — (1) the extraordinary complexity of the 
assemblage of igneous materials; (2) the extreme metamorphism 
and deformation which nearly all the rocks have suffered; and 
(3) the inextricable intermixture of igneous rocks with those 
for which a sedimentary origin is postulated. Wherever the 
Archean rocks have been closely examined two great groups 
of rocks are distinguishable, an older, schistose group and a 
younger, granitoid and gneissic group. For many years the 
latter was supposed to be the older, hence the epithets " primi- 
tive " or " fundamental " were applied to it. Now, however, 
it has been shown, both in Europe and in North America, that in 
certain regions a schistose series is penetrated by a gneissose 
series and when this occurs the schists must be the older. But 
bearing in mind the difficulties of interpretation, it is not at all 
unreasonable to assume that there may yet be regions where 
the gneissose rocks are the oldest; for where no schistose series 
is present there may be no criterion for estimating the age of 
the granites and gneisses. The exceedingly great difficulties 
which lie in the way of every attempt to unravel the history 
of an Archean rock-complex cannot be too forcibly emphasized; 
for to be able to demonstrate the order of events and succession 
of rocks we should at least know whether we are dealing with 
sediments, flows of volcanic material, or intrusions, yet in many 
instances this cannot be done. In some areas the gradual passage 
of highly foliated and metamorphosed schists may be traced 
into comparatively unaltered arkoses, greywackes, conglomer- 
ates; or into volcanic lava-flows, pyro-clastic rocks or dikes; 
or again through a gneissose rock into a granite or a gabbro; 
but the districts wherein these relationships have been thoroughly 
worked out are very few. 

This much may be said, that where the Archean -ystem has 
been most carefully studied, there appears to be (1) a schistose 
series, of itself by no means simple but containing the foliated 
equivalents of sedimentary and igneous rocks; into this series 
a gneissose group (2) has been intruded in the form of batholites, 
great sheets and sills with accompanying intrusional prolonga- 
tions into the schists; subsequently, into the gneisses and 
schists, after they had been further deformed, sheared and 
foliated, another set (3) of dikes or thin sheet-like intrusions 
penetrated. All this, namely, the formation of sediments, the 
outpouring of volcanic rocks, their repeated deformation by 
powerful dynamic agencies and then their penetration by dik§s 
and sheets had been completed and erosion had been at work 
upon the hardened and exposed rocks, before the earliest pre- 
Cambrian sediment was deposited. 

There has been much premature speculation as to the nature 
and origin of these very ancient rocks. The prevalence of regular 
foliation with layers of different mineral composition, producing 
a close resemblance to bedding, has led some to imagine that the 
gneisses and schists were themselves the product of the primeval 
oceans, a supposition that is no longer worthy of further dis- 
cussion. Others have supposed that the gneisses were largely 
produced by the resorption and fusion of older sediments in the 
molten interior of the earth; there is no evidence that this has 
taken place upon an extended scale, though there is reason to 
believe that something of this kind has happened in places, and 
there is in the hypothesis nothing radically untenable. In one 
way the sedimentary schists have undoubtedly been incorporated 
within the gneissose mass, namely, by the extremely thorough 
and intimate penetration of the former by the latter along planes 
of foliation; and when a complex mass such as this has been 
further sheared and metamorphosed, a uniform gneiss appears 
to result from the intermixture. 

A not uncommon cause of the' apparently bedded arrange- 
ment of layers of different mineralogical composition may be 
traced to the original differentiation of the granitoid magma 
into different mineral-sheets. When these mineralogically 



ARCHELAUS 



361 



iifferent layers were forced into other rocks, sometimes 
before the complete consolidation of the former and sometimes 
subsequent to it, in the generally metamorphosed condition of 
the whole, it is easy to see a superficial resemblance to 
bedding. 

The Archean rocks have frequently been spoken of as the 
original crust of the earth; but even granting a cooling molten 
globe with a first-formed stony surface, it is tolerably clear that 
such a crust has nowhere yet been found, nor is it ever likely 
to be discovered. The very earliest recognizable sediments are 
the result of the destruction of still earlier exposures of rock; 
the oldest known volcanic rocks were poured upon a surface 
we can no longer distinguish, and as for the great granitoid 
masses, they could only have been formed under the pressure 
of superincumbent masses of material. The earliest known 
sediments must have been deep in the zones of shearing and 
rock flowage before the first pre- Cambrian denudation. The 
time required for these changes is difficult to conceive. 

As regards the life of the Archean, or, as some call it, the 
" Archeozoic " period, we know nothing. The presence of car- 
bonaceous shale and graphitic schists as well as of the altered sedi- 
mentary iron ores has been taken as indicative of vegetable life. 
Similarly, the occurrence of limestones suggests the existence 
of organic activity, but direct evidence is wanting. Much interest 
naturally attaches to this remote period, and when Sir William 
E. Logan in 1854 found the foraminifera-like Eozoon Canadense, 
high hopes of further discoveries were entertained, but the 
inorganic nature of this structure has since been clearly proved. 

Distribution. — It is generally assumed that the Archean 
rocks underlie all the younger formations over the whole globe, 
and presumably this is the only system that does so. Naturally, 
the area of its outcrop is limited, for, directly or indirectly, all 
the younger rock groups must rest upon it. 

It has been estimated that Archean rocks appear at the 
surface over one-fifth of the land area (omitting coverings of 
superficial drifts). This estimate is no more than the roughest 
approximation, and is liable at any time to revision as our 
knowledge of little-known regions is increased. It must ever 
be borne in mind that the presence of a gneissose or schistose 
complex does not in itself imply the Archean age of such a set 
of rocks. Local manifestations of a similar petrological fades 
may and do appear which are of vastly inferior geological age; 
and unless there is unequivocal evidence that such rocks lie 
beneath the oldest fossil-bearing strata, there can be no absolute 
certainty as to their antiquity. It is more than likely that 
certain occurrences of gneiss and schist, at present regarded as. 
Archean, may prove on fuller examination to be metamorphosed 
representatives of younger periods. 

Britain. — The most important exposure of Archean rocks in Britain 
is in the north-west of Scotland, where they form the mainland in 
Sutherland and Ross-shire, and appear also in the outer Hebrides. 
Their great development in the isle of Lewis has given rise to the 
term " Lewisian " (Hebridean), by which the gneisses of this region 
are now generally known. The Lewisian series comprises two great 
groups of rocks, (1) the so-called " fundamental complex," an 
assemblage of acid, basic and intermediate irruptive rocks, associated 
together in a complex of extraordinary intricacy, and (2) a series of 
dikes, which like the rocks they traverse, show every gradation from 
ultra-basic to ultra-acid types. But the above bald statement 
conveys no idea of the complexity of the series, for before the " funda- 
mental complex " had been pierced by the later dike system it had 
been subjected to severe dynamo-metamorphism and many of the 
massive rocks had been folded, thrust and sheared, and a very 
general state of foliation had been produced. Nor was this all, for 
after the intrusion of the dikes, great movements brought about 
vertical dislocations, and thrust planes, which traversed the rocks 
at all angles, accompanied by still further internal shearing and 
superinduced foliation. 

In the valley of Loch Maree and thence south-westward into 
Glenelg, a series of mica-schists, quartz-schists, saccharoid limestones 
and graphitic schists has been regarded as a group of sedimentary 
origin through which the Lewisian rocks have been irrupted. 

In England several small masses of gneiss, notably at Primrose 
Hill on the VYrekin, Shropshire, in the Malvern hills, and on the 
island of Anglesey in North Wales, are supposed to correspond with 
the Lewisian of Scotland. 

North America. — In this continent there is a great development of 



Archean rocks in Canada. On the eastern side it covers nearly the 
whole of the Labrador peninsula, and extends into Baffin Bay and 
possibly over much of Greenland ; a broad tract unites the great 
lake region with Labrador, and from the same region, by way of 
the Mackenzie valley, a similar tract extends in a north-westerly 
direction to the Arctic Ocean. This northern (Canadian) area of 
Archean includes portions of the states of Minnesota, Michigan, 
Wisconsin and the Adirondack region of New York. On the western 
side of the continent a series of disconnected exposures of Archean 
rocks runs downwards in a narrow belt from Alaska to New 
Mexico; and on the eastern side a similar belt reaches from 
Newfoundland to Alabama. 

Much attention is now being given to the more scattered exposures 
of Archean rocks, but the best-known area is the classical ground in 
the vicinity of Lake Superior and Lake Huron and in the Ottawa 
gneiss region of Canada. Some of the more important districts are 
the following: — 

Rainy Lake district, Canada: The Archean rocks here consist of 
altered diorites and diabases (the lower Keewatin series) and black 
hornblende schists (probably altered igneous rocks), with mica 
gneisses which are perhaps of sedimentary origin. 

The Mona and Kitichi schists; metamorphosed lava and tuffs, 
with serpentine and dolomite, probably derived from peridotites; 
there are also gneissic granites and syenites. 

In the Menominee region of Michigan and Wisconsin, theQuinnesec 
schist series mainly consist of schistose quartz porphyry with 
associated gneisses. 

In the Mesaba district of Minnesota the Archean consists of a 
complex of more or less foliated igneous rocks mostly basic in 
character. 

The Archean of the Vermilion district of Minnesota comprises the 
Soudan formation, an altered sedimentary series with banded cherts, 
jasper and magnetite schists; the iron ores are extensively mined. 
At the base is a conglomerate containing pebbles from the formation 
below, the Ely greenstone, which is made up of altered basalts and 
andesites, generally in a schistose condition, but occasionally ex- 
hibiting spherulitic structures. Into these two formations a series 
of granites have been intruded. 

Europe. — In Scandinavia, as in Scotland, the pre-Cambrian is 
represented by an earlier and a later series of rocks of which the 
former (Grundfjeldet, Urberget) may be taken to be the equivalent 
of the Lewisian gneisses. This assemblage of coarse red and grey 
banded gneisses, with associated granulites and many varieties of 
acid, basic and intermediate rocks in a gneissose condition, is inti- 
mately related to a highly metamorphosed sedimentary series 
comprising limestones, quartzites and schists, which, as in Scotland, 
is apparently older than the gneisses. Similar rocks occur in Sweden 
and Finland. 

In Bavaria and Bohemia the Archean is divisible into a lower red 
gneiss, a comparatively simple series, called by C. W. von Gtimbel 
the "gneiss of Bojan " ; and an upper, grey gneiss with other 
schistose rocks, serpentine and graphitic limestone, termed by the 
same author the " Hercynian gneiss." 

In Brittany a gneissose and schistose igneous series lies at the 
base of the pre-Cambrian. The pre-Cambrian cores of the eastern 
and central Pyrenees, consisting of gneiss, schists and altered 
limestones, are presumably of Archean age. 

Asia, Australia, &c. — In northern China, mica-gneisses and granite- 
gneisses with associated schists may be regarded as Archean. In 
India the system is represented by the Bundelkhand gneiss and the 
central older gneisses of the Himalayas. In Japan, in the Abukuma 
plateau, there is much granite, gneiss and schist which may be of 
this age. In Australia, similar rocks are recognized as Archean in 
South Australia and Westralia, and they are estimated to cover an 
area of no less than 20,000 sq. m. ; in Tasmania they are well 
developed on the western side. Although a great area is occupied 
by crystalline rocks in New Zealand, the Archean age of any portion 
of the series is not yet satisfactorily established ; the lower granites 
and gneisses may belong to this period. Africa contains enormous 
tracts of crystalline gneisses, granites and schists, and some of these 
are almost certainly of Archean age ; but in the present state of our 
knowledge it is impossible to speak more exactly. 

References. — A good general account of the Archean system 
will be found in Sir A. Geikie's Text Book of Geology, vol. ii., 4th ed." 
(1903), and in T. C. Chamberlin and R. D. Salisbury's Geology, vol. 
ii. (1906) ; these volumes contain references to all important 
literature. (J. A. H.) 

ARCHELAUS OF CAPPADOCIA (1st century B.C.), general of 
Mithradates the Great in the war against Rome. In 87 B.C. he 
was sent to Greece with a large army and fleet, and occupied 
the Peiraeus after three days' fighting with Bruttius Sura, prefect 
of Macedonia, who in the previous year had defeated Mithra- 
dates' fleet under Metrophanes and captured the island of 
Sciathus. Here he was besieged by Sulla, compelled to with- 
draw into Boeotia, and completely defeated at Chaeroneia (86). 
A fresh army was sent by Mithradates, but Archelaus was again 
defeated at Orchomenus, after a two davs' battle (85). On the 



3 62 



ARCHELAUS— ARCHERY 



conclusion of peace, Archelaus, finding that he had incurred 
the suspicion of Mithradates, deserted to the Romans, by whom 
he was well received. Nothing further is known of him. 

Appian, Mithrid. 30, 49, 56, 64; Plutarch, Sulla, 11, 16-19, 20 > 
23 ; Lucullus, 8. 

Archelaus, king of Egypt, was his son. In 56 B.C. he married 
Berenice, daughter of Ptolemy Auletes, queen of Egypt, but his 
reign only lasted six months. He was defeated by Aulus 
Gabinius and slain (55). 

See Strabo xii. p. 558, xvii. p. 796; Dio Gassius xxxix. 57-58; 
Cicero. Pro Rabirio, 8; Hirtius (?), Bell. Alex. 66; also Ptolemies. 

Archelaus, king of Cappadocia, was grandson of the last 
named. In 41 B.C. (according to others, 34), he was made king 
of Cappadocia by Mark Antony, whom, however, he deserted 
after the battle of Actium. Octavian enlarged his kingdom by 
the addition of part of Cilicia and Lesser Armenia. He was not 
popular with his subjects, who even brought an accusation 
against him in Rome, on which occasion he was defended by 
Tiberius. Subsequently he was accused by Tiberius, when 
emperor, of endeavouring to stir up a revolution, and died in 
confinement at Rome (a.d. 17). Cappadocia was then made a 
Roman province. Archelaus was said to have been the author 
of a geographical work, and to have written treatises On Stones 
and Rivers. 

Strabo xii. p. 540; Suetonius, Tiberius, 37, Caligula, 1; Dio 
Cassius xlix. 32-51 ; Tacitus, Ann. ii. 42. 

ARCHELAUS, king of Judaea, was the son of Herod the Great. 
He received the kingdom of Judaea by the last will of his father, 
though a previous will had bequeathed it to his brother Antipas. 
He was proclaimed king by the army, but declined to assume 
the title until he had submitted his claims to Augustus at Rome. 
Before setting out, he quelled with the utmost cruelty a sedition 
of the Pharisees, slaying nearly 3000 of them. At Rome he was 
opposed by Antipas and by many of the Jews, who feared his 
cruelty; but Augustus allotted to him the greater part of the 
kingdom (Judaea, Samaria, Ituraea) with the title of ethnarch. 
He married Glaphyra, the widow of his brother Alexander, 
though his wife and her second husband, Juba, king of Maure- 
tania, were alive. This violation of the Mosaic law and his 
continued cruelty roused the Jews, who complained to Augustus. 
Archelaus was deposed (a.d. 7) and banished to Vienne. The 
date of his death is unknown. 

Archelaus is mentioned in Matt. ii. 22, and the parable of 
Luke xix. n f. probably refers to his journey to Rome. 

See Schiirer, Gesch. des jiidischen Volkes, i. 449-453. 

(J. H. A. H.) 

ARCHELAUS, king of Macedonia (413-399 B.C.), was the son 
of Perdiccas and a slave mother. He obtained the throne by 
murdering his uncle, his cousin and his half-brother, the legiti- 
mate heir, but proved a capable and beneficent ruler. He 
fortified cities, constructed roads and organized the army. 
He endeavoured to spread among his people the refinements of 
Greek civilization, and invited to his court, which he removed 
from Aegae to Pella, many celebrated men, amongst them 
Zeuxis, Timotheus, Euripides and Agathon. In 399 he was 
killed by one of his favourites while hunting; according to 
another account he was the victim of a conspiracy. 

Diodorus Siculus xiii. 49, xiv. 37; Thucydides ii. 100. See 
Macedonia. 

ARCHELAUS OF MILETUS, Greek philosopher of the 5th 
century B.C., was born probably at Athens, though Diogenes 
Laertius (ii. 16) says at Miletus. He was a pupil of Anaxagoras, 
and is said by Ion of Chios {ap. Diog. Laert. ii. 23) to have been 
the teacher of Socrates. Some argue that this is probably only 
an attempt to connect Socrates with the Ionian school; others 
(e.g. Gomperz, Greek Thinkers) uphold the story. There is similar 
difference of opinion as regards the statement that Archelaus 
formulated certain ethical doctrines. In general, he followed 
Anaxagoras, but in his cosmology he went back to the earlier 
Ionians. He postulated primitive Matter, identical with air and 
mingled with Mind, thus avoiding the dualism of Anaxagoras. 
Out of this conscious " air," by a process of thickening and 
thinning, arose cold and warmth, or water and fire, the one passive, 
the other active. The earth and the heavenly bodies are formed 



from mud, the product of fire and water, from which springs also 
man, at first in his lower forms. Man differs from animals by 
the possession of the moral and artistic faculty. No fragments of 
Archelaus remain; his doctrines have to be extracted from 
Diogenes Laertius, Simplicius, Plutarch and Hippolytus. 

See Ionian School; for his ethical theories see T. Gomperz, 
Greek Thinkers (Eng. trans., 1901), vol. i. p. 402. 

ARCHENHOLZ, JOHANN WILHELM VON (1743-1812), 
German historian, was born at Langfuhr, a suburb of Danzig, 
on the 3rd of September 1743. From the Berlin Cadet school 
he passed into the Prussian army at the age of sixteen, and took 
part in the last campaigns of the Seven Years' War. Retiring 
from military service, on account of his wounds, with the rank 
of captain in 1763, he travelled for sixteen years and visited 
nearly all the countries of Europe, and resided in England for 
ten years (1769-1779). Returning to Germany in 1780, he 
obtained a lay canonry at the cathedral of Magdeburg, and 
immediately entered upon a literary career by publishing the 
periodical Litteratur- und Vblkerkunde (Leipzig, 1782-1791). 
This was followed in 1785 by England und Italien (2nd ed., 
Leipzig, 1787), in which he gives a remarkably unprejudiced ap- 
preciation of English political and social institutions. Between 
1789 and 1798 he published his Annalen der britischen Geschichle 
(20 vols). But the work by which he is best known to fame is 
his brilliantly written history of the Seven Years' War, Ge- 
schichle des siebenjdhrigen Krieges (first published in the Berliner 
historisches Taschenbuch of 1787, and later in 2 vols., Berlin, 
!793; 13th ed., Leipzig, 1892). This work, though as regards 
the main facts and details it only follows other writers, is still 
a useful source of information upon the epoch with which it 
deals. In 1792 Archenholz removed to Hamburg, and there, 
from 1792 to 181 2, edited the journal Minerva, which had a 
great reputation for its literary, historical and political informa- 
tion. Archenholz died at his country seat, Oyendorf, near 
Hamburg, on the 28th of February 181 2. 

ARCHER, WILLIAM (1856- ), English critic, was born 
at Perth on the 23rd of September 1856, and was educated 
at Edinburgh University. He became a leader-writer on the 
Edinburgh Evening News in 1875, and after a year in Australia 
returned to Edinburgh. In 1879 he became dramatic critic of the 
London Figaro, and in 1884 of the World. In London he soon 
took a prominent literary place. Mr Archer had much to do 
with introducing Ibsen to the English public by his translation 
of The Pillars of Society, produced at the Gaiety Theatre, London, 
in 1880. He also translated, alone or in collaboration, other 
productions of the Scandinavian stage: Ibsen's Doll's House 
(1889), Master Builder (1893); Edvard Brandes's A Visit (1892); 
Ibsen's Peer Gyrtt (1892); Little Eyolf (1895); and John Gabriel 
Borkman (1897); and he edited Henrik Ibsen's Prose Dramas 
(5 vols., 1890-1891). Among his critical works are: — English 
Dramatists of To-day (1882); Masks or Faces? (1888); five 
vols, of critical notices reprinted, The Theatrical World (1893- 
1897); America To-day, Observations and Reflections; Poets 
of the Younger Generation (1901); Real Conversations (1904). 

ARCHERMUS, a Chian sculptor of the middle of the 6th 
century B.C. His father Micciades, and his sons, Bupalus and 
Athenis, were all sculptors of marble, using doubtless the fine 
marble of their native land. The school excelled in draped 
female figures. Archermus is said by a scholiast (on Aristophanes' 
Birds, v. 573) to have been the first to represent Victory and 
Love with wings. This statement gives especial interest to a 
discovery made at Delos of a basis signed by Micciades and 
Archermus which was connected with a winged female figure 
in rapid motion (see Greek Art), a figure naturally at first 
regarded as the Victory of Archermus. Unfortunately further 
investigation has discredited the notion that the statue 
belongs to the basis, which seems rather to have supported a 
sphinx. 

ARCHERY, the art and practice of shooting with the bow 
(arcus) and arrow, or with crossbow and bolts. Though these 
weapons are by no means widely used amongst savage tribes 
of the present day, their origin is lost in the mists of antiquity. 



ARCHERY 



363 



Amongst the great peoples of ancient history the Egyptians were 
the first and the most famous of archers, relying on the bow 
as their principal weapon in war. Their bows were 
iuwar. somewhat shorter than a man, and their arrows varied 
between 2 ft. and 2 ft. 8 in. in length. Here, as elsewhere, 
fiint heads for arrows were by no means rare, but bronze was the 
usual material employed. The Biblical bow was of reed, wood 
or horn, and the Israelites used it freely both in war (Gen. xlviii. 
22) and in the chase (xxi. 20). The Assyrians also were a 
nation of archers. Amongst the Greeks of the historic period 
archery was not much in evidence, in spite of the tradition of 
Teucer, Ulysses and many other archers of the Iliad and Odyssey. 
The Cretans, however, supplied Greek armies with the bowmen 
required. In the " Ten Thousand " figured two hundred Cretan 
bowmen of Sosias' corps. Riistow and Kochly {Geschichte des 
griechischen Kriegwesens, p. 131) estimate the range of the 
Cretan bow at eighty to one hundred paces, as compared with 
the sling-bullet's forty or fifty, and the javelin's thirty to forty. 
The Romans as a nation were, equally with the Greeks,indifferent 
to archery; in their legions the archer element was furnished 
by Cretans and Asiatics. On the other hand nearly all Asiatic 
and derived nations were famous bowmen, from the nations who 
fought under Xerxes' banner onwards. The Persian, Scythian 
and Parthian bow was far more efficient than the Cretan, though 
the latter was not wanting in the heterogeneous armies of the 
East. The sagittarii, three thousand strong, who fought in the 
Pharsalian campaign, were drawn from Crete, Pontus, Syria, &c. 
But the Roman view of archery was radically altered when the 
old legionary system perished at Adrianople (a.d. 378). After 
this time the armies of the empire consisted in great part of 
horse-archers. Their missiles, we are told, pierced cuirass and 
shield with ease, and they shot equally well dismounted and at 
the gallop. These troops, combined with heavy cavalry and 
themselves not unprovided with armour, played a decisive 
part in the Roman victories of the age of Belisarius and Narses. 
The destruction of the Franks at Casilinum (a.d. 554) was practi- 
cally the work of the horse-archers. 

In the main, the nations whose migrations altered the face 
of Europe were not aichers. Only with the Welsh, the Scandi- 
navians, and the peoples in touch with the Eastern empire was the 
bow a favourite weapon. The edicts of Charlemagne could not 
succeed in making archery popular in his dominions, and Abbot 
Ebles, the defender of Paris in 886, is almost the only instance 
of a skilled archer in the European records of the time. The 
sagas, on the other hand, have much to say as to the feats 
of northern heroes with the bow. With English, French and 
Germans the bow was the weapon of the poorest military classes. 
The Norman archers, who doubtless preserved the traditions of 
their Danish ancestors, were in the forefront of William's line at 
Hastings (1066), but contemporary evidence points conclusively 
to the short bow, drawn to the chest, as the weapon used on 
this occasion. The combat of Bourgtheroulde in n 24 shows 
that the Normans still combined heavy cavalry and archers as 
at Hastings. Horse-archers too (contrary to the usual belief) 
were here employed by the English. 

Yet the " Assize of Arms " of 1181 does not mention the bow, 
and Richard I. was at great pains to procure crossbowmen for 
the Crusades. The crossbow had from about the 10th century 
gradually become the principal missile weapon in Europe, in 
spite of the fact that it was condemned by the Lateran Council 
of 1139. As early as 1270 in France, and rather later in Spain, 
the master of the crossbowmen had become a great dignitary, 
and in Spain the weapon was used by a corps d'elite of men of 
gentle birth, who, with their gay apparel, were a picturesque 
feature of continental armies of the period. But the Genoese, 
Pisans and Venetians were the peoples which employed the 
crossbow most of all. Many thousand Genoese crossbowmen 
were present at Crecy. 

It was in the Crusades that the crossbow made its reputation, 
opposing heavier weight and greater accuracy to the missiles 
of the horse-archers, who invariably constituted the greatest and 
most important part of the Asiatic armies. So little change in 



warfare had centuries brought about that a crusading force in 
1 104 perished at Carrhae, on the same ground and before the 
same mounted-archer tactics, as the army of Crassus in 55 B.C. 
But individually the crusading crossbowman was infinitely 
superior to the Turkish or Egyptian horse-archer. 

England, which was to become the country of archers par 
excellence, long retained the old short bow of Hastings, and the 
far more efficient crossbow was only used as a rule by 
mercenaries, such as the celebrated Falkes de Breaute use- 
and his men in the reign of John. South Wales, it 
seems certain, eventually produced the famous long-bow. In 
Ireland, in Henry II. 's time, Strongbow made great use of Welsh 
bowmen, whom he mounted for purposes of guerrilla warfare, 
and eventually the prowess of Welsh archers taught Edward I. 
the value of the hitherto discredited arm. At Falkirk (q.v.), once 
for all, the long-bow proved its worth, and thenceforward for 
centuries it was the principal weapon of English soldiers. By 
1339, archers had come to be half of the whole mass of foot- 
men, and later the proportion was greatly increased. In 1360 
Edward III. mounted his archers, as Strongbow had done. 
The long-bow was about 5 ft., and its shaft a cloth-yard long. 
Shot by a Welsh archer, a shaft had penetrated an oak door 
(at Abergavenny in ir82) 4 in. thick and the head stood out a 
hand's breadth on the inner side. Drawn to the right ear, the 
bow was naturally capable of long shooting, and in Henry VIII. 's 
time practice at a less range than one furlong was forbidden. 
In rapidity it was the equal of the short bow and the superior 
of the crossbow, which weapon, indeed, it surpassed in all 
respects. Falkirk, and still more Crecy, Poitiers and Agincourt, 
made the English archers the most celebrated infantry in Europe, 
and the kings of England, in whatever else they differed from 
each other, were, from Edward II. to Henry VIII., at one in 
the matter of archery. In 1363 Edward III. commanded the 
general practice of archery on Sundays and holidays, all other 
sports being forbidden. The provisions of this act were from 
time to time re-issued, particularly in the well-known act of 
Henry VIII. The price of bows and arrows was also regulated 
in the reign of Edward III., and Richard III. ordained that for 
every ton of certain goods imported ten yew-bows should be 
imported also, while at the same time long-bows of unusual 
size were admitted free of duty. In order to prevent the too 
rapid consumption of yew for bow-staves, bowyers were ordered 
to make four bows of wych-hazel, ash or elm to one of yew, and 
only the best and most useful men were allowed to possess yew- 
bows. Distant and exposed counties were provided for by 
making bowyers, fletchers, &c, liable (unless freemen of the city 
■of London) to be ordered to any point where their services might 
be required. In Scotland and Ireland also, considerable atten- 
tion was paid to archery. In 1478 archery was encouraged in 
Ireland by statute, and James I. and James IV. of Scotland, 
in particular, did their best to stimulate the interest of their 
subjects in the bow, whose powers they had felt in so many 
battles from Falkirk to Homildon Hill. 

The introduction of hand-firearms was naturally fatal to the 
bow as a warlike weapon, but the conservatism of the English, 
and the non-professional character of wars waged by 
them, added to the technical deficiencies of early 
firearms, made the process of change in England 
very gradual. The mercenary or professional element 
was naturally the first to adopt the new weapons. At Pont 
de l'Arche in 1418 the English had " petits canons " (which seem to 
have been hand guns), and during the latter part of the Hundred 
Years' War their use became more and more frequent. The 
crossbow soon disappeared from the more professional armies 
of the continent. Charles the Bold had, before the battle of 
Morat (1476), ten thousand coulevrines a main. But in the hands 
of local forces the crossbow lingered on, at least in rural France, 
until about 1630. Its last appearance in war was in the hands 
of the Chinese at Taku (i860). But the long-bow, an incom- 
parably finer weapon, endured as one of the principal arms of 
the English soldier until about 1590. Edward IV. entered 
London after the battle of Barnet with 500 "smokie gunners" 



Decline 



weapon. 



364 



ARCHERY 



History of 
sport. 



(foreign mercenaries), but at that engagement Warwick's centre 
consisted solely of bows and bills (1471). The new weapons 
gradually made their way, but even in 1588, the year of the 
Armada, the local forces of Devonshire comprised 800 bows to 
1600 " shot/' and 800 bills to 800 pikes. But the Armada year 
saw the last appearance of the English archer, and the same 
county in 1598 provides neither archers nor billmen, while in 
the professional army in Ireland these weapons had long given 
way to musket and caliver, pike and halberd. Archers appeared 
in civilized warfare as late as 1807, when fifteen hundred 
" baskiers," horse-archers, clad in chain armour, fought against 
Napoleon in Poland. 

As a weapon of the chase the bow was in its various forms 
employed even more than in war. The rise of archery as a sport 
in England was, of course, a consequence of its military value, 
which caused it to be so heartily encouraged by all English 
sovereigns. 

The Japanese were from their earliest times great archers, 
and the bow was the weapon par excellence of their soldiers. 
Japan ^ e standard length of the bow (usually bamboo) was 

7 ft. 6 in., of the arrow 3 ft. to 3 ft. 9 in. Numerous 
feats of archery are recorded to have taken place in the " thirty- 
three span " halls of Kioto and Tokyo, where the archer had 
to shoot the whole length of a very low corridor, 128 yds. long. 
Wada Daihachi in the 17th century shot 8133 arrows down the 
corridor in twenty-four consecutive hours, averaging five shots 
a minute, and in 1852 a modern archer made 5583 successful 
shots in twenty hours, or over four a minute. 

The Pastime of Archery.— -The use of the bow and arrow as 
a pastime naturally accompanied their use as weapons of war, 
but when the gun began to supersede the bow the 
pastime lost its popularity. Charles II., however, 
and his queen, Catherine of Braganza, interested 
themselves in English archery, the queen in 1676 presenting 
a silver badge or shield to the " Marshall of the Fraternity of 
Archers," which badge, once the property of the Finsbury 
Archers, was transferred to the keeping of the Royal Toxo- 
philite Society, when in 1841 the two clubs combined. The 
Toxophilite Society was founded in 1781; for though in the 
north archery had long been practised, its resuscitation in the 
south really dates from the formation of this club by Sir Ashton 
Lever. This society received the title of " Royal " in 1847, 
though it had long been patronized by royalty. It is an error 
to suppose that the Finsbury Archers were connected with the 
Archers' division of the Hon. Artillery Company, but many 
members of the Toxophilite Society joined that division, and 
used its ground for shooting, securing, however, a London ground 
of their own in the district where Gower Street, W.C., now is. 
When this ground became unavailable, the shooting probably 
took place at Highbury, and later in 1820, on Lord's cricket 
ground, the present ground in the Inner Circle of Regent's Park, 
near the Botanical Gardens, not being acquired till 1833. The 
society may be regarded as the most important body connected 
with archery, most of the leading. archers belonging to it, though 
the Grand National Archery Society controls the public meetings. 
Among its more important events is the shooting of 144 arrows 
at 100 yds. for the Crunder Cup and Bugle. In the early days 
of the club targets of different sizes were used at the different 
ranges, and the scores were recorded in money (e.g. " Mr Elwin, 
86 hits, £5: 5:6 "). The Woodmen of Arden can claim an almost 
equal antiquity, having been founded — some say "revived" — 
in 1785. The number of members is limited to 80; at one time 
there were 81, Sir Robert Peel having been elected as a super- 
numerary by way of compliment. The headquarters of the 
Woodmen are at Meriden in Warwickshire; the club has a 
nominal authority over vert and venison, whence its officers 
bear appropriate names — warden, master-forester and verderers; 
and the annual meeting is called the Wardmote. The master- 
forester, or captain for the year, is the maker of the first "gold " 
at the annual target; he who makes the second is the senior 
verderer. The club devotes itself to the old-fashioned clout- 
shooting at long ranges, reckoned by " scores," nine score 



meaning 180 yds., and so on. (Vide " Clout-shooting " infra.) 
The chief matches in which the Woodmen engage are those 
against the Royal Company of Scottish Archers. The Royal 
British Bowmen date back to the end of the 18th century. Like 
many others, during the Napoleonic war they suspended opera- 
tions, revived when peace was made. The club was finally 
dissolved in 1880. The Royal Kentish Bowmen were founded 
in 1785, but did not survive the war. John O'Gaunt's Bowmen, 
who still meet at Lancaster, were revived, not created, at the 
same time, and still flourish. The Herefordshire Bowmen only 
shoot at 60 yds., while the West Berks Society is limited to 
twelve members, who meet at each other's houses, except for 
their Autumn Handicap, shot on the Toxophilite Grounds — 
216 arrows at 100 yds. The Royal Company of Archers is the 
chief Scottish society. Originally a semi-military body consti- 
tuted in 1676, it practised archery as a pastime from the time 
of its foundation, several meetings being held in the first few 
years of its existence. It devoted itself to " rovers," or long- 
range shooting at the " clout," among its most interesting 
trophies being the " Musselburgh Arrow," first shot for in 1603, 
possibly even earlier, in that town; the competition was then 
open to all comers, for archery was long popular in Scotland, 
especially at Kilwinning, the headquarters of popinjay (q.v.) 
shooting. Other prizes are the " Peebles Silver Arrow," dating 
back to 1626, the " Edinburgh Silver Arrow " (1709), the " Sel- 
kirk Arrow," a very ancient prize, the " Dalhousie Sword," the 
" Hopetoun Royal Commemoration Prize," and others, shot 
for at ranges of 180 or 200 yds. The most curious is the " Goose 
Medal." Originally a goose was buried in a butt with only its 
head visible, and this was the archers' mark; now a small glass 
globe is substituted. The " Popingo (Popinjay) Medal," for 
which a stuffed parrot was once used as the mark, is now con- 
tested at the ordinary butts. The Kilwinning Society of Archers, 
founded in 1688, did not disband till 1870; the Irvine Toxo- 
philites flourished from 1814 till about 1867. But of all societies 
the Grand National Archery Society, regulating the great 
meetings, though comparatively young, is the most important. 
Various open meetings were already in existence, but in 1844 a 
few leading archers projected a Grand National Meeting, which 
was held in York in that year and in 1845 and 1846, and subse- 
quently in other places. But the society did not exist as such 
till 1861, after the rnceting held at Liverpool, since when, not- 
withstanding some financial troubles, it has been the legislative 
and managing body of English archery. The chief meetings are 
the "Championship," the " Leamington and Midland Counties," 
the " Crystal Palace," the " Grand Western " and the " Grand 
Northern." For some years a "Scottish Grand National" was 
held, but fell into abeyance. The " Scorton Arrow " is no longer 
shot for in the Yorkshire village of that name, but the meeting, 
held regularly in the county, dates back to 1673 by record, and 
is probably far older. The silver arrow and the captaincy' are 
awarded to the man who makes the first gold; the silver bugle 
and lieutenancy to the first red; the gold medal to most hits, 
and a horn spoon to the last white. 

In the United States archery has had a limited popularity. 
The only one of the early clubs that lasted long was the " United 
Bowmen of Philadelphia," founded in 1828, but defunct in 1859. 
There was a revival twenty years later, when a National 
Association was formed; and various meetings were held annually 
and championships instituted, but there was never any popular 
enthusiasm for the sport, though it showed signs of increasing 
favour towards the end of the 19th century. The longer ranges 
are not greatly favoured by American archers, though at some 
meetings the regulation "York Round" (vide infra under 
"Targets ") and the " National " are shot. Other rounds are the 
"Potomac," 24 arrows at 80, 24 at 70, and 24 at 60 yds.; the 
"Double American," 60 arrows each at 60, 50 and 40 yds.; and 
the "Double Columbia," for ladies, 48 each at 50, 40 and 30 
yds. In team matches ladies shoot 96 arrows at 50 yds., gentle- 
men 96 at 60. 

The Bow. — As used in the pastime of archery the length of the 
bows does not vary much, though it bears some relation to the length 



ARCHERY 



3(>5 



of the arrow and the length of the arrow to the strength of the 
archer, to which the weight of the bow has to be adapted. The 
proper weight of a bow is the number of ft which, attached to the 
string, will draw a full-length arrow to its head. For men's bows the 
drawing-power varies from 40 to 60 ft, anything above this being 
extreme; ladies' bows draw from 24 to 32 ft. Estimating 50 ft 
as a fair average, such a bow would be 6 ft. 1 in. long for a 30-in., 
6 ft. for a 28-in., and 5 ft. 11 in. for a 27-in. arrow, but the height as 
well as the strength of the archer have to be considered. Similarly a 
lady's bow on the average measures about 5 ft. 6 in. and her arrows 
25 in. Modern bows are either made entirely of yew (occasionally 
of other woods), when they are called " self-bows," or of a com- 
bination of woods, when they are called " backed-bows." Self-bows 
are rarely or never made in a single stave, owing to the difficulty of 
obtaining true and flawless wood of the necessary length; hence two 
staves joined by a double fish-joint, which forms the centre of the 
bow, are used, tested and adjusted so that they may be as equally 
elastic as possible. The best yew is imported from Italy and Spain, 
and is allowed to season for three years before it is made into a bow, 
which again is not used till it is two years older. In backed-bows 
the belly, the rounded part nearest to the string, is generally but not 
necessarily made of yew, the back, or flat part, of yew (the best), 
hickory, lance or other woods, glued together in strips. The centre 
of the bow, for about 1 8 in. , should be stiff and resisting, then tapering 
off gradually to the horns in which the string is fitted, the greatest 
care being taken that the two limbs are uniform. The bow of self- 
yew is generally considered more agreeable to handle and has a 
better " cast," throwing the arrow more smoothly and with less jar, 
and since no glued parts are exposed, it is less liable to injury from 
wet. On the other hand, " crysals " (tiny cracks, which are apt to 
extend) are more frequent in this class of bow. Self-yew bows cost 
£8 or £io, where a good backed-bow can be bought for about half 
that. The self-bow is more sensitive than other bows, and its work 
is mostly done during the last few inches of the pull, where the 
backed-bow pulls evenly throughout. The backed-bow should be 
perfectly straight in the back, but after use often loses its shape 
either by " following the string," i.e. getting bent inwards on the 
string-side, or by becoming " reflex " (bending the opposite way). 
Self-bows are even more apt to lose their shape than backed-bows, 
as there is no hard wood to counteract the natural grain. A bow 
that is strongly reflexed at the ends is known as a " Cupid's 
bow." To form the handle the wood of the bow is left thick in 
the centre, and braid, leather or indiarubber is wound round it to 
give a better grip. 

The String and Stringing. — The string is made of three strands of 
hemp, dressed with a preparation of glue, and should be perfectly 
round, smooth and not frayed, as a broken string may result in a 
broken bow. The string, at its centre, is 6 in. from the belly of the 
man's bow; 5 in. in the lady's bow. The clenched fist with the 
thumb upright was the old, rough and ready estimate, known as 
" fist-mele." For a few inches above and below the nocking point the 
string is lapped with carpet-thread to save it from fraying by contact 
with the arm ; the nocking point being made by another lapping of 
filoselle silk, so that the string may exactly fit the nock of the arrow. 
When a bow is properly strung the string should be longitudinally 
along the middle of the belly. 

Arrows and Nocking. — The parts of the arrow are the shaft, the 
" nock " or notch, the " pile " or point, and the feathers. The shaft 
is made of seasoned red deal, and may be " self " or " footed." 
Most arrows are " footed," i.e. a piece of hard wood to which the 
pile is attached is spliced to the deal shaft, which should be perfectly 
straight and stiff. The shaft is made in several shapes. Most 
archers prefer the " parallel " pattern — the shaft being the same size 
from nock to pile; the next is the " barrelled," the shape being 
thick in the centre and tapering towards the ends. The " bob-tail " 
diminishes from the pile to the nock; the " chested " tapers from 
the middle to the pile. The pile should not be taper but cylindrical, 
" broadshouldered " where the point begins. The nock is cut square. 
There are three feathers, the body feathers of a turkey or peacock 
being the best. They should all curve the same way, are about 1 \ in. 
long and \ in. deep, with the ends near the nock either square, or 
balloon-shaped. The weight of an arrow is its weight in new English 
silver; a five-shilling arrow is heavy for a man's bow, while four- 
shillings is light. A 28-in. arrow for a 50- lb bow may weigh four-and- 
ninepence; a 27-in. arrow four-and-sixpence. This may serve as 
a rough standard. 

Other Implements. — The archer uses finger-tips, or a " tab " of 
leather, to protect the fingers against the string, and a leather 
" bracer " to protect the left arm from its blow. Quivers are not 
now used except by ladies. A special box for carrying bows and 
arrows about ; a proper cupboard, known as an " ascham," in which 
they may be kept at home in a dry, even temperature, not too hot ; 
and a baize or leather case for use on the ground, are important 
minor articles of equipment. 

Targets, Scoring and Handicapping. — The targets, 4 ft. in diameter, 
are made of straw 3 to 4 in. thick, and are supported sloping slightly 
backwards by an iron stand. The faces are of floor-cloth painted 
with concentric rings, 4! in. each in breadth. The outer ring, white, 
counts one point; the next, black, three; the next, blue, five; the 
next, red, seven; and the next, gold — a complete circle of 4^ in. 



radius — nine. The exact centre of the gold is called the " pin-hole." 
The targets are set up in pairs, facing each other, the distances for 
men being 100, 80 and 60 yds.; for ladies, 60 and 50; for con- 
venience, 5 yds. are added to allow for a shooting-line that distance 
in front of each target. The centre of the gold should be 4 ft. from 
the ground. Each archer shoots three arrows — an " end " — at one 
target ; they then cross over and mark the scores. If an arrow cuts 
two rings, the archer is credited with the value of the higher one. 
In matches a " York Round " or a " St George's Round " is usually 
shot by men, the former consisting of 144 arrows, 72 at 100 yds., 
48 at 80 yds., and 24 at 60 yds., the latter of 36 arrows at each of 
these distances. One York Round only is shot on a day ; a double 
York Round is shot, one on each day, at the more important meetings. 
Ladies usually shoot the " National Round " of 48 arrows at 60 yds. 
and 24 at 50 yds. At most meetings the prizes are awarded on the 
gross scores; at others, including the Championship meeting, on 
points, two points for the highest score on the round and two for 
most hits on the round, one point each for highest score and most 
hits at each of the three ranges, ten points in all. Ladies' scores 
are calculated similarly. To decide the Championship, the Grand 
National Archery Society passed a rule in 1894 that " The Champion 
prizes shall be awarded to the archer gaining the greatest number of 
points, provided that those for gross hits or gross score are included; 
any points won by other archers shall be redistributed among those 
gaining the points for gross hits or gross score." Handicapping may 
be done by " rings," the winner of a first prize not being allowed to 
count "whites" at subsequent meetings, and "blacks" and 
" blues " being lost for further successes. Better methods are (i)'to 
deduct a percentage from the gross score of successful shooters, 
(2) to handicap by points, as in other pastimes, or (3) to rate a 
shooter according to the average of his last year's performances, 
re-rating him monthly, or at convenient intervals, the system being 
to add his average of the current year to his average of last year, 
and divide the sum by two to form his new rating. 

Clout and Long Distance Shooting. — This form of archery is chiefly 
supported by the Woodmen of Arden and the Royal Company. At 
100 yds., the target (smaller by 4 in. than the usual one, but with an 
inner white circle instead of the blue) is set up against a butt only 
18 in. from the ground, but for nine-score, ten-score, and twelve- 
score shooting it is a white target, 2 ft. 6 in. in diameter, with a 
black centre. The target, the centre and the arrow that hits the 
centre are each known as a " clout." Hits and misses are signalled 
by a marker stationed, rather perilously, by the side of the butt. 
The target is sloped backwards to an angle of 60°, with rings marked 
round it on the ground at distances of 1 J ft., 3 ft., 6 ft. and 9 ft., a 
hit in the outer ring counting one, and in the next two, and so on, 
the clout or centre counting six. For the longer ranges lighter 
arrows are used. The Scotti°h clout was a piece of canvas, stretched 
on a frame; the range 1 80 or 200 yds.; all arrows counted one that 
were within 24 ft. of the target, the clout counting two. Modern 
archers have paid scant attention to mere distance-shooting, which 
is an art of its own, but their experiments prove that with a fairly 
heavy bow, say 60 ft or 63 ft, and a long light arrow, known as a 
" flight arrow," a good archer should be able to reach 300 or 310 yds. 
With a heavier bow, properly under control, 50 or 60 yds. might 
be added to this by a strong man. These experiments seem to 
be verified by a quotation from Shakespeare (Henry IV. Act iii. 
Sc. 2) : " A' would have clapped i' the clout and twelve score, and 
carried you a forehand shaft a fourteen and fourteen and a half," 
i.e. 286 or 290 yds. Instances are recorded of Englishmen shooting 
340 and 360 yds., but in 1795 Mahmoud Effendi of the Turkish 
embassy shot 482 yds. with a Turkish bow, and Sultan Selim 972. 
The Turk, however, used a Turkish bow and a 14-in. arrow, with a 
grooved rest on his left arm along which the arrow passed, to com- 
pensate for the difference between the draw of the bow and the 
shortness of the arrow. The diplomatist's shot is supported by 
good evidence, but the sultan's is regarded as improbable at 
least. 

Championship and Scores. — The British championship meetings, 
instituted in 1844, are conducted under the laws of the Grand 
National Archery Society: the prizes, apart from the Challenge 
prizes, are given in money, there being also a rule that any one who 
makes three golds at one end receives a shilling from all others of the 
same sex who are shooting. The most notable champion was 
Horace A. Ford (d. 1880), who held the title for eleven consecutive 
years, 1849 to 1859 inclusive, and again in 1867. He made a four- 
figure score at four other championship meetings, his highest, 125! 
(in 1857) for 245 hits being unapproached. To him the modern 
scientific practice of archery must largely be attributed, together 
with its improvement and its popularity. The names of G. Edwards, 
Major C. Hawkins Fisher, H. H. Palairet, C. E. Nesham, and G. E. S. 
Fryer, are also notable as champions. Among ladies Mrs Horniblow 
was champion for eleven years between 1852 and 1881, Miss Legh 
for nineteen years between 1880 and 1908; Mrs Piers Legh, Miss 
Betham and Mrs Bowly claim the title on four occasions. Mrs 
Bowly's score of 823 (1894) was the highest made for the champion- 
ship till Miss Legh made 825 with 143 hits — only one arrow missed 
altogether — in 1898 ; beating her own record with a score of 841 (143 
hits) in 1904. It should not be forgotten that as the champion- 
ship is awarded by points, the highest score does not necessarily win. 



3 66 



ARCHES— ARCHIAC 



See Roger Ascham, Toxophilus (1545), edited by Edward Arber 
(London, 1868); The Arte of Warre, by William Garrard (London 
1591); The Arte of Archerie, by Gervase Markham (London, 1634); 
Ancient and Modern Methods of Arrow Release, by E. S. Morse 
(1885); The English Bowman, by T. Roberts (London, 1801); A 
Treatise on Archery, by Thomas Waring (London, 9th ed., 1832); 
The Theory and Practice of Archery, by Horace A. Ford (new ed., 
London, 1887); Archery, by C. J. Longman and H. Walrond (Bad- 
minton Library, London, 1894). (W. J. F.) 

ARCHES, COURT OF, the English ecclesiastical court of appeal 
of the archbishop of Canterbury, as metropolitan of the province. 
of Canterbury, from all the consistory and commissary courts in 
the province. It derives its name from its ancient place of 
judicature, which was in the church of Beata Maria de Arcubus 
— St Mary-le-Bow or St Mary of the Arches, " by reason of the 
steeple thereof raised at the top with stone pillars in fashion 
like a bow bent archwise." This parish was the chief of thirteen 
locally situated within the diocese of London but exempt from 
the bishop's jurisdiction, and it was no doubt owing to this 
circumstance that it was selected originally as the place of 
judicature for the archbishop's court. The proper designation of 
the judge is official principal of the Arches court, but by custom 
he came to be styled the dean of the Arches, a title belonging 
formerly to the chief official of the subordinate court. ' Originally, 
the official principal exercised metropolitan jurisdiction, while 
the dean of the Arches exercised the " peculiar " jurisdiction. 
The jurisdictions called " peculiars " at one time numbered 
nearly 300 in England. They were originally introduced by the 
pope for the purpose of curtailing the bishop's legitimate auth- 
ority within his diocese; " an object which," says Phillimore, 
" they certainly attained, to the great confusion of ecclesiastical 
jurisdiction for many years." The dean of the Arches originally 
had jurisdiction over the thirteen London parishes above men- 
tioned, but as the official principal was often absent as ambassador 
on the continent, he became his substitute, and gradually the 
two offices were blended together. The original office of the 
dean of the Arches may now be regarded as extinct, though the 
title is still popularly used, for no dean of the Arches has been 
appointed eo nomine for several centuries, and by an act of 1838 
bishops have jurisdiction over all peculiars within their diocese. 
The judge of the Arches court was until 1874 appointed by the 
archbishop of Canterbury by patent which, when confirmed by 
the dean and chapter of Canterbury, conferred the office for the 
life of the holder. He took the oaths of office required by the 
127th canon. But by the Public Worship Regulation Act 1874 
the two archbishops were empowered, subject to the approval 
of the sovereign by sign-manual, from time to time to appoint 
a practising barrister of ten years' standing, or a person who 
had been a judge of one of the superior courts (being a member 
of the Church of England) to be, during good behaviour, a judge 
for the purpose of exercising jurisdiction under that act, and it 
was enacted (sec. 7) that on a vacancy occurring in the office of 
official principal of the Arches court the judge should become 
ex officio such official principal. In this way the late Lord 
Penzance became dean on the retirement of Sir Robert Philli- 
more in 1875. Lord Penzance received in 1878 a supplemental 
patent as dean from Archbishop Tait, but did not otherwise 
fulfil the conditions observed on the appointment of his pre- 
decessors. On Lord Penzance's retirement in 1 899, his successor, 
Sir Arthur Charles, received a patent from the archbishop of 
Canterbury as official principal of the Arches court, and he took 
the oaths of office according to the practice before the Public 
Worship Regulation Act. He was subsequently and separately 
appointed judge under that act. Sir A. Charles resigned in 1903 
and was succeeded by Sir L. T. Dibdin, who qualified in the same 
way as his immediate predecessor. The official principal of 
the Arches court is the only ecclesiastical judge who is em- 
powered to pass a sentence of deprivation against a clerk in 
holy orders. The appeals from the decisions of the Arches court 
were formerly made to the king in chancery, but they are now 
by statute addressed to the king in council, and they are heard 
before the judicial committee of the privy council. By an act 
of Henry VIII. (Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction Act 1532) the Arches 
court is empowered to hear, in the first instance, such suits as 



are sent up to it by letters of request from the consistorial courts 
of the bishops of the province of Canterbury, and by the Church 
Discipline Act 1840, this jurisdiction is continued to it, and it 
is further empowered to accept letters of request from the bishops 
of the province of Canterbury after they have issued commissions 
of inquiry under that statute, and the commissioners have made 
their report. 

The Arches court was also the court of appeal from the con- 
sistory courts of the bishops of the province in all testamentary 
and matrimonial causes. The matrimonial jurisdiction was 
transferred to the crown by the Matrimonial Causes Act 1857. 
Under the Clergy Discipline Act 1892 an appeal lies from the 
judgment of a consistory court under that act, in respect of 
fact by leave of the appellate court, and in respect of law 
without leave, to either the Arches court or the judicial committee 
of the privy council at the option of the appellant. Under the 
Benefices Act 1898 the official principal of the archbishop is 
recjuired to institute a presentee to a benefice if the tribunal 
constituted under that act decides that there is no valid ground 
for refusing institution and the bishop of the diocese notwith- 
standing fails to institute him. After the College of Advocates 
was incorporated and had established itself in Doctors' Commons, 
the archbishop's court of appeal, as well as his prerogative court, 
were usually held in the hall of the College of Advocates, but 
after the destruction of the buildings of the college, the court 
of appeal held its sittings, for the most part, in Westminster Hall. 
For many years past there has been but little business in the 
Arches court, mainly owing to the unwillingness of a large number 
of the clergy to recognize the jurisdiction of what they deny to 
be any longer a spiritual court, and the consistent use by the 
bishops of their right of veto in the case of prosecutions under the 
Public Worship Regulation Act. On the rare occasions when 
a sitting of the court is necessary, it is held in the library of 
Lambeth Palace, or at the Church House, Westminster. 

ARCHESTRATUS, of Syracuse or Gela, a Greek poet, who 
flourished about 330 B.C. After travelling extensively in search 
of foreign delicacies for the table, he embodied the result in a 
humorous poem called 'Hdviradeia, afterwards freely trans- 
lated by Ennius under the title Heduphagetica. About 300 lines 
of this gastronomical poem are preserved in Athenaeus. The 
writer, who has been styled the Hesiod or Theognis of gluttons, 
parodies the style of the old gnomic poets; chief attention is 
paid to details concerning fish. 

Ribbeck, Archestrati Reliquiae (1877); Brandt, Corpusculum 
Poesis Epicae Graecae ludibundae, i. 1888; Schmid, De Archestrati 
Gelensis Fragmentis (1896). 

ARCHIAC, ETIENNE JULES ADOLPHE DESMIER DE 
SAINT SIMON, Vicomte d' (i 802-1 868), French geologist and 
palaeontologist, was born at Reims on the 24th of September 
1802. He was educated in the Military School of St Cyr, and 
served for nine years as a cavalry officer until 1830, when he 
retired from the service. Prior to this he had published an 
historical romance; but now geology came to occupy his chief 
attention. In his earlier scientific works, which date from 1835, 
he described the Tertiary and Cretaceous formations of France, 
Belgium and England, and dealt especially with the distribution 
of fossils geographically and in sequence. Later on he investi- 
gated the Carboniferous, Devonian and Silurian formations. 
His great work, Histoire des progres de la geologic, 1834-1859, 
was published in 8 volumes at Paris (1847-1860). In 1853 the 
Wollaston Medal of the Geological Society was awarded to him. 
In the same year, with Jules Haime (1824-1856), he published 
a monograph on the Nummulitic formation of India. In 1857 
he was elected a member of the Academy of Sciences, and in 
1861 he was appointed professor of palaeontology in the Museum 
d'Histoire Naturelle in Paris. Of later works his Paltontologie 
stratigraphique, in 3 vols. (1864-1865); his Geologie et paUon- 
tologie (1866); and his palaeontological contributions to de 
Tchihatcheff's Asie mineure (1866), may be specially mentioned. 

He died on the 24th of December 1868. 

See Notice sur les travaux scientifiques du vicomte d'Archiac, par 
A. Gaudry (Meulan, 1874); Extrait du Bull. Soc. Geol. de France, 
ser. 3, t. ii. p. 230 (1874). 



ARCHIAS^-ARCHILOCHUS 



3(>7 



ARCHIAS, AULUS LICINIUS, Greek poet, was born at Antioch 
in Syria 120 B.C. In 102, his reputation having been already 
established, especially as an improvisatore, he came to Rome, 
where he was well received amongst the highest and most 
influential families. His chief patron was Lucullus, whose 
gentile name he assumed. In 93 he visited Sicily with his patron, 
on which occasion he received the citizenship of Heracleia, one 
of the federate towns, and indirectly, by the provisions of the 
lex Plautia Papiria, that of Rome. In 61 he was accused by 
a certain Gratius of having assumed the citizenship illegally; 
and Cicero successfully defended him in his speech Pro Archia. 
This speech, which furnishes nearly all the information concern- 
ing Archias, states that he had celebrated the deeds of Marius 
and Lucullus in the Cimbrian and Mithradatic wars, and that 
he was engaged upon a poem of which the events of Cicero's 
consulship formed the subject. The Greek Anthology contains 
thirty-five epigrams under the name of Archias, but it is doubtful 
how many of these (if any) are the work of the poet of Antioch. 
Cicero, Pro Archia; T. Reinach, De Archia Poeta (1890). 
* ARCHIDAMUS, the name of five kings of Sparta, of the 
Eurypontid house. 

1. The son and successor of Anaxidamus. His reign, which 
began soon after the close of the second Messenian War, is said 
to have been quiet and uneventful (Pausanias iii. 7 . 6) . 

2. The son of Zeuxidamus, reigned 476-427 B.C. (but see 
Leotychides). He succeeded his grandfather Leotychides 
upon the banishment of the latter, his father having already 
died. His coolness and presence of mind are said to have saved 
the Spartan state from destruction on the occasion of the great ' 
earthquake of 464 (Diodorus xi. 63; Plutarch, Cimon, 16), but 
this story must be regarded as at least doubtful. He was a 
friend of Pericles and a man of prudence and moderation. 
During the negotiations which preceded the Peloponnesian 
War he did his best to prevent, or at least to postpone, the 
inevitable struggle, but was overruled by the war party. He 
invaded Attica at the head of the Peloponnesian forces in the 
summers of 431, 430 and 428, and in 429 conducted queries
against Plataea. He died probably in 427, certainly before the 
summer of 426, when we find his son Agis on the throne. 

Herod, vi. 71; Thuc. i. 79— iii. 1; Plut. Pericles, 29. 33; Diodorus 
xi. 48-xii. 52. 

3. The son and successor of Agesilaus II., reigned 360-338 
B.C. During his father's later years he proved himself a brave 
and capable officer. In 371 he led the relief force which was 
sent to aid the survivors of the battle of Leuctra. Four years 
later he captured Caryae, ravaged the territory of the Parrhasii 
and defeated the Arcadians, Argives and Messenians in the 
" tearless battle," so called because the victory did not cost the 
Spartans a single life. In 364, however, he sustained a severe 
reverse in attempting to relieve a besieged Spartan garrison at 
Cromnus in south-western Arcadia. He showed great heroism 
in the defence of Sparta against Epaminondas immediately 
before the battle of Mantineia (362). He supported the Phocians 
during the Sacred War (355-346), moved, no doubt, largely by 
the hatred of Thebes which he had inherited from his father: he 
also led the Spartan forces in the conflicts with the Thebans and 
their allies which arose out of the Spartan attempt to break up 
the city of Megalopolis. Finally he was sent with a mercenary 
army to Italy to protect the Tarentines against the attacks of 
Lucanians or Messapians: he fell together with the greater part 
of his force at Mandonion 1 on the same day as that on which 
the battle of Chaeronea was fought. 

Xen. Hell. v. 4, vi. 4, vii. 1. 4, 5; Plut. Agis, 3, Camillas, 19, 
Agesilaus, 25, 33, 34, 40; Pausanias iii. 10, vi. 4; Diodorus xv. 54, 
72, xvi. 24, 39, 59, 62, 88. 

4. The son of Eudamidas I., grandson of Archidamus III. 
The dates of his accession and death are unknown. In 294 B.C. 
he was defeated at Mantineia by Demetrius Poliorcetes, who 
invaded Laconia, gained a second victory close to Sparta, and 
was on the point of taking the city itself when he was called 

1 So Plut. Agis, 3 (all MSS.). Following Cellarius, some authori- 
ties read Manduria or Mandyrium. 



away by the news of the successes of Lysimachus and Ptolemy 
in Asia Minor and Cyprus. 

Plut. Agis, 3, Demetrius, 35; Pausanias, i. 13. 6, vii. 8. 5; Niese, 
Gesch. der griech. u. makedon. Siaaten, i. 363. 

5. The son of Eudamidas II., grandson of Archidamus IV., 
brother of Agis IV. On his brother's murder he fled to Messenia 
(241 B.C.). In 227 he was recalled by Cleomenes III., who was 
then reigning without a colleague, but shortly after his return 
he was assassinated. Polybius accuses Cleomenes of the murder, 
but Plutarch is probably right in saying that it was the work 
of those who had caused the death of Agis, and feared his 
brother's vengeance. 

Plutarch, Cleomenes, i. 5 ; Polybius v. 37, viii. I ; Niese, op. cil. ii. 
304,311. (M. N. T.) 

ARCHIL (a corruption of " orchil," Ital. oricello, the origin 
of which is unknown) , a purple dye obtained from various species 
of lichens. Archil can be extracted from many species of the 
genera Roccella, Lecanora, Umbilicaria, Parmelia and others, 
but in practice two species of Roccella — R. tinctoria and R. 
fuciformis — are almost exclusively used. These, under the name 
of " orchella weed " or " dyer's moss," are obtained from 
Angola, on the west coast of Africa, where the most valuable 
kinds are gathered; from Cape Verde Islands; from Lima, 
on the west coast of South America; and from the Malabar 
coast of India. The colouring properties of the lichens do not 
exist in them ready formed, but are developed by the treatment 
to which they are subjected. A small proportion of a colourless, 
crystalline principle, termed orcinol (a dioxy toluene), is found 
in some, and in all a series of acid substances, erythric, lecanoric 
acids, &c. Orcinol in presence of oxygen and ammonia takes 
up nitrogen and becomes changed into a purple substance, 
orceine (C7H7NO3), which is essentially the basis of all lichen 
dyes. Two other colouring-matters, azoerythin and erythro- 
leinic acid, are sometimes present. Archil is prepared for the 
dyer's use in the form of a " liquor " (archil) and a " paste " 
(persis), and the latter, when dried and finely powdered, forms 
the " cudbear " of commerce, a dye formerly manufactured 
in Scotland from a native lichen, Lecanora tartarea. The manu- 
facturing process consists in washing the weeds, which are then 
ground up with water to a thick paste. If archil paste is to be 
made this paste is mixed with a strong ammoniacal solution, 
and agitated in an iron cylinder heated by steam to about 
140 F. till the desired shade is developed — a process which 
occupies several days. In the preparation of archil liquor the 
principles which yield the dye are separated from the ligneous 
tissue of the lichens, agitated with a hot ammoniacal solution, 
and exposed to the action of air. When potassium or sodium 
carbonate is added, a blue dye known as litmus, much used 
as an " indicator," is produced. French purple or lime lake 
is a lichen dye prepared by a modification of the archil process, 
and is a more brilliant and durable colour than the other. The 
dyeing of worsted and home-spun cloth with lichen dyes was 
formerly a very common domestic employment in Scotland; 
and to this day, in some of the outer islands, worsted continues 
to be dyed with " crottle," the name given to the lichens 
employed. 

ARCHILOCHUS, Greek lyric poet and writer of lampoons, 
was born at Paros, one of the Cyclades islands. The date of his 
birth is uncertain, but he probably flourished about 650 B.C.; 
according to some, about forty years earlier but certainly not 
before the reign of Gyges (687-652), whom he mentions in a 
well-known fragment. His father, Telesicles, who was of noble 
family, had conducted a colony to Thasos, in obedience to the 
command of the Delphic oracle. To this island Archilochus 
himself, hard pressed by poverty, afterwards removed. Another 
reason for leaving his native place was personal disappointment 
and indignation at the treatment he had received from Lycambes, 
a citizen of Paros, who had promised him his daughter Neobule 
in marriage, but had afterwards withdrawn his consent. Archi- 
lochus, taking advantage of the licence allowed at the feasts of 
Demeter, poured out his wounded feelings in unmerciful satire. 
He accused Lycambes of perjury, and his daughters of leading 



3 68 



ARCHIMANDRITE— ARCHIMEDES 



the most abandoned lives. Such was the effect produced by 
his verses, that Lycambes and his daughters are said to have 
hanged themselves. At Thasos the poet passed some unhappy 
years; his hopes of wealth were disappointed; according to him, 
Thasos was the meeting-place of the calamities of all Hellas. 
The inhabitants were frequently involved in quarrels with their 
neighbours, and in a war against the Saians — a Thracian tribe — he 
threw away his shield and fled from the field of battle. He does 
not seem to have felt the disgrace very keenly, for, like Alcaeus 
and Horace, he commemorates the event in a fragment in which 
he congratulates himself on having saved his life, and says he 
can easily procure another shield. After leaving Thasos, he is 
said to have visited Sparta, but to have been at once banished 
from that city on account of his cowardice and the licentious 
character of his works (Valerius Maximus vi. 3, externa 1). He 
next visited Siris, in lower Italy, a city of which he speaks very 
favourably. He then returned to his native place, and was slain 
in a battle against the Naxians by one Calondas or Corax, who 
was cursed by the oracle for having slain a servant of the Muses. 

The writings of Archilochus consisted of elegies, hymns — one 
of which used to be sung by the victors in the Olympic games 
(Pindar, Olympia, ix. 1) — and of poems in the iambic and trochaic 
measures. To him certainly we owe the invention of iambic 
poetry and its application to the purposes of satire. The only 
previous measures in Greek poetry had been the epic hexameter, 
and its offshoot the elegiac metre; but the slow measured 
structure of hexameter verse was utterly unsuited to express 
the quick, light motions of satire. Archilochus made use of the 
iambus and the trochee, and organized them into the two forms 
of metre known as the iambic trimeter and the trochaic tetra- 
meter. The trochaic metre he generally used for subjects of a 
serious nature; the iambic for satires. He was also the first 
to make use of the arrangement of verses called the epode. 
Horace in his metres to a great extent follows Archilochus 
{Epistles, i. 19. 23-35). All ancient authorities unite in praising 
the poems of Archilochus, in terms which appear exaggerated 
(Longinus xiii. 3 ; Dio Chrysostom, Orationes, xxxiii. ; Quintilian 
x. i. 60; Cicero, Orator, i.). His verses seem certainly to have 
possessed strength, flexibility, nervous vigour, and, beyond 
everything else, impetuous vehemence and energy. Horace 
(Ars Poetica, 79) speaks of the " rage " of Archilochus, and 
Hadrian calls his verses " raging iambics." By his countrymen 
he was reverenced as the equal of Homer, and statues of these 
two poets were dedicated on the same day. 

His poems were written in the old Ionic dialect. Fragments in 
Bergk, Poetae Lyrici Graeci; Liebel, Archilochi Reliquiae (1818); 
A. Hauvette-Besnault, Archiloque, sa vie et ses poesies (1905). 

ARCHIMANDRITE (from Gr. apx^v, a ruler, and y.avbpa, 
a fold or monastery), a title in the Greek Church applied to a 
superior abbot, who has the supervision of several abbots and 
monasteries, or to the abbot of some specially great and im- 
portant monastery, the title for an ordinary abbot being hegu- 
menos. The title occurs for the first time in a letter to Epiphanius, 
prefixed to his Panarium (c. 375), but the Lausiac History of 
Palladius may be evidence that it was in common use in the 4th 
century as applied to Pachomius (q.v.). In Russia the bishops 
are commonly selected from the archimandrites. The word 
occurs in the Regula Columbani (c. 7), and du Cange gives 
a few other cases of its use in Latin documents, but it never 
came into vogue in the West. Owing to intercourse with Greek 
and Slavonic Christianity, the title is sometimes to be met with 
in southern Italy and Sicily, and in Hungary and Poland. 

See the article in the Dictionnaire d' archeologie chretienne et de 
liturgie. 

ARCHIMEDES (c. 287-212 B.C.), Greek mathematician and 
inventor, was born at Syracuse, in Sicily. He was the son of 
Pheidias, an astronomer, and was on intimate terms with, if not 
related to, Hiero, king of Syracuse, and Gelo his son. He studied 
at Alexandria and doubtless met there Conon of Samos, whom he 
admired as a mathematician and cherished as a friend, and to 
whom he was in the habit of communicating his discoveries 
before publication. On his return to his native city he devoted 
himself to mathematical research. He himself set no value on I 



the ingenious mechanical contrivances which made him famous, 
regarding them as beneath the dignity of pure science and even 
declining to leave any written record of them except in the case 
of the a<t>a,LpoTroi.ta (Sphere-making), as to which see below. 
As, however, these machines impressed the popular imagination, 
they naturally figure largely in the traditions about him. Thus 
he devised for Hiero engines of war which almost terrified the 
Romans, and which protracted the siege of Syracuse for three 
years. There is a story that he constructed a burning mirror 
which set the Roman ships on fire when they were within a bow- 
shot of the wall. This has been discredited because it is not 
mentioned by Polybius, Livy or Plutarch; but it is probable 
that Archimedes had constructed some such burning instrument, 
though the connexion of it with the destruction of the Roman 
fleet is more than doubtful. More important, as being doubtless 
connected with the discovery of the principle in hydrostatics 
which bears his name and the foundation by him of that whole 
science, is the story of Hiero's reference to him of the 
question whether a crown made for him and purporting 
to be of gold, did not actually contain a proportion of silver.* 
According to one story, Archimedes was puzzled till one day, as he 
was stepping into a bath and observed the water running over, 
it occurred to him that the excess of bulk occasioned by the in- 
troduction of alloy could be measured by putting the crown 
and an equal weight of gold separately into a vessel filled with 
water, and observing the difference of overflow. He was so 
overjoyed when this happy thought struck him that he ran 
home without his clothes, shouting evpr\Ka., eupijxa, " I have 
found it, I have found it." Similarly his pioneer work in 
mechanics is illustrated by the story of his having said 56s 
lioi irov arSi /ecu klvSi ttjv yrp> (or as another version has it, 
in his dialect, wa /3£> /cat kivui rav yap), " Give me a place to 
stand and I (will) move the earth." Hiero asked him to give 
an illustration of his contention that a very great weight 
could be moved by a very small force. He is said to have 
fixed on a large and fully laden ship and to have used a mechanical 
device by which Hiero was enabled to move it by himself: but 
accounts differ as to the particular mechanical powers employed. 
The water-screw which he invented (see below) was probably 
devised in Egypt for the purpose of irrigating fields. 

Archimedes died at the capture of Syracuse by Marcellus, 
212 B.C. In the general massacre which followed the fall of the 
city, Archimedes, while engaged in drawing a mathematical 
figure on the sand, was run through the body by a Roman 
soldier. No blame attaches to the Roman general, Marcellus, 
since he had given orders to his men to spare the house and 
person of the sage; and in the midst of his triumph he lamented 
the death of so illustrious a person, directed an honourable 
burial to be given him, and befriended his surviving relatives. 
In accordance with the expressed desire of the philosopher, his 
tomb was marked by the figure of a sphere inscribed in a cylinder, 
the discovery of the relation between the volumes of a sphere 
and its circumscribing cylinder being regarded by him as his 
most valuable achievement. When Cicero was quaestor in 
Sicily (75 B.C.), he found the tomb of Archimedes, near the 
Agrigentine gate, overgrown with thorns and briers. " Thus," 
says Cicero (Tusc. Disp. v. c. 23, § 64), " would this most famous 
and once most learned city of Greece have remained a stranger 
to the tomb of one of its most ingenious citizens, had it not been 
discovered by a man of Arpinum." 

Works. — The range and importance of the scientific labours of 
Archimedes will be best understood from a brief account of those 
writings which have come down to us; and it need only be added 
that his greatest work was in geometry, where he so extended the 
method of exhaustion as originated by Eudoxus, and followed by 
Euclid, that it became in his hands, though purely geometrical in 
form, actually equivalent in several cases to integration, as expounded 
in the first chapters of our text-books on the integral calculus. This 
remark applies to the finding of the area of a parabolic segment 
(mechanical solution) and of a spiral, the surface and volume of a 
sphere and of a segment thereof, and the volume of any segments 
of the solids of revolution of the second degree. 

The extant treatises are as follows : — 

(1) On the Sphere and Cylinder (Ilepi v<j>aipas xai icuXicSpou). 
This treatise is in two books, dedicated to Dositheus, and deals 



ARCHIMEDES— ARCHITECTURE 



369 



with the dimensions of spheres, cones, " solid rhombi " and cy- 
linders, all demonstrated in a strictly geometrical method. The 
first book contains forty-four propositions, and those in which the 
most important results are finally obtained are: 13 (surface of right 
cylinder), 14, 15 (surface of right cone), 33 (surface of sphere), 34 
(volume of sphere and its relation to that of circumscribing cylinder), 
42, 43 (surface of segment of sphere), 44 (volume of sector of sphere). 
The second book is in nine propositions, eight of which deal with 
segments of spheres and include the problems of cutting a given 
sphere by a plane so that (a) the surfaces, (b) the volumes, of the 
segments are in a given ratio (Props. 3, 4), and of constructing a 
segment of a sphere similar to one given segment and having (a) its 
volume, (t) its surface, equal to that of another (5, 6). 

(2) The Measurement of the Circle (K6<cXou /ierpjjo-ts) is a short 
book of three propositions, the main result being obtained in Prop. 2, 
which shows that the circumference of a circle is less than 3^ and 
greater than 3!? times its diameter. Inscribing in and circum- 
scribing about a circle two polygons, each of ninety-six sides, and 
assuming that the perimeter of the circle lay between those of the 
polygons, he obtained the limits he has assigned by sheer calculation, 
starting from two close approximations to the value of V 3, which he 
assumes as known (265/1 53 < V 3 < 135 1 /780) . 

(3) On Conoids and Spheroids (Ilepi Kuvoeiftkoiv /cot o - $aipoeiSeco»') 
is a treatise in thirty-two propositions, on the solids generated by 
the revolution of the conic sections about their axes, the main results 
being the comparisons of the volume of any segment cut off by a 
plane with that of a cone having the same base and axis (Props. 21, 
22 for the paraboloid, 25, 26 for the hyperboloid, and 27-32 for the 
spheroid). 

(4) On Spirals (Ilepi iXUwv) is a book of twenty-eight proposi- 
tions. Propositions 1-11 are preliminary, 13-20 contain tangential 
properties of the curve now known as the spiral of Archimedes, and 
21-28 show how to express the area included between any portion 
of the curve and the radii vectores to its extremities. 

(5) On the Equilibrium of Planes or Centres of Gravity of Planes 
(Ilepi «ri7re6a>p iooppoiri&v ^ Ktvrpa fiapwv ejmrkSwv). This con- 
sists of two books, and may be called the foundation of theoretical 
mechanics, for the previous contributions of Aristotle were com- 
paratively vague and unscientific. In the first book there are fifteen 
propositions, with seven postulates; and demonstrations are given, 
much the same as those still employed, of the centres of gravity 
(1) of any two weights, (2) of any parallelogram, (3) of any triangle, 
(4) of any trapezium. The second book in ten propositions is devoted 
to the finding the centres of gravity (1) of a parabolic segment, (2) of 
the area included between any two parallel chords and the portions 
of the curve intercepted by them. 

(6) The Quadrature of the Parabola (TeTpayoiviands irapaffoXfis) is 
a book in twenty-four propositions, containing two demonstrations 
that the area of any segment of a parabola is J of the triangle which 
has the same base as the segment and equal height. The first (a 
mechanical proof) begins, after some preliminary propositions on the 
parabola, in Prop. 6, ending with an integration in Prop. 16. The 
second (a geometrical proof) is expounded in Props. 17-24. 

(7) On Floating Bodies (Ilepi dxovufvav) is a treatise in two 
books, the first of which establishes the general principles of hydro- 
statics, and the second discusses with the greatest completeness the 
positions of rest and stability of a right segment of a paraboloid of 
revolution floating in a fluid. 

(8) The Psammites {tyaiiixLriis, Lat. Arenarius, or sand reckoner), 
a small treatise, addressed to Gelo, the eldest son of Hiero, expound- 
ing, as applied to reckoning the number of grains of sand that could 
be contained in a sphere of the size of our " universe," a system 
of naming large numbers according to " orders " and " periods " 
which would enable any number to be expressed up to that which 
we should write with 1 followed by 80,000 ciphers! 

(9) A Collection of Lemmas, consisting of fifteen propositions in 
plane geometry. This has come down to us through a Latin version 
of an Arabic manuscript; it cannot, however, have been written by 
Archimedes in its present form, as his name is quoted in it more than 
once. 

Lastly, Archimedes is credited with the famous Cattle-Problem. 
enunciated in the epigram edited by G. E. Lessing] in 1773, which 
purports to have been sent by Archimedes to the mathematicians at 
Alexandria in a letter to Eratosthenes. Of lost works by Archimedes 
we can identify the following: (1) investigations on polyhedra 
mentioned by Pappus; (2) 'Apxai, Principles, a book addressed to 
Zeuxippus and dealing with the naming of numbers on the system 
explained in the Sand Reckoner; (3) Ilepi fvyuv, On balances or 
levers; (4) KevTpojSapixa, On centres of gravity; (5) Ka.TowTpt.Ka., an 
optical work from which Theon of Alexandria quotes a remark about 
refraction; (6) 'E<p6Siov, a Method, mentioned by Suidas; (7) Ilepi 
ff^aipoxotfas, On Sphere~making, in which Archimedes explained 
the construction of the sphere which he made to imitate the motions 
of the sun, the moon and the five planets in the heavens. Cicero 
actually saw this contrivance and describes it (De Rep. i. c. 14, 
§§ 21-22). 

Bibliography. — The editio princeps of the works of Archimedes, 
with the commentary of Eutocius, is that printed at Basel, in 1544, 
in Greek and Latin, by Hervagius. D. Rivault's edition (Paris, 
1615) gave the enunciations in Greek and the proofs in Latin some- 



what retouched. A Latin version of them was published by Isaac 
Barrow in 1675 (London, 4to) ; Nicolas Tartaglia published in 
Latin the treatises on Centres of Gravity, on the Quadrature of the 
Parabola, on the Measurement of the Circle, and on Floating Bodies, i. 
(Venice, 1543); Trojanus Curtius published the two books on 
Floating Bodies in 1565 after Tartaglia's death; Frederic Com- 
mandine edited the Aldine edition of 1558, 4to, which contains 
Circuli Dimensio, De Lineis Spiralibus, Quadratura Paraboles, De 
Conoidibus et Spheroidibus , and De numero Arenae; and in 1565 the 
same mathematician published the two books De Us quae vehuntur 
in aqua. J. Torelli's monumental edition of the works with the 
commentaries of Eutocius, published at Oxford in 1792, folio, 
remained the best Greek text until the definitive text edited, with 
Eutocius' commentaries, Latin translation, &c, by J. L. Heiberg 
(Leipzig, 1 880-1 881) superseded it. The Arenarius and Dimensio 
Circuli, with Eutocius' commentary on the latter, were edited by 
Wallis with Latin translation and notes in 1678 (Oxford), and the 
A renarius was also published in English by George Anderson (London, 
1784), with useful notes and illustrations. The first modern transla- 
tion of the works is the French edition published by F. Peyrard 
(Paris, 1808, 2 vols. 8vo.). A valuable German translation with 
notes, by E. Nizze, was published at Stralsund in 1824. There is 
a complete edition in modern notation by T. L. Heath {The Works 
of Archimedes, Cambridge, 1897). On Archimedes himself, see 
Plutarch's Life of Marcellus. (T. L. H.) 

ARCHIMEDES, SCREW OF, a machine for raising water, 
said to have been invented by Archimedes, for the purpose of 
removing water from the hold of a large ship that had been 
built by King Hiero II. of Syracuse. It consists of a water-tight 
cylinder, enclosing a chamber walled off by spiral divisions 
running from end to end, inclined to the horizon, with its lower 
open end placed in the water to be raised. The water, while 
occupying the lowest portion in each successive division of the 
spiral chamber, is lifted mechanically by the turning of the 
machine. Other forms have the spiral revolving free in a fixed 
cylinder, or consist simply of a tube wound spirally about a 
cylindrical axis. The same principle is sometimes used in 
machines for handling wheat, &c. (see Conveyors). 

ARCHIPELAGO, a name now applied to any island-studded 
sea, but originally the distinctive designation of what is now 
generally known as the Aegean Sea (Myaiov neXayos), its 
ancient name having been revived. Several etymologies have 
been proposed: e.g. (1) it is a corruption of the ancient name, 
Egeopelago; (2) it is from the modern Greek, 'A7to irk\ayo, the 
Holy Sea; (3) it arose at the time of the Latin empire, and 
means the Sea of the Kingdom (Archi); (4) it is a translation 
of the Turkish name, Ak Denghiz, Argon Pelagos, the White 
Sea; (5) it is simply Archipelagus, Italian, arcipelago, the ohief 
sea. For the Grecian Archipelago see Aegean Sea. Other 
archipelagoes are described in their respective places. 

ARCHIPPUS, an Athenian poet of the Old Comedy, who 
flourished towards the end of the 5th century B.C. His most 
famous play was the Fishes, in which he satirized the fondness 
of the Athenian epicures for fish. The Alexandrian critics 
attributed to him the authorship of four plays previously 
assigned to Aristophanes. Archippus was ridiculed by his con- 
temporaries for his fondness for playing upon words (Schol. on 
Aristophanes, Wasps, 481). 

Titles and fragments of six plays are preserved, for which see 
T. Kock, Comicorum Atticorum Fragmenta, i. (1880) ; or A. Meineke, 
Poetarum Comicorum Graecorum Fragmenta (1855). 

ARCHITECTURE (Lat. architectura, from the Gr. apxirknTUV , 
a master-builder) , the art of building in such a way as to accord 
with principles determined, not merely by the ends the edifice 
is intended to serve, but by high considerations of beauty and 
harmony (see Fine Arts). It cannot be defined as the art of 
building simply, or even of building well. So far as mere ex- 
cellence of construction is concerned, see Building and its 
allied articles. The end of building as such is convenience, use, 
irrespective of appearance; and the employment of materials 
to this end is regulated by the mechanical principles of the 
constructive art. The end of architecture as an art, on the other 
hand, is so to arrange the plan, masses and enrichments of a 
structure as to impart to it interest, beauty, grandeur, unity, 
power. Architecture thus necessitates the possession by the 
builder of gifts of imagination as well as of technical skill, and 



37o 



ARCHITECTURE 



in all works of architecture properly so called these elements 
must exist, and be harmoniously combined. 

Like the other arts, architecture did not spring into existence 
at an early period of man's history. The ideas of symmetry and 
proportion which are afterwards embodied in material structures 
could not be evolved until at least a moderate degree of civiliza- 
tion had been attained, while the efforts of primitive man in the 
construction of dwellings must have been at first determined 
solely by his physical wants. Only after these had been pro- 
vided for, and materials amassed on which his imagination 
might exercise itself, would he begin to plan and erect structures, 
possessing not only utility, but also grandeur and beauty. It 
may be well to enumerate briefly the elements which in com- 
bination form the architectural perfection of a building. These 
elements have been very variously determined by different 
authorities. Vitruvius, the only ancient writer on the art whose 
works have come down to us, lays down three qualities as in- 
dispensable in a fine building: Firmitas, Utilitas, Venustas, 
stabilty, utility, beauty. From an architectural point of view 
the last is the principal, though not the sole element; and, 
accordingly, the theory of architecture is occupied for the most 
part with aesthetic considerations, or the principles of beauty 
in designing. Of such principles or qualities the following appear 
to be the most important: size, harmony, proportion, symmetry, 
ornament and colour. All other elements may be reduced under 
one or other of these heads. 

With regard to the first quality, it is clear that, as the feeling 
of power is a source of the keenest pleasure, size, or vastness 
of proportion, will not only excite in the mind of man the feelings 
of awe with which he regards the sublime in nature, but will 
impress him with a deep sense of the majesty of human power. 
It is, therefore, a double source of pleasure. The feelings with 
which we regard the Pyramids of Egypt, the great hall of columns 
at Karnak, the Pantheon, or the Basilica of Maxentius at Rome, 
the Trilithon at Baalbek, the choir of Beauvais cathedral, 
or the Arc de l'Etoile at Paris, sufficiently attest the truth of 
this quality, size, which is even better appreciated when the 
buildings are contemplated simply as masses, without being 
disturbed by the consideration of the details. 

Proportion itself depends essentially upon the employment 
of mathematical ratios in the dimensions of a building. It is 
a curious but significant fact that such proportions as those of 
an exact cube, or of two cubes placed side by side — dimensions 
increasing by one-half (e.g., 20 ft. high, 30 wide and 45 long) — 
or the ratios of the base, perpendicular and hypotenuse of a 
right-angled triangle (e.g. 3, 4, 5, or their multiples) — please the 
eye more than dimensions taken at random. No defect is more 
glaring or more unpleasant than want of proportion. The 
Gothic architects appear to have been guided in their designs 
by proportions based on the equilateral triangle. 

By harmony is meant the general balancing of the several 
parts of the design. It is proportion applied to the mutual 
relations of the details. Thus, supported parts should have 
an adequate ratio to their supports, and the same should be 
the case with solids and voids. Due attention to proportion 
and harmony gives the appearance of stability and repose 
which is indispensable to a really fine building. Symmetry 
is uniformity in plan, and, when not carried to excess, is un- 
doubtedly effective. But a building too rigorously symmetrical 
is apt to appear cold and tasteless. Such symmetry of general 
plan, with diversity of detail, as is presented to us in leaves, 
animals, and other natural objects, is probably the just medium 
between the excesses of two opposing schools. 

Next to general beauty or grandeur of form in a building 
comes architectural ornament. Ornament, of course, may 
be used to excess, and as a general rule it should be confined 
to the decoration of constructive parts of the fabric; but, on 
the other hand, a total absence or a paucity of ornament betokens 
an unpleasing poverty. Ornaments may be divided into two 
classes — mouldings and the sculptured representation of natural 
or fanciful objects. Mouldings, no doubt, originated, first, in 
oimply taking off the edge of anything that might be in the way, 



as the edge of a square post, and then sinking the chamfer in 
hollows of various forms; and thence were developed the 
systems of mouldings we now find in all styles and periods. 
Each of these has its own system; and so well are their char- 
acteristics understood, that from an examination of them a 
skilful architect will not only tell the period in which any building 
has been erected, but will even give an estimate of its probable 
size, as professors of physiology will construct an animal from 
the examination of a single bone. Mouldings require to be 
carefully studied, for nothing offends an educated eye like a 
confusion of mouldings, such as Roman forms in Greek work, 
or Early English in that of the Tudor period. The same remark 
applies to sculptured ornaments. They should be neither too 
numerous nor too few, and above all, they should be consistent. 
The carved ox skulls, for instance, which are appropriate in 
a temple of Vesta or of Fortune would be very incongruous 
on a Christian church. 

Colour must be regarded as a subsidiary element in architec- 
ture, and although it seems almost indispensable and has always 
been extensively employed in interiors, it is doubtful how far 
external colouring is desirable. Some contend that only local 
colouring, i.e. the colour of the materials, should be admitted; 
but there seems no reason why any colour should not be used, 
provided it be employed with discretion and kept subordinate 
to the form or outline. 

Origin of the Art. — The origin of the art of architecture is to be 
found in the endeavours of man to provide for his physical 
wants; in the earliest days the cave, the hut and the tent may 
have given shelter to those who devoted themselves to hunting 
and fishing, to agriculture and to a pastoral and nomadic life, 
and in many cases still afford the only shelter from the weather. 
There can be no doubt, however, that climate and the materials 
at hand affect the forms of the primitive buildings; thus, in the 
two earliest settlements of mankind, in Chaldaea and Egypt, 
where wood was scarce, the heat in the day-time intense, and 
the only material which could be obtained was the alluvial clay, 
brought down by the rivers in both those countries, they shaped 
this into bricks, which, dried in the sun, enabled them to build 
rude huts, giving them the required shelter. These may have 
been circular or rectangular on plan, with the bricks laid in 
horizontal courses, one projecting over the other, till the walls 
met at the top. The next advance in Egypt was made by the 
employment of the trunks of the palm tree as a lintel over the 
doorway, to support the wall above, and to cover over the hut 
and carry the flat roof of earth which is found down to the present 
day in all hot countries. Evidence of this system of construction 
is found in some of the earliest rock-cut tombs at Giza, where the 
actual dwelling of the deceased was reproduced in the tomb, 
and from these reproductions we gather that the corners, or 
quoins of the hut were protected by stems of the douva plant, 
bound together in rolls by the leaves, which, in the form of torus 
rolls, were also carried across the top of the wall. Down to the 
present day the huts of the fellahs are built in the same way, 
and, surmounted as they are by pigeon-cots, bear so strong 
a resemblance to the pylons and the walls of the temples as at 
all events to suggest, if not to prove, that in their origin these 
stone erections were copies of unburnt brick structures. From 
long exposure in the sun, these bricks acquire a hardness and 
compactness not much inferior to some of the softer qualities 
of stone, but they are unable to sustain much pressure; conse- 
quently it is necessary to make the walls thicker at the bottom 
than at the top, and it is this which results in the batter or raking 
sides of all the unburnt brick walls. The same raking sides are 
found in all their mastabas, or tombs, sometimes built in un- 
burnt brick and sometimes in stone, in the latter case being 
simple reproductions of the former. In some of the early 
mastabas, built in brick, either to vary the monotony of the 
mass and decorate the walls, or to ensure greater care in their 
construction, vertical brick pilasters are provided, forming sunk 
panels. These form the principal decoration, as reproduced in 
stone, of an endless number of tombs, some of which are in the 
British Museum. At the top of each panel they carve a portion 



EGYPTIAN] 



ARCHITECTURE 



37 1 



of trunk necessary to support the walls of brick, and over the 
doorway a similar feature. In Chaldaea the same decorative 
features are found in the stage towers which constituted their 
temples, and broad projecting buttresses, indented panels and 
other features, originally constructive, form the decorations of 
the Assyrian palaces. There also, built in the same material, 
unburnt brick, the walls have a similar batter, though they were 
faced with burnt bricks. In later times in Greece and Asia 
Minor, where wood was plentiful, the stone architecture suggests 
its timber origin, and though unburnt brick was still employed for 
the mass of the walls, the remains in Crete and the representa- 
tions in painting, &c, show that it was encased in timber 
framing, so that the raking walls were no longer a necessary 
element in their structure. The clearest proofs of original 
timber construction are shown in the rock-cut tombs of Lycia, 
where the ground sill, vertical posts, cross beams, purlins and 
roof joists are all direct imitations of structures originally 
erected in wood. 

The numerous relics of structures left by primeval man have 
generally little or no architectural value; and the only interesting 
problem regarding them — the determination of their date and 
purpose and of the degree of civilization which they manifest — 
falls within the province of archaeology (see Archaeology; 
Barrow; Lake-Dwellings; Stone Monuments). 

Technical terms in architecture will be found separately 
explained under their own headings in this work, and in this 
article a general acquaintance with them is assumed. A number 
of architectural subjects are also considered in detail in separate 
articles; see, for instance, Capital; Column; Design; Order; 
and such headings as Abbey; Aqueduct; Arch; Basilica; 
Baths; Bridges; Catacomb; Crypt; Dome; Mosque; Palace; 
Pyramid ; Temple ; Theatre ; &c. , &c. Also such general articles 
on national art as China: Art; Egypt: Art and Archaeology; 
Greek Art; Roman Art; &c, and the sections on archi- 
tecture and buildings under the headings of countries and towns. 
In the remainder of this article the general history of the evolu- 
tion of the art of architecture will be considered in various 
sections, associated with the nations and periods from which 
the leading historic styles are chronologically derived, in so far 
as the dominant influences on the art, and not the purely local 
characteristics of countries outside the main current of its 
history, are concerned; but the opportunity is taken to treat 
with some attempt at comprehensiveness the leading features 
of the architectural history of those countries and peoples which 
are intimately connected with the development of modern 
architecture. 

These consecutive sections are as follows: — 
Egyptian 
Assyrian 
Persian 
Greek 
Parthian 
Sassanian 
Etruscan 
Roman 
Byzantine 
Early Christian 

Early Christian Work in Central Syria 
Coptic Church in Egypt 
Romanesque and Gothic in — 
Italy 
France 
Spain 
England 
Germany 

Belgium and Holland 
Renaissance : Introduction 
Italy 
France 
Spain 
England 
Germany 

Belgium and Holland 
Mahommedan 
Finally, a section on what can only be collectively termed Modern 
architecture deals with the main lines of the later developments 
down to the present day in the architectural history of different 
countries. (R. P. S.) 



Egyptian Architecture 



Although structures discovered in Chaldaea, at Tello and Nippur, 
seeming to date back to the fifth millennium B.C., suggest that the 
earlier settlements of mankind were in the valley of the Tigris and 
Euphrates, north of the Persian Gulf, it is to Egypt that we must 
turn for the most ancient records of monumental architecture 
(see also Egypt: Art and Archaeology). The proximity of the 
ranges of hills (the Arabian and Libyan chains) to the Nile, and the 
facilities which that river afforded for the transport of the material 
quarried in them, enabled the Egyptians at a very early period to 
reproduce in stone those structures in unburnt brick to which we 
have already referred. 

Although the great founder of the first Egyptian monarchy is 
reputed to be Menes, the Thinite who traditionally founded the 
capital at Memphis, he was preceded, according to Flinders Petrie, 
by an earlier invading race coming from the south, who established 
a monarchy at This near Abydos, having entered the country by the 
Kosseir road from the Red Sea; and this may account for the early 
tradition that it was the Ethiopians who founded the earliest dynastic 
race, " Ethiopians " being a wide term which may embrace several 
races. 

Egyptian architecture is usually described under the principal 
periods in which it was developed. They are as follows 1 : — (A) the 
Memphite kingdom, whose capital was at Memphis, south-west of 
Cairo, the Royal Domain extending south some 30 to 40 m. ; (B) 
the first Theban kingdom with Thebes as the capital ; this covers 
three dynasties. Then follows an interregnum of five dynasties, 
when the invasion of the Hyksos took place ; this was architecturally 
unproductive. On the expulsion of the Hyksos there followed (C) 
the second Theban kingdom, consisting of three dynasties, under 
whose reign the finest temples were erected throughout the country. 
After 1 102 followed six dynasties (1102-525 B.C.), with capitals at 
Sais, Tanis and Bubastis, when the decadence of art and power took 
place. Then followed the Persian invasion, 525-331 B.C., which was 
destructive instead of being reproductive. On the defeat of the 
Persians by Alexander the Great, and after his death in 323 B.C., 
was founded (D) the Ptolemaic kingdom, with Alexandria as the 
capital. A great revival of art then took place, which to a certain 
extent was carried on under the Roman occupation from 27 B.C., 
and lasted about 300 years. 

With the exception of a small temple, found by Petrie in front of 
the' temple of Medum, and the so-called " Temple of the Sphinx," 
the only monuments remaining of the Memphite kingdom are the 
Pyramids, which were built by the kings as their tombs, and the 
mastabas, in which the members of the royal family and of the priests 
and chiefs were buried. The mastaba (Arabic for " bench ") was a 
tomb, oblong in plan, with battering side and a flat roof, containing 
various chambers, of which the, principal were (1) the Chapel for 
offerings, (2) the Serdab, in which the Ka or double of the deceased 
was deposited, and (3) the well, always excavated -in the rock, in 
which the mummy was placed. 

The three best-known pyramids are those situated about 7 m. 
south-west of Cairo, which were built by the second, third and 
fourth kings of the fourth dynasty, — Khufu (c. 3969-3908 B.C.), 
Khafra (c. 3908-3845 B.C.), and Menkaura (c. 3845-3784 B.C.), who 
are better known as Cheops, Cephren and Mycerinus. The first of 
these is the largest and most remarkable in its construction and 
setting out. The pyramid of Cephren was slightly smaller, and that 
of Mycerinus still more so, compensated for by a casing in granite. 
The dimensions and other details are given in the article Pyramids. 
From the purely architectural point of view they are the least im- 
pressive of masses, and their immense size is not realized until on a 
close approach. 

The temple of the Sphinx, attributed to Cephren, is T-shaped 
in plan, with two rows of square piers down the vertical and one 
row down the cross portion. These carried a flat roof of stone. 
The temple is remarkable for the splendid finish given to the granite 
piers, and to the alabaster slabs which cased the rock in which it had 
■been partially excavated (but see Egypt: History, I.). 

The Serapeum at Sakkara, in which the sacred bulls were embalmed 
and buried, the tomb of Ti (a fifth dynasty courtier), and the tombs 
of the kings and queens of Thebes, have no special architectural 
features which call for description here. 

We pass on to the first Theban kingdom, the eighth king of which, 
Nebhepre Menthotp III., built the temple lately discovered on the 
south side of the temple at Deir-el-Bahri, of which it is the prototype. 
It was a sepulchral temple, and being built on rising ground was 
approached by flights of steps. In the centre was a solid mass of 
masonry which, it is thought by some authorities, was crowned by a 
pyramid. This was surrounded by a double portico with square 
piers in the outer range, and octagonal piers in the inner range, 
there being a wall between the two ranges. 

The earliest tombs in which the column (q.v.) appears, as an archi- 
tectural feature, are those at Beni Hasan, attributed to the period 
of Senwosri (formerly read Usertesen) I., the second king of the 
twelfth dynasty. These are carved in'the solid rock. There are two 

1 For the various chronological systems proposed see Egypt: 
Chronology. 



372 



ARCHITECTURE 



[EGYPTIAN 



types, the Polygonal column, sometimes in error calied the Proto- 
doric, which was cut in t'le rock in imitation of a wooden column, 
and a second variety known as the Lotus column, which is employed 
inside, supporting the rock-cut roof, but having such slender pro- 
portions as to suggest that it was copied from the posts of a porch, 
round which the Lotus plant had been tied. 

The culminating period of the Egyptian style begins with the 
kings of the eighteenth dynasty, their principal capital being Thebes, 
described by Herodotus as the " City with the Hundred Gates "; 
and although the execution of the masonry is inferior to that of the 
older dynasties, the grandeur of the conception of their temples, 
and the wealth displayed in their realization entitle Thebes to the 
most important position in the history of the Egyptian style, especi- 
ally as the temples there grouped on both sides of the river exceed 
in number and dimensions the whole of the other temples throughout 
Egypt. This to a certain extent may possibly be due to the distance 
of Thebes from the Mediterranean, which has contributed to their 
preservation from invaders. We have already referred to the probable 
origin of the peculiar batter or raking side given to the walls of the 
pylons and temples, with the Torus moulding surrounding the same 
and crowned with the cavetto cornice. What, however, is more 
remarkable is the fact that, once accepted as an important and 
characteristic feature, it should never have been departed from, 
and that down to and during the Roman occupation the same batter 
is found in all the temples, though constructively there was no 
necessity for it. The strict adherence to tradition may possibly 
account for this, but it has resulted in a magnificent repose possessed 
by these structures, which seem built to last till eternity/' 

An avenue with sphinxes on both sides form's the approach to 
the temple. These avenues were sometimes of considerable length, 
as in the case of that reaching from Karnak to Luxor, which is I J m. 

long. The leading features of the 
temple (see fig. i) were: — (A) The 
pylon, consisting of two pyramidal 
masses of masonry crowned with a 
cavetto cornice, united in the centre 
by an immense doorway, in front of 
which on either side were seated 
figures of the king and obelisks. 

(B) A great open court surrounded 
by peristyles on two or three sides. 

(C) A great hall with a range of 
columns down the centre on either 
side, forming what in European 
architecture would be known as 
nave and aisles, with additional 
aisles on each side; these had 
columns of less height than those 
first mentioned, so as to allow of 
a clerestory, lighting the central 
avenue. (D) Smaller halls with 
their flat roofs carried by columns. 
And finally (E) the sanctuary, with 

Eassage round giving access to the 
alls occupied by the priest. 
Broadly speaking, the temples 
bear considerable resemblance to 
one another (see Temple), except 
in dimensions. There is one im- 
portant distinction, however, to be 
drawn between the Theban temples 
and those built under the Ptolemaic 
rule. In these latter the halls are 
not enclosed between pylons, but 
left open on the side of the entrance 
court with screens in between the 
columns, the hall being lighted from 
above the screens. The temples of 
Edfu, Esna and Dendera are thus 
arranged. 

The great temple of Karnak (fig. 2) differs from the type just 
described, in that it was the work of many successive monarchs. 
Thus the sanctuary, built in granite, and the surrounding chambers, 
were erected by Senwosri (Usertesen) I. of the twelfth dynasty. In 
front of this, on the west side, pylons were added by Tethmosis 
(Thothmes, Tahutmes) I. (1541-1516), enclosing a hall, in the walls 
of which were Osirid figures. In front of this a third pylon was 
added, which Seti (Sethos) I. utilized as one of the enclosures of the 
great hall of columns (fig. 3), measuring 170 ft. deep by 329 ft. wide, 
having added a fourth pylon on the other side to enclose it. Again 
in front of this was the great open court with porticoes on two sides, 
and a great pylon, forming the entrance. In the rear of all these 
buildings, and some distance beyond the sanctuary, Tethmosis III. 
(IS03-I449) built a great colonnaded hall with other halls round, 
considered to have been a palace. All these structures form a part 
only of the great temple, on the right and left of which (i.e. to the 
north-east and south-west) were other temples preceded by pylons 
and connected one with the other by avenues df sphinxes. Though 
of small size comparatively, one of the best preserved is the temple 
of Chons, built by Rameses III. It was from this temple that an 




1=1 



CD 



□ Fig. 1. -Plan of the □ 
; — 1 Templeof Chons. q 

A, Pylon. 

B, Great court. 

C, Hall of columns. 

D, Priest's hall. 

E, Sanctuary. 



avenue of sphinxes led to the temple of Luxor, which was begun by 
Amenophis III. (1414-1379 B.C.), and completed by Rameses II. 
(1300-1234). 

On the opposite or west bank of the Nile are the temple of Medinet 
Abu, the Ramesseum, the temples of Kurna and of Deir-el-Bahri ; 
the last being a sepulchral temple, which, built on rising ground, 
had flights of steps leading to the higher level (fig. 4), and porticoes 
with square piers at the foot of each terrace. In the rear on the right- 
hand side was found an altar, the only example of its kind known in 



A. first Propylon. 

B. Great Court with 
Colonnades in centr*. 

C. Second Propylon. 

D. Hall of Columns. 

E. Third Propylon. 

F. Fourth' Propylon. 

G. Hall with Osirid figuns, 
H. Granite Sanctuary and 

adjoining chambers, 
Z. Open Area 
K. Columnar Edifice of 

Tethmosis III 

(XVlIIth. Dynasty). 
L. Temple of Rameses III, 

(XXth. Dynasty). 

M.Temple of Sethos II, 
(XlXth. Dynasty). 



a. Sculptures of Sethos I. 
(XIXIH. Dynasty). 

b. Sculptures of Sheshonk 
(XXllnd. Dynasty). 

c Sculptures of Rameses It, 
(XlXth. Dynasty 

d. Small Obelisks, 

e. Large Obelisks, 

f. Pillars of Senwosrt I. 
f XI Ilk. Dynasty . 

g. Hall of Ancestors, 




PLAN OF KARNAK 



from Murray's Handbook 
(or Egypt, by permission 
of Mr. Edward Stanford. 



FlG. 2. 

Egypt. The halls behind this and the portico of the right flank had 
polygonal columns. 

In the palace of Tell el-Amarna, built shortly before 1350 B.C. by 
the heretic king Akhenaton (whose name was originally Amenophis 
IV.), and discovered by Petrie, there were no special architectural 
developments, but the painted decoration of the walls and pavements 
assumed a literal interpretation of natural forms of plants and 
foliage and of birds and animals, recalling to some extent that 
found at Cnossus in Crete. 

Ascending the river from Cairo, the first temples of which im- 
portant remains exist are the two at Abydos. One of these has an 
exceptional plan, with seven sanctuaries in the rear. It was built 
by Seti I., and consists of an outer portico with square piers, a hall 



EGYPTIAN] 



ARCHITECTURE 



373 



with two rows of columns down to the centre, and a second hall with 
three rows of columns. These halls are placed longitudinally to give 
access to the seven sanctuaries. The second temple is of the ordinary 
type, with pylon, court with portico on all four sides, two halls of 
columns, and three sanctuaries in the rear. The next temple is that 
of Dendera, commenced under the second Ptolemy but not completed 
until the reign of Nero. It has been completely excavated, and 




Fig. 3.- 



-Section through Hall of Columns, Karnak. 
o, Clerestory window. 



retains the whole of its external walls. Above Thebes is the temple 
of Esna, of which the hall of columns only has been cleared out. 
The capitals of the front belong to the lotus-bud type, and those of 
the interior are carved with many varieties of river plant. The 
temple of Edfu is the best preserved in Egypt. Its plan (fig. 5) 
would seem to have been determined from the first, and it is singular 
to note that it presents the traditional type of plan, which in the 
Theban examples was evolved from additions made by successive 
monarchs. In dimensions it is but little inferior to these. Its pylon 
(fig. 6) is 250 ft. wide and 150 ft. high; the first court has porticoes 
on three sides. The great hall of columns, all of which here are of 
the same height, is lighted from above (fig. 7), the screen facing the 
court. Then follow the second hall of columns, two vestibules, 
and the sanctuary, surrounded by a passage giving access to the 
priest's rooms round. The temple of Kom Ombo, which comes next, 
was dedicated to two deities, and had therefore two sanctuaries. 

The temples of Philae owe much of their beauty and picturesque- 
ness to the island on which they are situated; their plans, and that 
of the long porticoes in front of the pylons of the great temple, 
being fitted to the irregularity of the site. In the first court is a 
well-preserved example of the Mammeisi temple (see Temple), the 
sanctuary and other rooms in which are entirely enclosed in a 
peristyle. It was built by Ptolemy Euergetes (247-222 B.C.). A 
second monarch of the same name (about 125 B.C.) built the pavilion 
on the north side of the island, known as " Pharaoh's bed," the roof 




Fig. 5 




CHmMajlHtrt Detr-d-Boliari.lv permission °*" J CHuu-icha. Leipzig 



Fig. 4. — Temple of Deir-el-Bahri, conjectural restoration by Prof. E. Brune. 

of which was covered with stone slabs, resting on timber beams. 
In consequence of the building of the Assuan dam all these temples 
are submerged for the greater part of the year. The principal temples 
between Philae and the second cataract are: — Dabod, of which 
little remains; Kartassi; Kalabsha, still preserving its pylon and 
great hall of columns; the Bet el-Wali, in which are two ancient 
polygonal columns ; Gerf Husen, partially cut in the rock ; Dakka; 



Wadi es-Sebu'a ; and lastly Abu Simbel. Owing to the proximity 

of the ranges of hills to the Nile, there was no room for the ordinary 

type of temple at Abu Simbel, so that those founded here by Rameses 

the Great (c. 1300-1234 B.C.) were 

excavated in the rock. In the 

place of the pylon the side of the 

cliff was worked off, leaving in 

relief four immense seated figures, 

66 ft. high. The first hall had 

three aisles, divided by four piers 

on each side, in front of which 

Osirid figures (18 ft. high) were 

carved ; beyond was a second hall, 

vestibule and sanctuary. The 

long rectangular chambers on 

each side are provided with 

benches cut in the rock. The 

depth of the temple is 90 ft. 

There is a second temple of 

smaller size which faces the Nile. 
We have already referred to 

the lotus columns at Beni Hasan; 

these, when employed construc- 

tionally to carry stone roofs, 

assumed a far more solid appear- 
ance, and the stems of the lotus 

plant carved in the earlier ex- 
amples were omitted in the later, 

in order to give more surface for 

intaglio carving. The capital and 

its neck still retain the lotus buds 

and the bands which tied them 

round the column. In the central 

avenues of the great halls the 

columns had bell capitals, the 

decoration of which was based on 

the flower of the papyrus. There 

are a few examples of the palm 

capital, often carved in granite, 

which date from an early period. 

Commencing with the Ptolemaic 

revival the capitals assume a 

much greater variety of form, 

their decoration being based on 

river plants; but here again the 

lotus plant, which seems still to 

be the favourite type, pre- 
dominates, the buds in various 

degrees of their growth alternat- 
ing one with the other. All these varieties of form are described 

in the article Capital, but two or three may be mentioned here, 

as they depart from the usual type. The Hathor-headed capital, 
with faces on all four sides, and sur- 
mounted with a miniature shrine, is 
found at Dendera, Philae and other 
temples of the Ptolemaic or Roman 
periods; one of the earliest examples, 
but without the shrine, dates back to 
Tethmosis III. (1503-1449 B.C.). As a 
distinct type of pier decoration, the 
Osirid figures at Medinet Abu, at 
Karnak, Gerf Husen, Abu Simbel and 
other temples, constitute important 
features : the figure is carved in front of 
the pier and does not serve any con- 
structive function. 

With the exception of the great 
building in the rear of the temple at 
Karnak, built by Tethmosis 111., and 
the pavilion of Medinet Abu on the 
west bank of the Nile at Thebes, no 
palatial residences of any importance 
have yet been found, from which it 
might be inferred that the king, being 
the head of the Egyptian religion, 
occupied with his family the sacred 
precincts of the temple; but large as 
these temple enclosures are, there would 
have been no room for the immense 
army of attendants and servants re- 
quired in an Oriental court. Moreover, 
the darkness of the halls and the rigid 

enclosures would have made a residence in them anything but 

cheerful. There are two instances where, in consequence of the 
subsequent desertion of the site, remains have been found of ancient 

towns. At Tell el-Amarna, built by the heretic king, Akhenaton, 
portions of the houses remain, and at Kahun, in the Fayum, Petrie 
discovered the walls of a town which, erected for the overseers and 

workmen employed in the construction of the pyramid of Mahun, 



Plan of the Temple of 
Edfu. 
AA, Pylon. 

B, Entrance door. 

C, Great Court. 

D, Hall of Columns. 

E, Second Hall. 

F, Hall of the Altar. 

G, Hall of the Centre. 
H, Sanctuary. 

KK, Storerooms. 



374 



ARCHITECTURE 



[ASSYRIAN 



built by Senwosri (Usertesen) II. (2684-2666 B.C.), was abandoned 
when the pyramid was completed. The houses were all built in 
unburnt brick, and in those cases where the rooms exceeded 8 or 9 ft. 
in width, columns in stone or wood were employed to assist in carry- 
ing the roof, which was constructed of beams carrying smaller 
timbers covered over with a flat roof of mud. The plans of the houses 





Fig 6. — Exterior of the Pylon of the Temple of Edfu. 

were not unlike those found in Pompeii, with open courts and 
porticoes and no external windows. The streets ran at right angles 
to one another, and the houses varied in size from the workman's 
hut, of one room, to the overseer's house with several rooms and 
courts; the principal residence, in the centre, occupied by the 
governor of the town, being of still larger dimensions. 

Further knowledge of the Egyptian dwellings is chiefly derived 
from the " soul-houses " recently discovered by Petrie, and from the 
paintings in the tombs, which suggest that 
they corresponded to that class of residence 
which in Rome was known as a villa, viz. a 
series of detached buildings built in immense 
enclosures, with porticoes round, groves of 
trees, artificial lakes, &c. The walls, gates 
and buildings were all built probably in un- 
burnt brick, and the whole site, if on the 
borders of the river, raised on great mounds. 
In this respect they accord with the houses 
of the fellah at the present day, which are 
raised on the accumulation of centuries, for 
when, owing to the rise of the Nile, the 
houses succumb to the moisture creeping up, 
another house is built on the top. The 
representations in paintings show that the 
houses were chiefly built in unburnt brick, and 
they sometimes were of two or three storeys 

p IG _ Facade ' n ne 'g nt > with windows in the upper floors, 

of the Great Hall anc ' a ^ at ro °^ w ' tn a kind of dormer known 
of Columns of the as tne M umul > turned towards the north-west 
Ptolemaic temple at to ventilate the house. The paintings fre- 
jjjfy quentlv represent the store-rooms, or granaries; 

and the preservation of those built by 
Rameses the Great, in the rear of the Ramesseum at Thebes, as 
granaries to hold corn, enables us to follow their construction. 
These granaries consist of a series of long cellars, about 12 to 14 ft. 
wide, placed side by side, and roofed over ' with elliptical barrel 
vaults. The_ reason for the elliptical form and the method of their 
construction is given in the article Vault (q.v.). 

The pavilion of Medinet Abu was built in stone, and consequently 
has been preserved more or less complete to our day. It consisted of 
three storeys with a flat roof and battlement round, said to be in 
imitation of those on a Syrian fortress, as they are quite unlike 
anything else in Egypt. The floors were in wood, but there are traces 
of a stone staircase. The windows, of large size, were filled with 
thin stone slabs pierced with vertical slits, like those of the hall of 
columns at Karnak. (R. P. S.) 

Assyrian Apxhitecture 

About 3800 B.C. the earlier inhabitants of Chaldaea or Babylonia 
were invaded and absorbed by a Semitic race, whose first monarch 
was Sargon of Agade (Akkad). 1800 years later, emigrations took 
place northward, and founded Nineveh on the banks of the Tigris, 
about 250 m. north of Babylon. 1200 years later, the Assyrians 
began building the magnificent series of palaces from which were 
brought the winged man-headed bulls and the sculptured slabs now 
in the British Museum. The leading characteristics of the style, and 
the nature of the structures, temples and palaces, evolved by the 
Chaldaeans (or first Babylonian empire), the Assyrians, and the new 
Babylonian empire, are similar; they are best known by those 



which represent a culmination of the style in north Mesopotamia, 
and are therefore described here. 

By a singular coincidence the remains of the oldest building 
found at Nippur (Niffar), in lower Mesopotamia, bear a close resem- 
blance to the oldest pyramid in Egypt, Medum, before it received 
its final casing. The latter, however, is known to have been a tomb, 
whereas the structure at Nippur was a temple, which took the form 
of a ziggurat or stage tower. It consisted of several storeys built one 
over the other, the upper storey in each case being set back behind 
the lower, in order to leave a terrace all round. In some cases the 
terrace was wider in front, to give space for staircases ascending 
from storey to storey. In consequence of the extreme flatness of 
the country and its liability to sudden inundations, it became 
necessary, when erecting buildings of any kind, to raise them on 
mounds of earth. The more important the structure, the higher was 
it deemed necessary to raise it, so as to make it the most conspicuous 
feature in the landscape. The result is that from Abu Shahrain, 
the most southern town, to Akarkuf (Aqarquf), 220 m. north, 
there are a series of immense mounds, sometimes nearly a mile in 
diameter, and rising to a height of 200 ft., crowned with the remains 
of towns, which, notwithstanding the thirty centuries more or less 
during which they have been exposed to the torrential rains and the 
destructive agencies of man, form still the most prominent features 
in the country. The structures which were raised on the mound, 
i.e. the temples and palaces with their enclosure walls, were all 
built with bricks made of the alluvial clay of the country, shaped in 
wooden moulds and dried in the heat of the sun, a heat so intense 
that they acquired sometimes the hardness of the inferior qualities 
of stone. The walls of the temples, palaces and enclosures had the 
same batter as that already referred to in the preceding section on 
Egypt. In the latter country they were reproduced in stone, of 
which there were many quarries on either side of the Nile; in 
Chaldaea they were obliged to content themselves with the preserva- 
tion of their ziggurats by outer casings of burnt brick and with 
pavements of tiles for their terraces. In order to vary the monotony 
of their temple walls, and perhaps to give them greater strength, 
they built vertical bands or buttresses at intervals, or they sank 
panels in the walls to two depths, a natural decoration to which brick 
work lends itself; and these two methods, which were employed in 
early times, were followed by the Assyrians in the palaces of Nimrud, 
Nineveh and Khorsabad. 

The earlier settlements were those founded between the mouths 
of the Tigris and the Euphrates, on what was then the shore of the 
Persian Gulf, now some 140 m. farther south. The principal towns 
where the remains of ziggurats have been found, all on the borders 
of the Euphrates, beginning with the most southern, are: — Abu 
Shahrain (Eridu) ; Mugheir (Ur of the Chaldees) ; Senkera (? Ellasar 
or Larsa) ; Warka (Erech) ; Tello (Eninnu) ; Nippur; Birs 
Nimrud (Borsippa) ; Babil (Babylon) ; El Ohemir (Kish) ; Abu 
Habba (Sippara) ; and Akarkuf (Durkurigalsu). 

Although the ziggurats at Warka, Nippur and Tello are probably 
of older foundation, the great temple of Borsippa at Birs Nimrud 
is in better preservation, having been restored or rebuilt by 
Nebuchadrezzar, and may be taken as a typical example. The 
ground storey was 272 ft. square, and, according to Fergusson, 45 ft. 
high. The upper storeys or stages receded back, one behind the 
other, so as to leave a terrace all round. Although it is not possible 
to trace more than four storeys, it is known from the description on a 
cylinder found on the site that there were seven storeys, dedicated 
to the planets, each coloured with the special tint prescribed. The 
total height was about 160 ft., and on the top was a shrine dedicated 
to the god Nebo. An invaluable record of the researches which 
have been made during the last three centuries or more is given in 
H. V. Hilprecht's Explorations in Bible Lands during the igth Century. 
Two or three of them might be mentioned here. At Warka Mr 
Kenneth Loftus uncovered a wall, strengthened by buttresses 15 ft. 
wide and projecting 18 in., between which were panels filled with a 
series of semicircular shafts side by side, both buttresses and shafts 
being decorated with geometrical patterns consisting of small 
earthenware cones embedded in the wall, the ends of which were 
enamelled in various colours. The design of these patterns is so 
unlike anything found in Assyrian work, but bears so close a resem- 
blance to the geometrical designs carved on the columns at Diarbekr 
ascribed to the Parthians, that this wall may have been built at a 
much later period ; and this becomes the more probable in view 
of the discoveries made subsequently at Tello and Nippur, where 
Parthian palaces have been found, crowning the summits of the 
ancient Chaldaean mounds. In both these towns the researches 
made in later years have been carried out far more methodically 
than previously, and, following the example of Schliemann, excava- 
tions have been made to great depths, careful notes being taken of 
the strata shown by the platforms at different levels. At Tello, de 
Sarzac discovered the magnificent collection of statues of diorite 
now in the Louvre, one of them (unfortunately headless) of Gudea, 
priest-king and architect of Lagash, seated and carrying on his lap 
a tablet, on which is engraved the plan of a fortified enclosure, 
whilst a divided scale and a stylos are carved in relief near the upper 
and right-hand side. A silver inlaid vase of Entemena, also priest- 
king of Lagash (about 3950 B.C.), and other treasures, were found on 
the same site. 



ASSYRIAN] 



ARCHITECTURE 



375 



At Nippur (the ancient Calneh) the research undertaken by the 
university of Pennsylvania resulted in the discovery, under a 
ziggurat dated from 4000-4500 B.C., of a barrel-vaulted tunnel, in 
the floor of which were found terra-cotta drain pipes with flanged 
mouths. At a later date (3750 B.C.) Naram-Sin, the son of Sargon, 
had built over the older ziggurat a loftier and larger temple, above 
which was a third built by Ur Gur (2500 B.C.), which still retained 
its burnt brick casing, 5 ft. thick. Crowning all these was the 
Parthian palace mentioned in the section on Parthian architecture 
below. The result of these researches has not only carried back the 
date of the earlier settlements to a prehistoric period quite unknown, 
but has suggested that if similar researches are carried out in other 
well-known mounds, among which the great city of Babylon should 
be counted as the most important, further revelations may still 
be made. 

But we have now to pass to the principal cities of the Assyrian 
monarchy on the river Tigris. At Nineveh, the capital, which is 
about 250 m. north of Babylon, the remains of three palaces have 
been found, those of Sennacherib (705-681 B.C.), Esarhaddon (681- 
668 B.C.), and Assurbanipal (668-626 B.C.). At Nimrud (the ancient 








.. .mu^***** 



From TV. e History 
& Hall, Lid. 

Fig. 



of Art in Chaidaea and Assyria, by permission of Chapman 



-Plan of the Palace at Khorsabad. 

A, Principal courtyard. E, Official residences. 

B, The harem. F, The king's residence. 

C, The offices. G, The ziggurat or tgmple. 
DD, The halls of state. 

Calah, founded by Assur), 20 m. south of Nineveh, are also three 
palaces, one (the earliest known) built by Assurnazirpal (885-860 
B.C.), the others by Shalmaneser II. (860-825 B.C.) and Esarhaddon. 
At Balawat, 10 m. east of Nineveh, was a second palace of Shal- 
maneser II., and at Khorsabad, 10 m. north-east of Nineveh, the 
palace (fig. 8) built by Sargon 722-705 B.C.), which was situated on 
the banks of the Khanser, a tributary of the Tigris. As this palace 
is one of the most extensive of those hitherto explored, its descrip- 
tion will best give the general idea of the plan and conception of an 
Assyrian palace. 

The palace was built on an immense platform, made of sun-dried 
bricks, enclosed in masonry, and covering an area of nearly one 
million square feet, raised 48 ft. above the town level. The principal 
front of the palace measured 900 ft., there being a terrace in front. 
The approach was probably by a double inclined ramp which chariots 
and hoises could mount. A central and two side portals (fig. 9), 
flanked with winged human-headed bulls (now in the British 
Museum), led to the principal courtyard (A), measuring 300 ft. by 
240 ft. The block (B) on the left of the court, containing smaller 
courts and rooms, constituted the harem; that on the right the 
offices (C) ; those in the rear the halls of state (DDD), the residences 
of the officers of the court (E), the king's private apartments (F) 
being on the left, facing the ziggurat or temple (G). In the extreme 
rear were other state rooms with terraces probably laid out as 
gardens and commanding a view of the river and country beyond. 



As there must have been nearly 700 rooms in the palace, the 
destination of the greater number of which it would be difficult to 
determine, it will be sufficient to refer only to those state rooms 
in which the principal sculptured slabs were found, and which 
decorated the lower 9 ft. of the walls. The two chief factors to be 
noted are (1) the great length of the halls compared with their 
width, the chief hall being 150 ft. long and 30 ft. wide, and (2) the 
immense thickness of the walls, which measured 28 ft. The only 



Fig. 9. — Entrance gateway, Palace of Khorsabad. 

reason for walls of this thickness would be to resist the thrust of a 
vault, and as La Place, the French explorer, found many blocks of 
earth of great size, the soffits of which were covered with stucco and 
had apparently fallen from a height, he was led to the conclusion, 
now generally accepted, that these halls were vaulted. These dis- 
coveries, and the fact that in none of the palaces excavated has a 
single foundation of the base of any column been found, quite dispose 
of Fergusson's restoration, which was based on the palaces of 
Persepolis. Moreover, the two climates are entirely different. In 
the mountainous country of Persia the breezes might be welcomed, 
but in Mesopotamia the heat is so intense that every precaution 




Fig. 10.- 



-Bas-relief of group of buildings at Kuyunjik. 
(After Layard.) 



has to be taken to protect the inmates of the house or palace. Thick 
walls and vaults were a necessity in Nineveh, and even the windows 
or openings must have been of small dimensions. No windows have 
been found, nor are any shown on the bas-reliefs, except on the 
upper parts of towers. It is possible therefore that the light was 
admitted through terra-cotta pipes or cylinders, of which many were 
found on the site, and this is the modern system of lighting the dome 
in the East. Although no remains have ever been found of domes 
in any of the Assyrian palaces, the representation of many domical 



37^ 



ARCHITECTURE 



[PERSIAN 



forms is given in a bas-relief found at Kuyunjik (fig. 10), suggesting 
that the dome was often employed to roof over their halls. 

Reference has already been made to the bas-reliefs which decorated 
the lower portion of the great halls; the less important rooms had 
their walls covered with stucco and painted. Externally the archi- 
tectural decoration was of the simplest kind; the lower portion of 
the walls was faced with stone; and the monumental portals, in 
addition to the winged bulls which flanked them, had deep archivolts 
in coloured enamels on glazed brick, with figures and rosettes in 
bright colours. A similar decoration would seem to have been 
applied to the crenellated battlements, which crowned all the 
exterior walls, as also those of the courts. The buttresses inside the 
courts, and the towers which flanked the chief entrance, were 
decorated with vertical semicircular mouldings of brick. This 
system of decoration is also found in the ziggurats or observatories 
behind the harem, where the three lower storeys still exist. A 
winding ramp was carried round this tower, the storeys of which 
were set back one behind the other, the burnt brick paving of the 



human-headed bulls which flank the portals of the propylaea. From 
Media it would seem to have derived the great halls of columns and 
the porticoes of the palaces, so clearly described by Polybius (x. 24) 
as existing at Ecbatana; the principal difference being that the 
columns of the stoas and peristyle, which there consisted of cedar 
and cypress covered with silver plates, were in the Persian palaces 
built of stone. The ephemeral nature of the one material, and the 
intrinsic value of the other, are sufficient to account for their entire 
disappearance; but as Ecbatana was occupied by Darius and 
Xerxes as one of their principal cities, the stone column, bases and 
capitals, which still exist there, may be regarded as part of the 
restoration and rebuilding of the palace ; and as they are similar to 
those found at Persepolis and Susa, it is fair to assume that the source 
of the first inspiration of Persian architecture came from the Medians, 
especially as Cyrus, the first king, was brought up at the court of 
Astyages, the last Median monarch. 

The earliest Persian palace, of which but scanty remains have 
been found, was built at Pasargadae by Cyrus. There is sufficient, 




ramp and the crenellated battlements forming a parapet, portions 
of which are still in situ. 

Although not unknown in either Chaldaea or Assyria, the stone 
column, according to Perrot and Cbipiez, found no place in those 
structures of crude brick of which the real architecture of Mesopo- 
tamia consisted. Only one example in stone, in which the shaft and 
capital together are 3 ft. 4 in. in height, has been found. Two bases 
of similar design to the capital are supposed to have supported 
wooden columns carrying an awning. There are representations in 
the bas-reliefs of kiosks in a garden, the columns in which, with 
volute capitals, are supposed to have been of wood sheathed in 
metal, and on the bronze bands of the Balawat gates in the British 
Museum are representations of the interior of a house with wood 
columns and bracket capitals, and several awnings carried by posts. 
Small windows are shown in some of the bas-reliefs, with 
balustrades of small columns, which were doubtless copied from 
the ivory plaques found at Nimrud and now in the British 
Museum. (R. p. S.) 

Persian Architecture 

The origin of Persian architecture must be sought for in that of the 
two earlier dynasties, — the Assyrian and Median, to whose empire 
the Persian monarchy succeeded by conquest in 560 B.C. From the 
former, it borrowed the raised platform on which their palaces were 
built, the broad flights of steps leading up to them and the winged 



however, to show that it was of the simplest kind, and consisted of a 
central hall, the roof of which was carried by two rows of stone 
columns, 30 ft. high, and porticoes in antis on two if not on three 
sides. 

The great platform, also at Pasargadae, known as the Takht-i- 
Suleiman, or throne of Solomon, covered an area of about 40,000 
sq. ft., and is remarkable for the beauty of its masonry and the large 
stones of which it is built. These are all sunk round the edge, being 
the earliest example of what is known as " drafted masonry," which 
at Jerusalem and Hebron gives so magnificent an effect to the great 
walls of the temple enclosures. No remains have ever been traced 
on this platform of the palace which it was probably built to support. 

We pass on therefore to Persepolis, the most important of the 
Persian cities, if we may judge by the remains still existing there. 
Here, as at Pasargadae, builders availed themselves of a natural 
rocky platform, at the foot of a range of hills, which they raised in 
parts and enclosed with a stone wall. Here the masonry is not 
drafted, and the stones are not always laid in horizontal courses, 
but they are shaped and fitted to one another with the greatest 
accuracy, and are secured by metal clamps. The plan (fig. 11) 
shows the general configuration of the platform on which the palaces 
of Persepolis are built, which covered an area of about 1,600,000 
sq. ft. The principal approach to it was at the north-west end, up 
a magnificent flight of steps (A) with a double ramp, the steps being 
22 ft. wide, with a tread of 15 in. and a rise of 4, so that they could be 



PERSIAN] 



ARCHITECTURE 



377 



ascended by horses. The first building opposite this staircase was 
the entrance gateway or propylaea (B), a square hall, with four 
columns carrying the roof and with portals in the front and rear 
flanked by winged bulls. The earliest palace on the platform (D) 
is that which was built by Darius, 521 B.C. It was rectangular on 
plan, raised on a platform approached by two flights of steps, and 
consisted of an entrance portico of eight columns, in two rows of 
four placed in antis, between square chambers, in which were prob- 
ably staircases leading to the roof. This portico led to the great hall, 
square on plan, whose roof was carried by sixteen columns in four 
rows. This hall was lighted by two windows on each side of the 
central doorway, all of which, being in stone, still exist, the lintels 
and jambs of both doors and windows being monolithic. The walls 
between these features, having been built in unburnt brick, or in 
rubble masonry with clay mortar, have long since disappeared. 
There were other rooms on each side of the hall and an open court in 
the rear. The bases of the columns of the portico still remain in situ, 
as also one of the antae in solid masonry; and as these in their 
relative position and height are in exact accordance with those 




A.7? J.-.V 



Fig. 12. — The Tomb of Darius, cut in the cliff at Nakshi Rustam, 
near Persepolis. 

represented on the tomb of Darius (fig. 12) and other tombs carved 
in the rock near Persepolis (q.v.), there is no difficulty in forming a 
fairly accurate conjectural restoration of the same. In the repre- 
sentation of this palace, as shown on the tomb, and above the portico, 
has been sculptured the great throne of Darius, on which he sat, 
rendering adoration to the Sun god. 

All the other palaces on the site, built or added to by various 
monarchs and at different periods, preserve very much the same 
plan, consisting always of a great square hall, the roof of which was 
carried by columns, with one or more porticoes round, and smaller 
rooms and courts in the rear. In one of the palaces (G) the roof was 
carried by 100 columns in ten rows of ten each. The most important 
building, however, and one which from its extent, height and magnifi- 
cence, is one of the most stupendous works of antiquity, is the great 
palace of Xerxes (C), which, though it consists only of a great central 
hall and three porticoes, covered an area of over 100,000 sq. ft., 
greater than any European cathedral, those of Milan and St Peter's 
at Rome alone excepted. 

It was built on a platform raised 10 ft. above the terrace and 
approached by four flights of steps on the north side, the principal 
entrance. The columns of the porticoes and of the great hall were 
65 ft. high, including base and capital. In the east and west porticoes 
the capitals consist only of the double bull or griffin; the cross 
corbels on their backs, similar to those shown on the tomb of Darius, 
have disappeared, being probably in wood. In the north or entrance 



portico, and in the great hall, the capitals are of a much more 
elaborated nature, as under the double capital was a composition of 
Ionic capitals set on end, and below that the calix and pendant leaves 
of the lotus plant. It can only be supposed that Xerxes, thinking the 
columns of the east portico required more decoration, instructed his 
architects to add some to those of the entrance portico and hall, and 
that they copied some of the spoils brought from Branchidae and 
others from Egypt. 

Fig. 13 shows the plan of the palace according to the researches 
of Mr Weld Blundell, who found the traces of the walls surrounding 
the great hall and of the square chambers at the angles, and also 
proved that the lines of the drains as shown in Coste's and Texier's 
plans were incorrect. M. Dieulafoy also traced the existence of 
walls enclosing the Apadana at Susa from the paving of the hall and 
the portico which stopped on the lines of the wall. The plan of 




From R. P. Spiers's Architecture, East and West. 

Fig. 13. — Plan of the^Hall of Xerxes. 

the palace at Susa was similar to that of the palace of Xerxes, 
except that on the side facing the garden facing south the apadana 
or throne room was left open. M. Dieulafoy's discoveries at Susa 
of the frieze of archers, the frieze of the lions, and other decorations 
of the walls flanking the staircase, all executed in bright coloured 
enamels on concrete blocks, revealed the exceptional beauty of the 
decoration both externally and internally applied to the Persian 
palaces. 

The only other monumental works of Persian architecture are the 
tombs; to those cut in the solid rock, of which there are some 
examples, we have already referred. The most ancient tomb is that 
erected to Cyrus the Elder at Pasargadae, and consists of a small 
shrine or cella in masonry raised on a series of steps, inspired (accord- 
ing to Fergusson) by the ziggurat or terrace-temples of Assyria, 
but on a small scale. The tomb was surrounded on three sides by 
porticoes of columns. There are two other tombs, one at Persepolis 
and one at Pasargadae — small square towers with an entrance 
opening high up on one side, sunk panels in the stone, and a dentil 
cornice, copied from early Ionian buildings. (R. P. S.) 

Greek Architecture 

Prehistoric Period. — We have now to retrace our steps and go 
back to the prehistoric period of Greek architecture, to the origin 
and early development of that style which sowed the seed and deter- 
mined the future form and growth of all subsequent European art. 

The discoveries in Crete and Argolis have shown that Greek 
architecture owes much less than was at one time supposed to 
Egyptian and Chaldaean architecture; and although from very 
early times there may have been a commercial exchange between the 
several countries, the objects imported suggested only new and 
various schemes of decorative design, and exercised no influence on 
the development of architectural style. The remains of the palaceat 
Cnossus in Crete, together with the representations in fresco painting 
and other decorative objects, show that whilst the lower part of the 
walls under the level of the ground and up to a height of 5 ft. above 
were all built in well-worked masonry, the upper portions were con- 
structed in unburnt brick with timber framing, which not only gave 
strength and solidity to the walls, but carried the cross beams and 
timbers of intermediate floors and the roof, and further, that the walls 
were always vertical, which was not the case in Egypt or Chaldaea. 

The principal remains discovered by Dr Arthur J. Evans (see 
Crete) are described by him as belonging to the later Minoan 
age, from which it may be inferred they are the result of same 



378 



ARCHITECTURE 



[GREEK 



centuries of previous development. What, however, is most remark- 
able is the admirable planning of the whole palace, the bringing 
together, under one roof and in proper and regular intercommunica- 
tion, of the numerous services, which in a palace are somewhat 
complicated. The palace measured about 400 ft. square, and was 
built round an open court, nearly 200 ft. long by 90 ft. wide; as the 
same arrangement was found at Phaestus, excavated by the Italian 
archaeologists, it may be assumed to have been the Cretan plan. 
It was built on the crest of a hill, and in the western or highest portion 
was the court entrance from the agora to the megaron or throne- 
room, and the halls of the officers of the state. In the lower portion 
facing the east (the rooms in which were two storeys below the level 
of the court on account of the slope of the hill) was the private suite 
of apartments of the king and queen. All the services of the palace 
were at. the north end of the palace, where the entrance gateway 
to the central court was situated. This northern entrance, Dr 
Evans points out, " represents the main point of intercourse 
between the palace and the city on the one hand and the port on the 
other." This is the only part of the palace in which there is evidence 
of some kind of fortification, as the road of access is dominated by a 
tower or bastion. Other provisions also in the plan of the western 
entrance suggest that its passage was guarded to some extent. In 
this respect the palace of Tiryns, excavated by Dr Schliemann, 
presents an entirely different aspect; the whole stronghold bears a 
singular resemblance to a fortified castle of the middle ages; a 
high wall from 24 to 50 ft. thick surrounded the acropolis, and the 
inclined paths of approach and the double gateways gave that 
protection at. Tiryns which at Cnossus was assured, as Dr Evans 
remarks, by the bulwarks of the Minoan navy. The area on the spur 
of the hiH, on which the citadel of Tiryns was placed, was very much 
smaller, but if we accept the forecourt at Tiryns as equivalent to 
the great central court at Cnossus, there are great similarities in 
the plans of the two palaces. The propylaca, the altar court, the 
portico, and the megaron are found in both, and those details which 
are missing in the one are found in the other. The discoveries at 
Cnossus have enabled Dr Evans to reconstitute the timber columns, 
of which the bases only were found at Tiryns, and the spur walls of 
the portico of the megaron and the sills of the doorways at Tiryns 
give some clue to the restoration of similar features at Cnossus; 
and if in the latter palace we find the origin of the Doric column, at 
Tiryns is found that of the antae and of the door linings, further 
substantiated by the careful analysis made by Dr Dorpfeld of the 
Heraeum at Olympia. 

The reconstruction by Dr Evans of the timber columns at Cnossus, 
which tapered from the top downwards, the lower diameter being 
about six-sevenths of the upper, has little historical importance (see 
Order), so that we may now pass on to the next early monument 
of importance, the tomb of Agamemnon, the principal and the best 
preserved of the beehive tombs found at Mycenae and in other parts 
of Greece. This tomb consists of three parts, the dromos or open 
entrance passage, the tholos or circular portion domed over, and a 
smaller chamber excavated in the rock and entered from the larger 
one. The tomb was subterranean, the masonry being concealed 
beneath a large mound of earth. The domed part, 48 ft. 6 in. in 
diameter and 45 ft. high, is built in horizontal courses of stone, 
which project one over the other till they meet at the top. Subse- 
quently the projecting edges were dressed down, so that the section 
through the dome is nearly that of an equilateral triangle. Notwith- 
standing the great thickness of the lintel (3 ft.) over the entrance 
doorway, the Mycenaeans left a triangular void over, to take off the 
superincumbent weight, subsequently (it is supposed) filled with 
sculpture, as in the Lions' Gate at Mycenae. The doorway was 
flanked by semi-detached columns 20 ft. high, the shafts of which 
tapered downwards like those reconstituted at Cnossus; the shafts 
rested on a base of three steps, and carried a capital with echinus 
and abacus. These shafts carried a lintel which has now dis- 
appeared ; the wall above was set back, and was at one time faced 
with stone slabs carved with spiral and other patterns, of which there 
are fragments in various museums, the most important remains being 
those of the shafts, of which the greater part, which was brought 
over to England in the beginning of the 19th century by the 2nd 
marquess of Sligo, was presented by the 5th marquess to the British 
Museum in 1905. These shafts, as also the echinus moulding of the 
capitals, are richly carved with the chevron and spirals, probably 
copied from the brass sheathing of wood columns and doorways 
referred to by Homer. 

The Archaic Period. — The buildings just referred to belong to 
what is known as the prehistoric age in Greece ; the dispersion of the 
tribes by invaders from the north about 1 100 B.C. destroyed the 
Mycenaean civilization, and some centuries have to pass before we 
reach the results of the new development. Among the invaders the 
Dorians would seem to have been the chief leaders, who eventually 
became supreme. They brought with them from Olympus the 
worship of Apollo, so that henceforth the sanctuary of the god takes 
the place of the megaron of the king. From Greece the Dorians 
spread their colonies through the Greek islands and southern Italy. 
Later they passed on to Sicily and founded Syracuse, and subse- 
quently Selinus and Agrigentum (Acragas). The prosperity of all 
these colonies is shown in the splendid temples which they built in 
stone, the remains of many of which have lasted to our day. 



The earliest Greek temple of which remains have been discovered 1 
is that of the Heraeum at Olympia, ascribed to about 1000 B.C. 
Its plan (fig. 14) shows that the enclosure of the sanctuary and its 
porticoes in a peristyle had already been found necessary, if only to 
protect the walls of the cella, built in unburnt brick on a stone 
plinth; further, that the antae of the portico and the dressings of 
the entrance were in wood; and, following Pausanias' statement 
relative to the wood column in the opisthodomos, all the columns 
of the peristyle were in that material, gradually replaced by stone 
columns as they decayed, evidenced by the character of their capitals, 
which in style date from the 6th century B.C. to Roman times. The 
ephemeral nature of the 
materials employed in this 
and other early temples, 
and the risk of fire, must 
have naturally led to the 
desire to render the Greek 
sanctuaries more perman- 
ent by the employment 
of stone. But the Greeks 
were always timid as 
regards the bearing value 
of that material, and would 
seem to have imagined 
that unless the blocks were 
of megalithic dimensions 
it was impossible to build 
in stone. This may be 
gathered from the remains 
of the earliest example 
found, the temple of Apollo 
in the island of Ortygia, 
Syracuse, where the mono- 
lith columns had widely 
projecting capitals, the 
abaci of which were set 
so close together that the 
intercolumniation was less 
than one diameter of the 
column. 

Following the temple of 
Apollo at Syracuse is the 
temple of Corinth, ascribed 
to 650 b.c, of which seven 
columns remain in situ, all 
monoliths, and the Olym- 
pieum at Syracuse. Nearly 
contemporary with the 
latter is one of the temples 
at Selinus in Sicily, 630 
B.C., remarkable for the 
archaic nature of its sculp- 
tured metopes. Of later 
date there are five or six 
other temples in Selinus, 
all overthrown by earth- 
quakes; the temple of 
Athena at Syracuse, which 
having been converted 
into a church is in fair pre- 
servation; an unfinished 
temple at Segesta; and A, 
six at Agrigentum, built D. 




Scale of Feet 



From Curtius and Adler's Olympia, by permission 
of Behrend & Co. 



Fig. 14. — Plan of the Heraeum. 
Peristyle; B, Pronaos; C, Naos; 
Opisthodomus; E, Base of statue 
on the brow of a hill facing of Hermes, 
the sea, one of which was 
so large that it was necessary to build in walls between the columns. 

In Magna Graecia, in the acropolis at Tarentum, are the remains 
of a 7th century temple and three at Paestum about a century 
later in date. In one of these, the temple of Poseidon (figs. 15 and 16) 
the columns which carried the ceiling and roof over the cella are still 
standing; these are in two stages superimposedwith an architrave 
between them, and although there are no traces in this instance of a 
gallery, they serve to render more intelligible Pausanias' description 
of that which existed in the temple of Zeus at Olympia. 

The temple of Assus in Asia Minor is an early example remarkable 
for its sculptured architrave, the only one known, and in the temple 
of Aphaea in Aegina (g.v.) we find the immediate predecessor of the 
Parthenon, if we may judge by its sculpture and the proportions of 
its columns. 

So far we have only referred to the early temples of the Doric 
order; of the origin and development of those of the Ionic order 
far less is known. The earliest examples are those of the temple of 
Apollo at Naucratis in Egypt, and of the archaic temple of Diana 
at Ephesus, both about 560 B.C. The remains of the latter,_ dis- 
covered by Wood, are now in the British Museum; they consist of 
two capitals, one with a portion of a shaft in good preservation; 
the sculptured drum and the base' of one of the columns, inscribed 
with the name of Croesus, who is known to have contributed to it; 

1 Except, possibly, the earliest of those at Sparta (q.v.). — Ed. 



GREEK] 



ARCHITECTURE 



379 



two other bases, and the cornice or cymatium. The treasury of the 
Cnidians at Delphi was Ionic, judging by the carved ornament en- 
riching the cornice and architraves, and in the Naxian votive column 
we have another early example of an early voluted capital. 

The tombs of Tantalais, near Smyrna, and of Alyattes, near Sardis, 
belong to the same date as those we shall find in Etruria. The 
Harpy tomb, now in the British Museum, built after 547 B.C., is the 
predecessor of many other Lycian tombs of the 5th and 4th centuries, 
to which we return. 

As already pointed out, in the temple of Hera at Olympia (10th 
century B.C.), we find the complete plan of an hexastyle peripteral 
Greek temple, where columns originally in wood supported a wood 
architrave and superstructure protected by terra-cotta plaques and 
roofed over with tiles. The temple of Apollo at Syracuse, and the 
temple at Corinth (7th century B.C.) represent the earliest examples 
in stone, and in the temple of Poseidon at Paestum (6th century) 
are preserved the columns of the cella which carried the ceiling and 

roof. The structural development 
therefore of the temple was com- 
pleted, and no great constructional 
improvements reveal themselves 
after 550 B.C. The next century 
would seem to have been chiefly 
directed to the beautifying and 
refining of the features already 
prescribed, and it was the tradi- 
tional respect for, and the con- 
servative adherence to, the older 
type, which led the architects to 
the production of such master- 
pieces as the Parthenon and the 
Erechtheum, which would have 
been impossible but for the careful 
and logical progression of pre- 
ceding centuries. 

The Parthenon (q.v.) at Athens 
represents the highest type of 
perfection, not only in its con- 
ception but in its realization. It 
is only necessary here to give a 
general description. It was 
designed by Ictinus in collabora- 
tion with Callicrates, and built 
on the south side of the Acropolis 
on a foundation carried down to 
the solid rock. The temple, com- 
menced in 454 B.C. and completed 
in 438 B.C., was of the Doric order 
and raised on a stylobate of three 
steps; it had eight columns in 
front and rear and was surrounded 
Fig. 15. — Plan of the Temple of by a peristyle, there being twenty 
Poseidon at Paestum. columns on the^ flanks. It con- 

tained two divisions; the eastern 
chamber was originally known as the Hekatompedos (temple 
of 100 ft.), that being the dimension of the cella of the ancient 
temple which it was built to replace. The chamber on the western 
side was called the Parthenon {i.e. chamber of the virgin). 
All the principal lines of the building had delicate curves. The 
entablature rose about 3 in. in the middle to correct an optical 
illusion caused by the sloping lines of the pediment, which gave to 
the horizontal cornice the appearance of having sunk in the centre. 
The stylobate had therefore to be similarly curved so that the 
columns should be all of the same height. The columns are not all 
equidistant, those nearer the angle being closer together than the 
others, which gave a greater appearance of strength to the temple; 
this was increased by a slight inclination inwards of all the columns. 
In order to correct another optical illusion, which causes the shaft of 
a column, when it diminishes as it rises, and is formed with absolute 
straight lines, to appear hollow or concave, an increment known as 
the entasis was given to the column, about one-third up the shaft. 
The columns were not monoliths, like those of the earliest stone 
temples mentioned above ; they were built in several^ drums, so 
closely fitted together that the joint would be imperceptible but for 
the slight discoloration of the marble. The setting of the lowest 
drum of these columns on the curved stylobate, with the slight 
inclination of the column, must have been a work of an extra- 
ordinary nature, only possible with such a material as Pentelic 
marble. The cella or naos was built to enshrine the chryselephantine 
statue of Athena by Pheidias. In order to carry the ceiling and roof 
there was a range of columns on each side of the cella returning 
round the end. These columns probably carried an upper range as 
in the temple of Poseidon at Paestum. The tympana of the two 
pediments and all the metopes were enriched with the finest sculpture, 
and were realized, designed, and executed by Pheidias and his pupils. 
On the upper part of the cella wall and under the peristyle was the 
Panathenaic frieze, of which, as also of the other sculptures, the 
British Museum possesses the finest examples. 

The Propylaea (q.v.), designed by Mnesicles and built 437-432 B.C., 
was the only entrance to the Acropolis. It was of the Doric order, 




and consisted of a portico of six columns, the two centre ones being 
wider apart, to allow of the road through, up which the chariots and 
beasts for sacrifices ascended. The columns carrying the marble 
ceiling of the vestibule were of the Ionic order; beyond them the 
wall was pierced by three doorways, and on the other side and facing 
east was another portico of six columns. The front entrance was 
flanked on the left hand by a chamber known as the Pinacotheca, 
and on the right by a chamber intended probably to be a replica 
but subsequently curtailed in size in consequence of the proximity 
of another temple. 

The Erechtheum on the north side of the Acropolis occupied the 
site of three older shrines, which may account for its irregular plan. 
The eastern portion was the temple of Athena Polias, with a portico 
of six columns of the Ionic order. At a lower level on the north side 
was a portico of six columns (four in front and two at the sides) 
leading to the shrine of Erechtheus; the west front of this shrine 
had originally a frontispiece of four columns in antis raised on a 
podium ; subsequently during the Roman occupation these columns 
were taken down and reproduced as semi-detached columns with 
windows between. On the west side was a court in which was the 
olive tree and the shrine of Pandrosus (Pandroseion). At the south- 
west angle was the well-known portico or tribune of the Caryatides. 
There was a small entrance through the podium at the side, and 
stairs leading down to the shrine of Erechtheus. 

The only other building remaining on the Acropolis is the temple 
of Nike Apteros, raised on a lofty substructure south-west of the 
propylaea. It also was of the Ionic order, and belonged to the type 
known as " amphiprostyle," with a portico of four columns in the 




m^ 






From a photo by Brogi. 

Fig. 16. — Temple of Poseidon at Paestum. 

front and rear but no peristyle. The term " apteros " applied to the 
temple and not to the goddess of victory. 

In 430 B.C., shortly after the completion of the Parthenon, Ictinus 
was employed to design the temple of Apollo Epicurius, at Bassae, 
in Arcadia. This temple externally was of the Doric order, but, 
being built in local stone, no attempt was made to introduce those 
refinements which are found in the Parthenon. In the rear of the 
cella is a second sanctuary with a doorway facing east; it was 
probably the site of an ancient temple which had to be preserved, 
and this may account for the fact that the temple runs north and 
south. The cella is flanked by five columns of the Ionic order 
which are connected by spur walls to the cella wall. These columns 
carry an architrave, frieze richly sculptured with figure subjects, 
cornice and wall above rising to the roof. There was no ceiling 
therefore, and the interior was probably lighted through pierced 
Parian marble tiles, of which three examples were found. The 
Corinthian capital found on the site is supposed by Cockerell to have 
belonged to the shaft between the two cellas. 

The same architect, Ictinus, was employed in 420 B.C. to rebuild 
the hall of the mysteries at Eleusis on a larger scale. The hall was 
185 ft. square, and its ceiling and roof were carried by seven rows 
of columns with six in each row. The propylaea, which gave access 
to the sacred enclosure at Eleusis, was copied from the propylaea 
at Athens. The so-called lesser propylaea had some connexion with , 
the mysteries. 

The temple of Zeus at Olympia had much in common with the 
Parthenon, being nearly contemporaneous, built to enshrine a second 
chryselephantine statue by Pheidias, and in plan having a similar 
arrangement of columns inside the cella; the lower range of columns 
(according to Pausanias) supported a gallery round, so that privileged 
visitors could approach nearer to the statue. The temple, however, 
was built in the local conglomerate stone covered with a thin coat of 
stucco and painted. 

Of circular temples there are two examples known, the Philippeion 
at Olympia and the Tholos at Epidaurus. The latter had, inside 
the cella, a peristyle of Corinthian columns, the capitals of which 
are of great beauty and represent in their design the transition 



• 3 8o 



ARCHITECTURE 



[PARTHIAN 



between those of the monument of Lysicrates and the temple of 
Zeus Olympius at Athens. 

In the sacred enclosures of the Greek sanctuaries were other 
smaller temples or shrines, altars, statues and treasuries, the latter 
being built by the various cities, from which pilgrimages were made, 
to contain their treasures. At Olympia there were ten or eleven, 
the remains of some of which are of great interest. Of the treasury 
of the Cnidians at Delphi, discovered by the French, so much has 
been found that it has been possible to evolve a complete conjectural 
restoration in plaster, now in the Louvre. Its sculpture and the rich 
carving of its architectural features show that it was Ionian in 
character. In front was a portico-in-antis, in which the caryatide 
figures standing on pedestals took the place of columns. These are 
the earliest examples known of caryatide figures, and they precede 
those of the Erechtheum by about a century. 

The most important temple in Asia Minor was the temple of Diana 
(Artemis) at Ephesus (356-334 B.C.). The archaic temple was burnt 
in 356, and was immediately rebuilt with greater splendour from the 
designs of Paeonius. The site of the temple was discovered by Wood 
in 1869, and the remains brought over to the British Museum in 
1875. There were 100 columns, 36 of which (according to Pliny) 
were sculptured, and it was probably on account of the magnificence 
of the sculpture that this temple was included among the seven 
wonders of the world. The sculptured bases are of two kinds, 
square and circular, in the latter case being the lower drums of the 
columns. Examples of both are in the British Museum, and several 




Fig. 17. — Lycian Tomb of Telmessus. 

conjectural restorations have been made, among which that of Dr 
A. S. Murray has been generally accepted, but recent researches 
(1905) suggest that it remains still an unsolved problem. 

The temple of Apollo Didymaeus, near Miletus, was the largest 
temple in Asia Minor, and its erection followed that of the temple 
at Ephesus, Paeonius and Daphnis of Miletus being the architects. 
The temple was decastyle, dipteral, with pronaos and vestibule, 
but no opisthodomos. The cella was so wide (75 ft.) that it remained 
open to the sky. The bases of the columns were elaborately carved 
with ornament, as if in rivalry with the temple of Diana. Both these 
temples were of the Ionic order, as also were those of Athena Polias 
at Priene (340 B.C.), many of the capitals of which are in the British 
Museum, and the temples of Aphrodite at Aphrodisias and Cybele at 
Sardis. 

The mausoleum at Halicarnassus, also of the Ionic order, built by 
Queen Artemisia in memory of her husband Mausolus, who died in 
353 B.C., was, according to Pliny, recorded as one of the seven wonders 
of the world, probably on account of the eminence of the sculptors 
employed, Bryaxis, Leochares, Timotheus, Scopas and Pythius. 
Pliny's description is somewhat vague, so that its actual design is 
a problem not yet solved. Professor Cockerell's restoration is in 
accord with the description, but does not quite agree with the actual 
remains brought over by Newton and deposited in the British 
Museum. If the Nereid monument and the tombs at Cnidus and 
Mylasa be taken as suggesting the design, the peristyle (pteron) of 
thirty-six columns of the Ionic order with entablature stood on a 
lofty podium, richly decorated with bands of sculpture, and was 
crowned by a pyramid which, according to Pliny, " contracted itself 
by twenty-four steps into the summit of a meta." The steps found 
are not high enough to constitute a meta, and it is possible therefore 
that, according to Mr J. J. Stevenson, these steps were over the 
peristyle only, and that the lofty steps which constituted the meta 



were in the centre, carried by the inner row of columns. The 
magnificent sculpture of the Macedonian period has in recent times 
been demonstrated by the discovery of the marble sarcophagi found 
at Sidon by Hamdi Bey and now in the museum at Constantinople. 

The Lycian tombs, of which there are many hundreds carved in 
the rock in the south of Asia Minor, are copies of timber structures, 
based on the stone architecture of the neighbouring Greek cities 
(fig. 17). The Paiafaor Payava tomb (375-362 B.c.),foundatXanthus 
and now in the British Museum, is apparently a copy, cut in the solid 
rock, of a portable shrine, in which the wood construction is clearly 
defined. 

Capitals of the Greek Corinthian order have been found at Bassae, 
Epidaurus, Olympia and Miletus, but the earliest example of the 
complete order is represented in the Choragic monument of Lysicrates 
at Athens. 

The most important example of the Greek Corinthian order is 
that of the temple of Jupiter Olympius at Athens, begun in 174 B.C., 
but not completed till the time of Hadrian, a.d. 117. The temple 
was 135 ft. wide and 354 ft. long, built entirely in Pentelic marble, 
the columns being 56 ft. high. There were eight columns in front 
and a double peristyle round. 

The two porches of the Tower of the Winds at Athens (c. 75 B.C.) 
had Corinthian capitals. The upper part of the tower, which was 
octagonal in plan, was sculptured with figures representing the winds. 

The Greek houses discovered at Delosand Priene were very simple 
and unpretentious, but the palace near Palatitza in Macedonia, 
discovered by Messrs Heuzey and Daumet, would seem to have 
been of a very sumptuous character. The front of the palace 
measured 250 ft. In the centre was a vestibule flanked with Ionic 
columns on either side, leading to a throne room at one time richly 
decorated with marble, and with numerous other halls on either side. 
The date is ascribed to the middle of the 4th century B.C. 

In selecting the sites for their theatres, the Greeks always utilized 
the slope of a hill, in which they could cut out the cavea, and thus 
save the expense of raising a structure to carry the seats, at the 
same time obtaining a beautiful prospect for the background. The 
theatre of Dionysus at Athens was discovered and excavated in 
1864, and has fortunately preserved all the seats round the orchestra, 
sixty-seven in number, all in Pentelic marble, with the names 
inscribed thereon of the priests and dignitaries who occupied them. 
The largest theatre was at Megalopolis, with an auditorium 474 ft. 
in diameter. The most perfect, so far as the seats are concerned, 
is the theatre at Epidaurus, with a diameter of 415 ft. Other theatres 
are known at Dodona in Greece, Pergamum and Tralles in Asia 
Minor, and Syracuse and Segesta in Sicily. (R. P. S.) 

Parthian Architecture 

The architecture of the Parthian dynasty, who from 250 B.C. to 
A.D. 226 occupied the greater part of Mesopotamia, their empire in 
160 B.C. extending over 480,000 sq. m., was quite unknown until 
Sir A. H. Layard, following in the steps of Ross and Ainsworth, 
visited and measured the plan of the palace at Hatra (el Hadr) 
about 30 m. south of Mosul ; the architecture of this palace shows 
that, on the one hand, the Parthians carried on the traditions 
of the barrel vault of the Assyrian palace, and on the other, from 
their contact with Hellenistic methods of building, had acquired 
considerable knowledge in the working of ashlar masonry. 

El Hadr is first mentioned in history as having been unsuccessfully 
besieged by Trajan in A.D. 116, and it is recorded to have been a 
walled town containing a temple of the sun, celebrated for the value 
of its offerings. The temple 
referred to is probably the large 
square building at the back of 
the palace, as above the door- 
way is a rich frieze carved with 
griffins, similar to those found at 
Warka by Loftus, together with 
large quantities of Parthian 
coins. The remains (fig. 18) 
consist of a block of 380 ft. 
frontage, facing east, and 128 ft. 
deep, subdivided by walls of 
great thickness, running at right 
angles to the main front, and 
built in an immense court, 
divided down the centre by a 
wall, separating that portion on 
the south side, where the temple 
was situated, from that on the 
north side, which constituted 
the king's palace. The seven 
subdivisions of the different 
widths were all covered with semi-circular barrel vaults which, 
being built side by side, mutually resisted the thrust, the outer walls 
being of greater thickness, with the same object. In the centre of the 
south block was an immense hall 49 ft. wide and 98 ft. deep, which 
formed the vestibule to the temple in the rear; this vestibule was 
flanked by a series of three smaller halls on either side, over which 
there was probably a second floor. On the palace or north side were 




Fig. 18. — Plan of Palace of 
el Hadr. 

A, Throne or reception room. 

B, Large hall, or 

C, Entrance hall of temple. 

D, Temple. 



SASSANIAN] 



ARCHITECTURE 



38i 



two great aiwans or reception halls. The main front (fig. 19) was 
built in finely jointed ashlar masonry with semicircular attached 
shafts between the entrance doorways, which had semicircular heads, 
every third voussoir of the three larger doors being decorated by 
busts in strong relief with a headgear similar to that shown on 
Parthian coins ; other carvings, with the acanthus leaf, belonged to 
that type of Syrio-Greek work, of which Loftus found so many 




Scale of Feer 



30 40 50 



Fig. 19. — Portion of front of Palace of el Hadr. 

examples at Warka (Loftus, Chaldaea, Susiana, p. 225). In the great 
mosque of Diarbekr are two wings at the north and south ends 
respectively, which are said to have been Parthian palaces built by 
Tigranes, 74 B.C. ; they have evidently been rearranged or rebuilt 
at various times, the columns with their capitals and the entablature 
having been utilized again. The shafts of the columns of the upper 
storey are richly carved with geometrical patterns similar to those 
found by Loftus at Warka. 

The American researches at Nippur have resulted in the discovery 
on the top of the mounds of the remains of a Parthian palace; and 
the disposition of its plan (fig. 20), and the style of the columns of 




From Prof. H. V. Hilprecht's Exploration in Bible Lands, by permission of 
A. J. Holman & Co. and T. & T. Clark. 

Fig. 20. — Plan of the Parthian Palace at Nippur. 

the peristylar court, show so strong a resemblance to Greek work 
as to suggest the same Hellenistic influence as in the palace of el 
Hadr. Having no stone, however, they were obliged to build up 
these columns at Nippur with sections in brick, covered afterwards 
with stucco. The columns diminished at the top to about one-fifth 
of the lower diameter, and would seem to have had an entasis, as the 
lower portion up to one-third of the height is nearly vertical. A 
similar palace was discovered at Tello by the French archaeo- 
logists, and the bases of some of the brick columns are in the 
Louvre. (R. P. S.) 

Sassanian Architecture 

Although, on the overthrow of the Parthian dynasty' in a.d. 226, 
the monarchs of the Sassanian dynasty succeeded to the immense 
Parthian empire, the earliest building found, according to Fergusson, 
is that at Serbistan, to which he ascribes the date a.d. 380. The 
palace (fig. 21), which measures 130 ft. frontage and 143 ft. deep, 
with an internal court, shows so great an advance in the arrange- 
ments of its plan as to suggest considerable acquaintance with 
Roman work. The fine ashlar work of el-Hadr is no longer adhered 
to, and in its place we find rubble masonry with thick mortar joints, 
the walls being covered afterwards, both externally and internally, 
with stucco. While the barrel vault is still retained for the chief 
entrance porches, it is of elliptical section, and the central hall is 
covered with a dome, a feature probably handed down from the 
Assyrians, such as is shown in the bas-relief (fig. 10) from Kuyunjik, 
now in the British Museum. In order to carry a dome, circular on 
plan, over a square hall, it was necessary to arch across the angles, 
and here to a certain extent the Sassanians were at fault, as they 



did not know how to build pendentives, and the construction of these 

are of the most irregular kind. As, however, their mortar had 

excellent tenacious properties, these pendentives still remain in situ 

(fig. 22), and their defects were probably hidden under the stucco. 

In the halls which flank the building on either side, however, they 

displayed considerable knowledge of construction. Instead of having 

enormously thick walls to resist the thrust of their vaults, to which 

we have already drawn attention in the Assyrian work and at el 

Hadr, they built piers at intervals, covering over the spaces between 

them, with semi-domes on which the walls carrying the vaults are 

supported, so that they lessened the span of the vault and brought 

the thrust well within the wall. 

This, however, lessened the width 

of the hall, so they replaced the 

lower portions of the piers by the 

columns, leaving a passage round. 

It is possible that this idea was 

partly derived from the great 

Roman halls of the thermae 

(baths), where the vault is 

brought forward on columns; 

but it was an improvement to 

leave a passage behind. The 

elliptical sections given to all the 

barrel vaults may have been the 

traditional method derived from 

Assyria, of which, however, no 

remains exist. In the article 

VAULTtherewillbefoundareason 




Plan. 




Section in lines BC, DE, FG of plan. 
Fig. 21 and Fig. 22. — The Palace of Serbistan. 

why these elliptical sections were adopted (see also below in the 
description of the great hall at Ctesipbon). In the palace of 
Firuzabad, attributed by Fergusson to Peroz (Firuz)' (a.d. 459- 
485), the plan (fig. 23) follows more closely the disposition of the 
Assyrian palaces, and we return again to the thick walls, which 
might incline us to give a later date to Serbistan, except that 
in the pendentives carrying the three great domes in the centre 
of the palace at Firuzabad they show greater knowledge 
in their construction. The angles of the square hall are vaulted, 
with a series of concentric arches, each ring as it rises being brought 
forward, the object being to save centreing, because each ring rested 
on the ring beneath it. The plan is a rectangular parallelogram 
with a frontage of 180 ft. and a depth of 333 ft., more than double, 
therefore, of the size of Serbistan. 
An immense entrance hall in the 
centre of the main front is flanked 
on each side bv two halls placed at 
right angles to it, so as to resist the 
thrust of the elliptical barrel vaults 
of the entrance hall. This hall leads 
to a series of three square halls, side 
by side, each surmounted by a dome 
carried on pendentives. Beyond is an 
open court, the smaller rooms round 
all covered with barrel vaults. Here, 
as in Serbistan, the material employed 
is rubble masonry with thick joints of 
mortar, and fortunately portions of 
the stucco with which this Sassanian 
masonry was covered remain both 
externally and internally. As there are 
no windows of any sort, the wall 
surface of the exterior has been FiG.23.— PlanofthePalace 
decorated with semi - circular at- at Firuzabad. 

tached shafts and panelling between, 

which recall the primitive decorations found in the early Chaldaean 
temples, except that arches are carried at the top across the sunk 
panels. Internally an attempt has been made to copy the decoration 
of the Persian doorway, which represents a kind of renaissance of 
the ancient style. But instead of the lintel the arch has been intro- 
duced, and the ornament in stucco representing the Persian cavetto 
cornice shows imperfect knowledge of the original and is clumsily 
worked. The niches also, in the main front, have been copied from 




IS (SD 

{MB iM wmi 



3 82 



ARCHITECTURE 



[ETRUSCAN 



the windows which flank the doorway in the Persian palace. 
But they are decorative only, and are too shallow to serve any 
purpose. 

If there has been some difficulty in determining the exact date of 
Firuzabad, that of the third great palace, at Ctesiphon, on the borders 
of the Tigris, is known to have been built by Chosroes I. in a.d. 550. 
Owing probably to its proximity to Bagdad, from which it lies about 
25 m. distant, it is much better known than the other examples we 
have quoted; but while they are constructed in rubble masonry, 
Ctesiphon is built of brick, because we have now returned to the 
alluvial plain where no stone could be procured. The only portion 
of the palace which still exists is that which was built in burnt brick, 
and this far exceeds in dimensions Serbistan and Firuzabad. Its 
main front measured 312 ft.; its height was about 115 ft.; and its 
depth 175 ft. The plan is very simple, and consisted of an aiwan 
or immense hall, 86 ft. in width and 163 ft. long, covered with an 
elliptical barrel vault, the thrust of which is counteracted by five 
long halls on each side, also covered with barrel vaults and probably 
used as guard chambers or stores. The great hall was open in the 
front, and constituted an immense portal, 83 ft. wide and 95 ft. to 
the crown of the arch. The springing of the vault is 40 ft. from the 
ground, but up to about 26 ft. above the springing the walls are 
built in horizontal courses projecting inwards as they rise, so that the 
actual width of the vaulted portion (fig. 24) has been diminished 




From Dieulafoy's V Art Antique, by permission of Morel et Cie. 
Fig. 24. — The Great Hall at Ctesiphon. 

one-sixth and measures only about 71 ft. The crown of the vault is 
9 ft. thick, the walls at the base being 23 ft. The bricks or tiles of 
which the vault is built are, like those at Thebes, laid flat-wise, and 
there is also a similar inclination of the rings of brick-work, which 
are about 10° out of the vertical. This leads fo the conclusion that 
this immense vault was built without centreing, as the tenacious 
quality of the mortar would probably be sufficient to hold each tile 
in its position until the ring was complete. In the building of the 
arch of the great portal other precautions were taken ; bond timbers 
23 ft. long and in five rows, one above the other, were carried through 
the wall from front to back. The lower portion of the arch (5 ft. in 
height) was built with bricks placed flat-wise; the upper portion 
(4 ft. in height) in the usual way, viz. right angles to the face. The 
reason for this change was probably that the upper portions might 
be carved, as they have been, with a series of semi-circular 
cusps. 

The decoration of the flanks of this great central portal is of the 
most bewildering description. There has evidently been a desire to 
give a monumental character to the main front. With this idea in 
view they would seem to have attempted to reproduce Roman 
features, such as are found decorating the fronts of the various 
amphitheatres of the Empire. But the semi-circular shafts which 
form the decoration do not come one over the other on the several 



storeys, and there is a reckless employment of blank arcades 
distributed over the surface. 

There are remains of two other palaces at Imamzade and Tag 
Iran, and in Moab a small example, the Hall of Rabboth Ammon, 
supposed to have been erected for Chosroes II. during the subjugation 
of Palestine, which is richly decorated with carving, probably by 
Syrio-Greek artists, with a mixture of Greek, Jewish and Sassanian 
details. At Takibostan and Behistun (Bisutun), some 200 m. 
north-east of Ctesiphon, are some remarkable Sassanian capitals 
and panels (published in Flandin and Coste's Voyage en Perse, 
1851, Paris). (R. p. S.) 

Etruscan Architecture 

Although our acquaintance with Etruscan architecture is confined 
chiefly to the entrance gateways and the walls of towns, and to tombs, 
it forms a very important link between the East and the West. 
Though little is known of the history of Etruria (q.v.), the influence 
which her people exerted on Roman architecture, lasting down to the 
period when Greece was overrun and plundered of her treasures, 
was so great that it would be difficult to follow the origin of Roman 
architecture without some inquiry into the work of its immediate 
predecessor. The, theory put forward by Fergusson, as to the migra- 
tion of the Etruscans from Asia Minor in the 12th or 1 1 th century B.C., 
is substantiated by the resemblance of the tumuli in the latter 
country, such as those at Tantalais, on the northern shore of the 
gulf of Smyrna, and that of Alyattes near Sardis, as compared with 
the Regulini Galeassi tomb at Cervetri and the Cucumella tomb at 
Vulci, in all cases consisting of a sepulchral chamber buried under 
an immense mound surrounded by a podium in stone. The chamber 
was covered over with masonry, laid in horizontal courses, each stone 
projecting slightly over the one below. The same system of con- 
struction prevailed in the bee-hive tombs of Greece, except that the 
latter were always circular on plan, whilst these cited above were 
rectangular. Similar methods of construction are found at Tusculum 
and in a gateway at Arpino. In all these cases the projecting courses 
were worked off on the completion of the tomb, in Greece and at 
Tusculum and Arpino following a curve, and in the Regulini Galeassi 
tomb a raking line. 

The earliest example known of the arched vault, with regular 
voussoirs in stone, is found in the canal of the Marta near Graviscae, 
ascribed to the 7th century. The vault is 14 ft. in span, with 
voussoirs from 5 to 6 ft. in depth. In the tomb of Pythagoras near 
Cortona, with a span of about 10 ft., only four voussoirs were em- 
ployed. In the Cloaca Maxima at Rome the vault (now ascribed by 
Commendatore Boni to the 1st century B.C.) ia built with three 
concentric rings of voussoirs. In all these cases the thrust of the 
arch was amply resisted as they were constructed under ground, and 
in the entrance gateways at Volterra, Perugia and Falerii a similar 
resistance was given by the immense walls in which they were built. 

We have already referred to one class of tomb in which the sepul- 
chral chamber, built above the ground, was covered over with a 
mound of earth ; there is a second class, carved out of the solid rock, 
in which we find the same treatment as that described in connexion 
with Egypt. The tomb represents, in its internal arrangements and 
in its decorations, the earthly dwelling of the defunct (compare the 
Egyptian " soul-houses "). The ceilings are carved in imitation cf 
the horizontal beams and slanting rafters of the roof, the former 
carried by square piers with capitals; one well-known tomb at 
Corneto (fig. 25) represents the atrium of an Etruscan house, which 
corresponds with the description given by Vitruvius of the cavaedia 
displuviata, in which there was a small opening at the top, known as 
the compluvium, the roof sloping down on all four sides. 

The paintings which decorate these tombs have very much the 
same character as those which are found on what were thought to 
have been Etruscan, but are now generally considered as Greek 
vases, the principal difference being that instead of allegorical 
subjects, domestic scenes recalling the life of the deceased are 
represented. In a tomb at Cervetri the walls and piers were carved 
with representations of the helmets, swords and other accoutrements 
of a soldier, and also the mirrors and jewelry of his wife, even the 
kitchen utensils being included, so as to give the complete fittings 
of the house they occupied. In two examples at Castel D'Asso the 
rock has been cut away on all sides, leaving a rectangular block, 
crowned with reverse mouldings. 

Scarcely any remains in situ of Etruscan temples have been found, 
and the description given by Vitruvius is very scanty. Of late years, 
however, in the British Museum and in the museums at Florence and 
Rome, a large amount of material has been brought together, from 
which it is possible to make some kind of conjectural restoration. 
This has been facilitated by the discoveries made at Olympia, 
Delphi and elsewhere in Greece, showing the important function 
which terra-cotta served in the protection and decoration of the 
timber roofs of the Greek temples and treasuries. The cornices, 
antefixae, pendant slabs and other decorative features in terra- 
cotta, found on the sites of the Etruscan temples, show that the 
timber construction of their roofs was protected in the same way; 
and although Vitruvius (bk. iii. ch. 2) considered the temple of Ceres 
at Rome to be clumsy and heavy, and its roofs low and wide, in 
comparison with the purer examples of Greek architecture, the 
remains of terra-cotta found at Civita Castellana (the ancient 



ROMAN] 



ARCHITECTURE 



383 



Falerii), at Luna, Telamon and Lanuvium (the latter in the British 
Museum), show that in their modelling and colour they must have 
possessed considerable decorative effect, and when raised on an 
eminence, as in the case of the temple of Jupiter on the Capitol, 
formed striking features of importance, enriched as they were with 
gilding. There is one feature in the Etruscan examples which 
seems to have been peculiar to their temples, viz. the pendant slabs 
hung round the eaves to protect the walls ; these latter were probably 
covered with stucco and decorated with paintings. The lower 




Fig. 25. — The Corneto Tomb. 

portions of many of these slabs were decorated in relief and in colour 
at the back, showing that they were exposed to view below the 
soffit of the projecting eaves. 

Owing to the ephemeral nature of the materials employed in the 
building of the walls of Etruscan temples, viz. unburned brick or 
rubble masonry with clay mortar, the roofs being in timber, little 
is known of their general design; the terra-cotta decorations are, 
however, fortunately in good preservation, and suggest that although 
the Etruscan temple, architecturally speaking, was not of a very 
monumental character, its external decoration and colour added 
considerably to its effect. (R. P. S.) 

Roman Architecture 

The rebuilding of Rome, which began in the reign of Augustus, 
and was carried on by his successors to a much greater extent, has 
caused the destruction of nearly all those examples of early work to 
which the student, working out the history of a style, would turn. 
There are, however, a few early buildings still existing, and these 
are of value as showing the extremely simple nature of their design. 
The temple of Fortuna Virilis (so-called) in the Forum Boarium, 
attributed to the beginning of the 1st century B.C., shows the great 
difference between Greek and Roman temples. Like the Etruscan 
temple, it is raised on a podium, and approached by a flight of 
steps. The Etruscan cella is dispensed with ; and what may be 
looked upon as the semblance of a Greek peristyle is retained in the 
semi-detached columns which are carried round the walls of the cella. 
To the entrance portico, however, the 'Roman architect attached 
great importance, and we find here that one-third of the whole 
length of the temple is given up to the portico. The Tabularium 
built by Lutatius Catulus (78 B.C.) is a second example of early work. 
On a lofty substructure, built of peperino stone, was raised an arcade, 
which formed a passage from one side of the capitol to the other, 
and here we find the earliest example of the use of the Classic order, 
as a decorative feature only, applied to the face of a wall. The arcade 
consists of a series of arches with intermediate semi-detached Doric 
column^ carrying an entablature. The architectural design of the 
substructure is of the simplest kind, depending for its effect only on 
the size of the stones employed and the finish given to the masonry. 
The same remark applies to the few remains left of the Forum Julium 
(47 B.C.), where an additional decorative effect was produced by 
the bevelled edge worked round all the stones, producing the effect 
of rusticated masonry. 

If, however, the remains are few, the records of classical writers 
show that already before the beginning of the 1st century B.C. the 
influence of Greece had been shown in the transformation of the 
Forum, the embanking of the river Tiber, the erection of numerous 
porticoes throughout the Campus Martius, and of basilicas, one of 
which, rebuilt by Paulus Aemilius in 50 B.C., was remarkable for its 
monolithic columns of pavonazetto marble; and further that on the 
Palatine hill were various mansions, the courts and peristyles of 
which were richly decorated with marble. 

The boast of Augustus that he found Reme built of brick and left 



it in marble is true in a sense, but not in the way it is usually inter- 
preted. He greatly encouraged the use of marble — the temple of 
Venus in the forum of Julius Caesar is said to have been, built 
entirely of that material — but as a rule marble was only used as a 
facing. This, however, led to the substitution of solid concrete for 
the core of walls, in place of the unburnt brick which up to that 
time had been employed. On this subject the writings of Vitruvius, 
the Roman architect, are of the greatest value, as they describe 
clearly not only the materials used at this time (about 30 B.C.), but 
the different methods of building walls (see Rome). The material 
which contributed more than any other to the magnificent concep- 
tions of the Roman Imperial style was that known as pozzolana, a 
volcanic earth which, mixed with lime, formed an hydraulic cement 
of great cohesion and strength. Not only the walls but the vaults 
were built in this pozzolana concrete, and formed one solid mass. 
Bricks were employed in arches, on the quoins of walls, occasionally 
in bond courses, and in the constructional vaults as ribs, in order to 
relieve the centreing of the weight until the pozzolana concrete had 
been poured in and had consolidated. The bricks employed in these 
ribs, and for the voussoirs of arches, were of the kind we should 
describe as tiles, being about 2 ft. square and 2 in. thick. Bricks 
also of smaller size and triangular in shape were used for the facing 
of walls, the triangular portions being embedded into the concrete 
walls. 

The Romans themselves do not seem to have realized the tenacious 
properties of this pozzolana cement which, when employed for the 
foundation of temples, formed a solid mass capable of bearing as 
much weight as the rock itself. They feared also the thrust of the 
immense vaults over their halls, and always provided crosswalls to 
counteract the same, as shown in the plan of all the thermae; 
when, however, they had discovered the secret of covering over large 
spaces with a permanent casing indestructible by fire, it not only 
gave an impetus to the great works in Rome, but led to a new type of 
plan, which spread all through the Empire, varied only by the 
difference in materials and in labour. In this respect the Romans 
always availed themselves of the resources of the country, which they 
turned to the best account. As pozzolana was not to be found in 
North Africa or Syria, they had to trust to the excellent qualities of 
the Roman mortar, but even in Syria, where stone was plentiful and 
could be obtained in great dimensions, when they attempted to 
erect vaults of great span similar to those in Rome, these probably 
collapsed before the building was finished, and were replaced by 
roofs in wood. 

In the styles hitherto described the gradual development has been 
traced to their primitive, culminating and decadent periods. This 
is not called for in a description of the Roman style of architecture, 
which to a certain extent appeared phoenix-like in its highest 
development under Augustus. Roman orders in the Augustan age 
had reached their culminating development. The capitals of the 
portico of the Pantheon (27 B.C.), or of the temple of Mars Ultor 
(2 B.C.), constitute the finest examples of the Corinthian order, 
whilst those of later temples show a falling off in style. It was only 
in the application of the orders that new combinations presented 
themselves, and this can be better understood when we refer to the 
monuments themselves. The description of the Roman orders, 
with the subsequent modifications, is given in the article Order. 
It is necessary, however, here to draw attention to two very important 
developments which the Roman architect introduced as regards the 
orders : firstly, their employment as decorative features in combina- 
tion with the arcade, known as composite arcades, and secondly, 
their superposition one above the other in storeys. The earliest 
example of the first class is that found in the Tabularium as it now 
exists; of the second class the Colosseum and the theatre of Mar- 
cellus are the best known examples. In principle the practice must 
be condemned, for the employment of the column and entablature, 
which was designed by the Greek architect as an independent 
constructive feature, in a purely decorative sense stuck on the face 
of a wall, is contrary to good taste, but it is impossible not to recog- 
nize in its application to the Colosseum the value of the scale which 
it has given to the whole structure, a scale which would have been 
entirely lost if the building had been treated as one storey. The 
superposition of the orders as exemplified in the Roman theatres 
and amphitheatres throughout the Empire constitutes the greatest 
development made in the style, and it is one which, from the Italian 
revivalists down to our time, has had more influence in the design 
of monumental work than any other Roman innovation. 

In the preceding sections it has been necessary to confine our 
descriptions, in the case of Egypt and Greece, more or less to temples 
and tombs, and in that of Assyria to palaces, but in Roman archi- 
tecture the monuments are not only of the most extensive and 
varied kinds, but in some parts of the Empire they become modified 
by the requirements of the country, so that a tabulated list alone 
would occupy a considerable space. The following are the principal 
subdivisions : The Roman forum (see Rome) ; the colonnaded 
streets in Syria and elsewhere, and temple enclosures; temples (q.v.), 
rectangular and circular; basilicas (q.v.); theatres (q.v.) and amphi- 
theatres (q.v.) ; thermae or baths (q.v.) ; entrance gateways and 
triumph arches (see Triumphal Arch) ; memorial buildings and 
tombs, aqueducts (q.v.) and bridges (q.v.), palatial architecture (see 
Palace) ; domestic architecture (see House). 



384 



ARCHITECTURE 



[ROMAN 



The Forum Romanum under the Republic would seem to have 
served several purposes. The principal temples and important 
public burldings occupied sites round it, and up to the time of Julius 
Caesar there were shops on both sides : it was also used as a "hippo- 
drome and served for combats and other displays. Under the 
Empire, however, these were relegated to the amphitheatre and the 
theatre, markets were provided for elsewhere, and the forum became 
the chief centre for the temples, basilicas, courts of law and exchanges. 
But already in the time of Julius Caesar the Forum Romanum had 
become too small, and others were built by succeeding emperors. 
In order to find room for these, not only were numerous crowded 
sites cleared, but vast portions of the Quirinal hill were cut away to 
make place for them. The Fora added were those of Julius Caesar, 
Augustus, Trajan, Nerva and Vespasian. Outside Rome, in pro- 
vincial towns and in Africa and Syria, the Forum was generally built 
on the intersection of the two main streets, and was surrounded by 
porticoes, temples and civic monuments. 

Colonnaded Streets. — We gather from some Roman authors that 
in early days the Campus Martius was laid out with porticoes. All 
these features have disappeared, but there are still some existing 
in Syria, North Africa and Asia Minor, which are known as colon- 
naded streets. The most important of these are found in Palmyra, 
where the street was 70 ft. wide with a central avenue open to the 
sky and side avenues roofed over with stone. The columns employed 
were of the Corinthian order, 31 ft. high, and formed a peristyle on 
each side of the street, which was nearly a mile in length. The triple 
archway in this street is still one of the finest examples of Roman 
architecture. At Gerasa, the colonnaded streets had columns of the 
Ionic order, the street being 1800 ft. long, with other streets at right 
angles to it; similar streets are found at Amman, Bosra, Kanawat, 
&c. At Pompeiopolis, in Asia Minor, are still many streets of 
columns, and in North Africa the French archaeologists have traced 
numerous others. 

Temple Enclosures. — In Rome the great cost, and the difficulty of 
obtaining large sites, restricted the size of the enclosures of the 
temples; this was to a certain extent compensated for by the 
magnificence of the porticoes surrounding them. The most important 
was that built by Hadrian, measuring 480 ft. by 330 ft., to enclose 
the double temples of Venus and Rome. The portico of Octavia 
measures 400 ft. by 370 ft., enclosing two temples, and the portico 
of the Argonauts, which enclosed the temple of Neptune, was about 
300 ft. square. These dimensions, however, are far exceeded by 
those of the enclosures in Syria and Asia Minor. The court of the 
temple of the Sun at Palmyra was raised on an artificial platform 
16 ft. high, and measured 735 ft. by 725 ft., with an enclosure wall 
oi 74 ft. on the west and 67 ft. high or the other three sides. 

At Baalbek the platform was raised 25 ft. above the ground, the 
dimensions being 400 ft. wide and 900 ft. deep. At Damascus the 
enclosure of the temple of the Sun has been traced, and it extended 
to about 1000 ft. square. Simiiar enclosures are found at Gerasa, 
Amman and other Syrian towns. In Asia Minor, at Aizani the plat- 
form was 520 by 480 ft., raised about 20 ft., and in Africa the French 
have found the remains of similar enclosures. 

Roman Temples. — The Romans, following the Etruscan custom, 
invariably raised their temples on a podium with a flight of steps 
on the main front. Their temples were not orientated, and being 
regarded more as monuments than religious structures occupied 
prominent sites facing the Forum or some great avenue. Much 
importance was attached to the entrance portico, which was deeper 
than those in Greek temples, and the peristyle when it existed was 
rarely carried round the back. On the other hand the cella exceeded 
in span those of the Greek temples, as the Roman, being acquainted 
with the principle of trussing timbers, could roof over wider spaces. 
The principal temples in Rome, of which remains still exist, are 
those of Fortuna Virilis, Mars Ultor, Castor, Neptune, Antoninus 
and Faustina, Concord, Vespasian, Saturn and portions of the 
double temples of Venus and Rome. At Pompeii are the temples of 
Jupiter and Apollo, at Cora the temple of Mercury, and in France, 
the Maison Carree at Nimes and the temple at Vienne. In Syria 
are the temples of Jupiter at Baalbek, of the Sun at Palmyra and 
Gerasa, and in Spalato the temple of Aesculapius. 

Of circular temples the chief are the Pantheon at Rome, the 
temple of Vesta on the Forum, of Mater Matuta, so-called, on the 
Forum Boarium, the temple of Vesta at Tivoli, of Jupiter at Spalato 
and of Venus at Baalbek. 

Of the rectangular temples the Maison Carree at Nimes is the 
most perfect example existing (fig. 26). It was built by Antoninus 
Pius, and dedicated to his adopted sons Lucius and Martius. This 
temple, 59 ft, by 117 ft., is of the Corinthian order, hexastyle, 
pseudoperipteral, with a portico three columns deep, and is raised 
on a podium 12 ft. high. The next best preserved example is the 
temple of Jupiter at Baalbek, also of the Corinthian order, octastyle, 
peripteral, with a deep portico, and a cella richly decorated with 
three-quarter detached shafts of the Corinthian order. 

Of the circular temples the Pantheon is the most remarkable. It 
was built by Hadrian, and consists of an immense rotunda 142 ft. in 
diameter, govered with a hemispherical dome 140 ft. high. Its 
walls are 20 ft. thick, and have alternately semicircular and rect- 
angular recesses in them. In the centre of the dome is a circular 
opening 30 ft. in diameter open to the sky, the only source from 



which the light is obtained. The rotunda is preceded by a portico, 
originally built by Agrippa as the front of the rectangular temple 
erected by him, taken down and re-erected after the completion of 
the rotunda, with the omission of the two outer cclumns. In other 
words Agrippa's portico was decastyle ; the actual portico is octastyle. 

Basilicas. — The earliest example of which remains exist is that of 
the Basilica Julia on the Forum, the complete plan of which is now 
exposed to view. It consisted of a central hall measuring 255 ft. 
by 60 ft., surrounded by a double aisle of arches carried on piers, 
which were covered with groined vaults. The Basilica Ulpia built 
by Trajan was similar in plan, but in the place of the piers were 
monolith columns, with Corinthian capitals carrying an entablature, 
with an upper storey forming a gallery round. 

The third great basilica, commenced by Maxentius and completed 
by Constantine, differs entirely from the two above mentioned. It 




Scale of Yards 

J. 1 1 L 




Scale of Yards 



Fig. 26. — Elevation and plan of the Maison Carree, Nimes. 

followed the design and construction of the Tepidarium of the 
Roman thermae, and consisted of a hall 275 ft. long by 82 ft. wide 
and 114 ft. high, covered with an intersecting barrel vault with deep 
recesses on each side which communicated one with the other by 
arched openings and constituted the aisles. 

Theatres. — The only example in Rome is the theatre of Marcellus, 
built by Augustus 13 B.C., and one of the purest examples of Roman 
architecture. Amongst the best preserved examples is the theatre 
of Orange in the south of France, the stage of which was 203 ft. long. 
In the theatre at Taormina in Sicily are still preserved some of the 
columns which decorated the rear wall of the stage. The theatre 
of Herodes Atticus at Athens (a.d. 160) retains portions of its 
enclosure walls and some of the marble seats. There are two theatres 
in Pompeii where the seats and the stage are in fair preservation. 
Other examples in Asia Minor are at Aizani, Side, Telmessus, Alinda, 
and in Syria at Amman, Gerasa, Shuhba and Beisan. 

Amphitheatres. — The largest amphitheatre' is that known as the 
Colosseum, commenced by Vespasian in a.d. 72, continued by Titus 
and dedicated by the latter in a.d. 80. This refers to the three lowet 



ROMAN] 



ARCHITECTURE 



385 



storeys, for the topmost storey was not erected until the first part 
of the 3rd century, when it was completed by Severus Alexander 
and Gordianus. The building is elliptical in plan and measures 
620 ft. for the major axis and 513 ft. for the minor axis. There were 
eighty entrances, two of which were reserved for the emperor and 
his suite. The Cavea (q.v.) was divided into four ranges of seats; 
the whole of the exterior and the principal corridors were built in 
travertine stone, and all other corridors, staircases and substructures 
in concrete. Externally the wall was divided into four storeys, the 
three lower ones with arcades divided by semi-detached columns of 
the Tuscan, the Ionic and the Corinthian orders respectively. The 
walls of the topmost storey were decorated with pilasters of the 
Corinthian order, the only openings there being small windows, to 
light the corridors and the upper range of seats. Among other 
amphitheatres the best preserved are those found at Capua, Verona, 
and Pompeii in Italy; at El Jem in North Africa; at Pola in Istria, 
and at Aries and Nimes in France. 

The Thermae or Imperial Baths. — The term thermae is given to the 
immense bathing establishments which were built by the emperors 
to ingratiate themselves with the people. Of the ordinary baths 
(Balneae) there were numerous examples not only in Rome but at 
Pompeii and throughout the Empire. The thermae were devoted 
not only to baths but to gymnastic pursuits of every kind, and 
being the resorts of the poets, philosophers and statesmen of the day, 
contained numerous halls where discussions and orations could take 
place. The plans of these thermae were measured by Palladio about 
1560, at a time when they were in far better preservation and more 
extensive than they are to-day. They have, however, been measured 
since by some of the French Grand Prix students; and Blouet's 
work on the Thermae of Caracalla (1828) and Paulin's on the Thermae 
of Diocletian (1890) give accurate drawings as well as conjectural 
restorations which are of the greatest value. The earliest thermae 
were those built by Agrippa (20 B.C.) in the Campus Martius, and of 
others those of Titus and Trajan are the best preserved; plans can 
be found in Cameron's Baths (1775). 

Entrance Gateways and Arches of Triumph. — As the entrance 
gateways were sometimes erected to commemorate some important 
event, we have grouped these together, the real difference being 
that the arch of triumph was an isolated feature and served no 
utilitarian purpose, whereas the entrance gateway constituted part 
of the external walls of the city and could be opened and closed at 
will. Of the latter those at Verona, Susa, Perugia and Aosta in 
Italy, Autun in France, and the Porta Nigra at Treves (Trier) are 
the best known, but there are also numerous examples throughout 
Syria and North Africa. The arches of triumph offered a fine scope 
for decoration with bas-reliefs setting forth the principal events of 
the campaign; the representation on coins also suggests that they 
were looked upon as pedestals to carry large groups of sculpture. 
The best known examples are those of Titus, Septimius Severus 
and Constantine at Rome, of Trajan at Ancona, and, in France, 
at Orange, St Remi and Reims. There were numerous examples 
throughout North Africa and Syria, of which the arch of Caracalla 
at Tebessa in the former and the great gateway of Palmyra in Syria 
are the best preserved. 

Memorial Buildings and Tombs. — Columns of victory constituted 
another type of memorial, and the shafts of the columns of Trajan 
and Marcus Aurelius in Rome lent themselves to a better representa- 
tion of the records of victory than those which could be obtained in 
the panels of a triumphal arch. Other columns erected are those of 
Antoninus Pius in Rome, a column at Alexandria, and others in 
France and Italy. 

If the Romans derived from the Etruscans a custom of erecting 
tombs in memory of the dead, they did not follow on the same 
lines, for whilst the Etruscans always excavated the tomb in the 
lolid rock, constituting a more lasting memorial, the Romans 
regarded them as monumental features and lined the routes of the 
via sacra of their towns with them. The earliest example remaining 
is that of Caecilia Metella (58 B.C.), of which the upper portion, 
;onsisting of a circular drum 93 ft. in diameter, remains. Of the 
tomb of Hadrian the core only exists in the castle of Sant' Angelo. 
From the descriptions given it must have been a work of great 
magnificence. The tombs known as Columbaria (q.v.) were always 
below ground, but in some cases an upper storey was built above 
them consisting of a small temple, and these flanked the Via Appia 
in large numbers. At Pompeii outside the Herculaneum Gate the 
Via Appia was lined on both sides with tombs of varied design, and 
with exedrae or circular seats in marble, provided for the use of 
those visiting the tombs. The tombs in Syria form a very large and 
important series, the earliest perhaps being those in Palmyra, 
where they took the form of lofty towers, from 70 to 90 ft. high, 
externally simple as regards their design, but in the several storeys 
inside profusely decorated with Corinthian pilasters and coffered 
ceilings in stone. The tombs in Jerusalem built in the 1st century 
of our era are partly excavated in the rock and partly erected. The 
most important were those known as the tomb of Absalom, the tomb 
of St James, and the tombs of the judges and the kings, all cut in 
the solid rock. In central Syria some of the tombs are excavated in 
the rock, and over them are built a group of two or more columns 
held together by their entablatures. The most important series 
are the tombs at Petra, all cut in the side of cliffs and of elaborate 



design. The sculptor, being free from the restriction of construction, 
realized his conception much in the same way as a scene-painter 
produces a theatrical background. 

Aqueducts and Bridges. — Although at the present day aqueducts 
and bridges would be classed under the head of engineering works, 
those built by the Romans are so fine in their conception and design 
that they take their place as monuments. The Pont-du-Gard near 
Nimes, and the aqueducts of Segovia, Tarragona and Merida in 
Spain, and some of those in or near Rome, are of the simplest design, 
depending for their effect on their magnificent construction, their 
dimensions both in length and height, and the scale given in the 
ranges of arches one above the other. Few of the Roman bridges 
have lasted to our day; the bridges of Augustus at Rimini and of 
Alcantara in Spain may be taken as types of the design, in which we 
note that there are no architectural superfluities; the quality of the 
design depends on the graceful proportion of the arches and the fine 
masonry in which they are built. 

Palatial Architecture. — By far the most magnificent group of 
palaces are those which were erected by the Caesars on the Palatine 
hill at Rome. Commenced by Augustus and added to by his suc- 
cessors down to the reign of Severus, they cover an area considerably 
over 1,000,000 sq. ft., and comprise an immense series of great halls, 
throne room, banqueting hall, basilicas, peristylar courts, temple, 
libraries, schools, barracks, a stadium and separate suites for princes 
and courtiers. The service of the palace would seem to have been 
carried on in vaulted corridors in several storeys, some of which 
on the north side, overlooking the Circus Maximus, must have been 
over 100 ft. in height. Except under the Villa Mills, the greater part 
of the plan has been traced ; and large remains of mosaic pavements 
have been found in situ, and in the approaches, vaulted halls, some 
still retaining their stucco decoration. 

A similar variety of groups of every description of structure is 
found at Tivoli, but spread over a very much larger area. The villa 
of Hadrian extended over 7 m. ; the works there were probably 
begun about a.d. 123, the first portion being his own residential 
palace. In addition to the numerous halls, courts, libraries, &c, 
Hadrian attempted to reproduce some of the most remarkable monu- 
ments which he had seen during his long travels; the Stadium, 
Palaestra, Odeum, the two theatres, the artificial lake, Canopus and 
other features were, however, constructed in the Roman style. 
Built on a ridge between two valleys, the several buildings occupied 
various levels, so that immense terraces and flights of stairs existed 
throughout the site and, combined with the natural scenery, must 
have been of extraordinary beauty. 

The palace of Diocletian at Spalato, to which he retired after 
his abdication, constituted a fortress, three of its walls being 
protected by towers, the fourth on the south by the sea.. For an 
account of its well-preserved remains see Spalato. The emperor's 
own residence was on the south side, and had a gallery 520 ft. long 
overlooking the sea. The two main streets, with arcades on each 
side and crossing one another, divided the whole palace into four 
sections. One of these streets crossed from gate to gate, the other 
from the north gate led to the entrance into the palace of the emperor. 

Private Houses. — The entire absence of the remains of the private 
houses of Rome, with the single exception of the house of Livia on 
the Palatine, would have left us with a very poor insight into their 
design were it not for the discovery of Pompeii (q.v.) and Hercu- 
laneum (q.v.). The descriptions given by Pliny of the lavish ex- 
travagance in the Roman houses, and the employment of various 
Greek marbles in the shape of monolith columns and panelling of 
walls, are substantiated by those which are found in the Pantheon, 
in the palaces on the Palatine, and in Hadrian's villa at Tivoli; 
and these compared with what is found at Pompeii show that the 
latter was only a provincial town of second or third-rate importance, 
where painted imitations took the place of real marbles, and where 
the wall paintings were very inferior to those which have been 
discovered in Rome. (R. P. S.) 

Byzantine Architecture 

The term " Byzantine " is applied to the style of architecture 
which was developed in Byzantium after Constantine had transferred 
the capital of the Roman empire to that city in a.d. 324. 

It is not possible, in the early ages of any style which is based on 
preceding or contemporaneous styles, to draw any hard and fast line 
of demarcation; and already before the Peace of the Church, a 
gradual transformation in the Roman style had been taking place, 
even in Rome itself. Thus the arch had gradually been taking the 
place of the lintel, either frankly as a relieving arch above it (portico 
of Pantheon), or introduced in the frieze just above the architrave 
(San Lorenzo), or by the conversion of the architrave into a flat arch 
by dividing it into voussoirs, as in the Forum Julium at Rome or 
in the temple of Jupiter at Baalbek. In the palace built by Diocletian 
at Spalato, the architrave or lintel of the Golden Gate is built with 
several voussoirs, and the pressure is further relieved by an arch 
thrown across above it. Long before this, however, and already in 
the 2nd century a.d. in Syria, this relieving arch had been moulded 
and decorated, with the result of emphasizing it as a new architec- 
tural feature. In this same palace at Spalato, in order to obtain a 
wider opening in the centre of the portico, leading to the throne 
room, it was spanned by an arch, round which were carried the 



386 



ARCHITECTURE 



FBYZANTINE 



mouldings of the whole entablature, viz. architrave, frieze and 
cornice. At a still earlier date in Syria the same had been done in 
the Propylaea of the temple at Damascus (a,d. 151) and other 
examples are found in North Africa. 

Now when Constantine transferred the capital to Byzantium, he 
is said to have imported immense quantities of monolith columns 
from Rome, and also workmen to carry out the embellishments of 
the new capital; for his work there was not confined to churches, 
but included amphitheatres, palaces, thermae and other public 
buildings. Owing to the haste with which these were built, and in 
some cases probably to the ephemeral materials employed, for the 
roofs of the churches were only in timber, all these early works have 
been swept away ; but there remain two structures at least, which 
are said to date from Constantine's time, viz. the Binbirderek or 
cistern of a thousand columns, and the Yeri-Batan-Serai, both in 
Constantinople. As one of the first tasks a Roman emperor set 
himself to perform was the provision of an ample supply of water, 
of which Byzantium was much in need, there is every reason to 
suppose that they are correctly attributed to Constantine's time. If 
so, as the construction of their vaults is quite different from that 
employed by the Romans, it suggests that there already existed in 
the East a traditional method of building vaults of which theemperor 
availed himself ; and, although it is not possible to trace all the earlier 
developments, the traditional art of the East, found throughout 
Syria and Asia Minor, must from the first have wrought great changes 
in the architectural style, and in some measure this would account 
for the comparatively shcrt period of two centuries which elapsed 
between the foundation of the new empire and the culminating period 
of the style under Justinian in ad. 532-558. 

Constantine is said to have built three churches in Palestine, but 
these have either disappeared or have been reconstructed since; 
an early basilican church is that of St John Studius (the Baptist) in 
Constantinople, dating from a.d. 463, and though it shows, but little 
deviation from classic examples, in the design and vigorous execution 
of the carving in the capitals and the entablature we find the germ 
of the new style. The next typical example is that found in the 
church of St Demetrius at Salonica, a basilican church with atrium 
in front, a narthex, nave and double aisles, with capacious galleries 
on the first floor for women, and an apsidal termination to the nave. 
Instead of the classic entablature, the monolithic columns of the 
nave carry arches both on the ground and upper storeys ; above the 
capitals, however, we find a new feature known as the dosseret, 
already employed in the two cisterns referred to, a cubical block 
projecting beyond the capital on each side and enabling it to carry 
a thicker wall above. In later examples, when the aisles were 
vaulted, the dosseret served a still more important purpose, in 
carrying the springing of the vaults. The nave and aisles of this 
church of St Demetrius were covered with timber roofs, as the 
architects had neither the knowledge, the skill, nor perhaps 
the materials to build vaults, so as to render the whole church 
indestructible by fire. < 

One of the first attempts at this (though the early date given is 
disputed) would seem to have been made at Hierapolis, on the 
borders of Phrygia in Asia Minor, where there are two churches 

covered with barrel vaults carried 
on transverse ribs across the nave, 
the thrust of which was met by 
carrying up solid walls on each side, 
these walls being pierced with open- 
ings so as to form aisles on the 
ground floor and galleries above. 
The same system was carried out 
a century earlier in central Syria, 
where, in consequence of the absence 
of timber, the buildings had to be 
roofed with slabs of stone carried on 
archesacrossthenave. It is probable 
that in course of time other examples 
will be found in Asia Minor, giving 
a more definite clue to the next 
development, which we find in the 
work of Justinian, who would seem 
to have recognized that the employ- 
ment iff timber or combustible 
materutls was fatal to the long 
duration of such buildings. Accord- 
ingly in the first church which he 
built (fig. 27), that of SS. Sergius 
and Bacchus (a.d. 527), the whole 
building is vaulted; the church is about 100 ft. square, with a 
narthex on one side. The central portion of the church is octagonal 
(52 ft. wide), and is covered by a dome, carried on arches across the 
eight sides, which are filled in with columns on two storeys. These 
are recessed on the diagonal lines, forming apses. The vault is 
divided into thirty-two zones, the zones being alternately flat and 
concave. 

We now pass to Justinian's greatest work, the jchurch of St 
Sophia (fig. 28), begun in 532 and dedicated in 537, which marks 
the highest development of the Byzantine style and became the 
modef on which all Greek churches, and even the mosques built by 




Scale of Feet 
o 10 zo 30 405060 

Fig. 27. — Plan of SS. Sergius 
and Bacchus. 



the Mahommedans in Constantinople, from the 15th century on- 
wards, were based. The architects employed were Anthemius of 
Tralles and Isidorus of Miletus, and the problem they had to solve 
was that of carrying a dome 107 ft. in diameter on four arches. The 
four arches formed a square on plan, and between them were built 
spherical pendentives, which, overhanging the angles, reduced the 
centre to a circle on which the dome was built. This dome fell down in 
555, and when rebuilt was raised higher and pierced round its lower 
part with forty circular-headed windows, which give an extraordinary 
lightness to the structure. At the east and west ends are immense 
apses, the full width of the dome, which are again subdivided into 
three smaller apses. The north and south arches are filled with lofty 
columns carrying arches opening into the aisle on the ground storey 
and a gallery on the upper storey, the walls above being pierced with 
windows of immense size. The church was built in brick, and 
internally the walls were encased with thin slabs of precious marble 
up to a great height (fig. 29). The walls and vault above were 
covered with mosaics on a gold ground, which, as they represented 
Christian subjects, were all covered over with stucco by the Turks 




Fig. 28. — Plan of St Sophia. 

after the taking of Constantinople. During the restoration in the 
middle of the 19th century, when it became necessary to strip off 
the stucco, these mosaics were all drawn and published by Salzen- 
burg, and they were covered again with plaster to prevent their 
destruction by the Turks. The columns of the whole church on the 
ground floor are of porphyry, and on the upper storey of verd 
antique. The length of the church from entrance door to eastern 
apse is 260 ft.; in width, including the aisles, it measures 238 ft., 
and it measures 175 ft. to the apex of the dome. The columns and 
arches give scale to the small apses, the small apses to the larger 
ones, and the latter to the dome, so that its immense size is grasped 
from the first. The lighting is admirably distributed, and the rich 
decoration of the marble slabs, the monolith columns, the elaborate 
carving of the capitals, the beautiful marble inlays of the spandrils 
above the arches, and the glimpse here and there of some of the 
mosaic, which shows through the stucco, give to this church an effect 
which is unparalleled by any other interior in the world. The 
narthex or entrance vestibule forms a magnificent hall 240 ft. in 
length, equally richly decorated. Externally the building has little 
pretensions to architectural beauty, but its dimensions and varied 
outline, with the groups of smaller and larger apses and domes, 
make it an impressive structure, to which the Turkish minarets, 
though ungainly, add picturesqueness. 

In a.d. 536 a second important church was begun by Theodora, 
the church of the Holy Apostles, which was destroyed in 1454 by 
order of Mahommed II. to build his mosque. The design of this 
church is_known only from the clear description given by Procopius, 



BYZANTINE] 



ARCHITECTURE 



387 



the historian who has transmitted to us the record of Justinian's 
work, and its chief interest to us now is that it forms the model 
on which the church of St Mark at Venice was based, when it was 
restored, added to, and almost rebuilt about 1063. 

The church of St Sophia was not only the finest of its kind at the 
time of its erection, but no building approaching it has ever been 
built since in the Byzantine style, nor does much seem to have been 
done for two or three centuries afterwards. At the same time the 
erection of new churches must have been going on, because there are 
certain changes in design, the results probably of many trials. The 
difficulty of obtaining sufficient light in domes of small diameter led 
to the windows being placed in vertical drums, of which the earliest 
example is that of the western dome of St Irene at Constantinople, 
rebuilt a.d. 718-740. This simplified the construction and externally 
added to the effect of the church. The greatest change, however, 
which took place, arose in consequence of the comparatively small 
dimensions given to the central dome, which rendered it necessary 
to provide more space in another way, by increasing the area on 
each side, so that the plan developed into what is known as the Greek 
cross, in which the four arms are almost equal in dimensions to the 
central dome, and were covered with barrel vaults which amply 
resisted its thrust. In front of the church a narthex and sometimes 
an exonarthex was added, which was of greater width than the 
church itself, as in the churches (both in Constantinople) of the 
Theotokos and of Chora (a.d. 1080). The latter, better known as the 




Fig. 29. — Cross section of the interior of St Sophia. 

" mosaic mosque," on account of its splendid decoration in that 
material, is of special interest, because in the five arches of its facade 
we find the same design as that which originally constituted the front 
ol the lower part of St Mark's at Venice, before it was encrusted with 
the marble casing and the plethora of marble columns and capitals 
brought over from Constantinople. 

Sometimes an additional church was built adjoining the first 
church and dedicated to the immaculate Virgin, as in the church of 
St Mary Panachrantos, Constantinople, the church of St Luke of 
Stiris, Phocis, and the church in the island of Paros. In the last- 
named church the apse still retains its marble seats, rising one above 
the other, with the bishop's throne in the centre. In addition to 
the churches already mentioned in Constantinople, there are still 
some which have been appropriated by the Turks and utilized as 
mosques. At Mount Athos there are a large number of Greek 
churches, ranging from the 10th to the i6ch centuries, which are 
attached to the monasteries. At Athens one of the most beautiful 
examples is preserved in the Catholicon or cathedral, the materials 
of which were taken from older classical buildings. This cathedral 
measures only 40 ft. by 25 ft., and is now overpowered by the new 
cathedral erected close by. 

The external design of the Byzantine churches, as a rule, is 
extremely simple, but it owes its quality to the fact that its features 
are those which arise out of the natural construction of the church. 
The domes, the semi-domes over the apses, and the barrel vaults 
over other parts of the church, appear externally as well as internally, 
and as they are all covered with lead or with tdes, laid direct on the 
vaults, they give character to the design and an extremely picturesque 
effect. The same principle is observed in the doorways and windows, 
to which importance is given by accentuating their constructive 



features. The arches, always in brick, are of two orders or rings of 
arches set one behind the other, and the voussoirs, alternately in 
brick and stone, have the most pleasing effect. The same simple 
treatment is given to the walls by the horizontal courses of bricks 
or tiles, alternating with the stone courses. In the apse of the 
church of the Apostles at Salonica, variety is given by the interlacing 
of brick patterns. This elaboration of the surface decoration is 
carried still further in the palace of Hebdomon at Blachernae, in 
Constantinople, built by Constantine Porphyrogenitus (913-949), 
where the spandrils of the arches are inlaid with a mosaic of bricks in 
various colours arranged in various patterns. 

There would seem to have been a revival in the nth century, 
possibly a reflex of that which was taking place in Europe, and it is 
to this period we owe the churches of St Luke in Phocis, the church 
at Daphne, and the churches of St Nicodemus and St Theodore in 
Athens. The finest example of brick patterns is that which is found 
in the church of St Luke of Stiris, attached to the monastery in the 
province of Phocis, north of the Gulf of Corinth, of which an admir- 
able monograph was published in 1901 by the committee of the 
British School at Athens, illustrated by measured drawings of the 
plans, elevations, sections and mosaics by Messrs Schultz and 
Barnsley, with a detailed description. The church of St Luke of 
Stiris is one of those already referred to, where a second church 
dedicated to the Holy Virgin has been added, but in this case, 
according to Messrs Schultz and Barnsley, on the site of a more 
ancient church of which the narthex alone was retained. The plan 
of the great church differs from the ordinary Greek cross in that the 
arms of the cross are of much less width than the central domed 
square, and arches being thrown across the angles carry eight 
pendentives instead of four. On the east side the Diaconicon and 
Prothesis are included in the width of the domed portion instead of 
forming the eastern termination of the aisles. The churches at 
Daphne in Attica and of St Nicodemus at Athens 
have a similar plan. 

The decoration of the smaller church of St Luke 
of Stiris is of the most elaborate character, bright 
patterns of infinite variety alternating with the 
brick courses, and as blocks of marble, removed 
from the site of the old city near, were available, 
they have been utilized in various parts of the 
structure and richly carved. The church at 
Mistra in the Peloponnesus, 13th century, built in 
the side of a hill, is one of the most picturesque 
examples, and is almost the only example in 
which a tower is to be found. 

Armenia. — One other phase of the Byzantine 
style has still to be mentioned, the development 
of church architecture in Armenia, which follows 
very much on the same lines as that of the Greek 
church, with a central dome on the crossing, a 
narthex at the west end and a triapsal east end. 
In two churches at Echmiadzin and Kutais there 
are transeptal apses in addition to those at the east 
end. One of the differences to be noted is that 
the domes and roofs are generally in stone 
externally, and this has led to another change; 
the domes, though hemispherical inside, have 
conical roofs over them. There is also a greater 
admixture of styles, the Persian, Byzantine 
and Romanesque phases entering into the design; the last 
was probably derived from the churches of central Syria, as 
the Armenians were the only race who seem to have penetrated 
there, and the finest example, at Kalat Seman, was at one time in 
their possession. The church at Dighur near Ani, of the 7th century, 
also probably owes its classical details to the work in central Syria. 
The most important example of the Armenian style is found in the 
cathedral at Ani, the capital of Armenia, dating from a.d. ioio. In 
this church pointed arches and coupled piers are found, with all the 
characteristics of a complete pointed-arch style, which, as Fergusson 
remarks, " might be found in Italy or Sicily in the 12th or 14th 
century." Externally the walls are decorated with lofty blind 
arcades similar to those in the cathedral at Pisa and other churches 
in the same town, which are probably fifty years later. The elaborate 
fret carving of the window dressings and hcod moulds are probably 
borrowed from the tile decoration found in Persia. 

Russia. — The architecture of Russia is only a somewhat degraded 
version of the style of the Byzantine empire. The earliest buildings 
of importance are the cathedrals of Kiev and Novgorod, 1019-1054. 
The original church of Kiev consisted of nave, with triple aisles each 
side, the piers in which are of enormous size, a transept and square 
bays of the choir beyond, each with deep apsidal chapels. Externally 
the chief features are the bulbous domes adopted from the Tatars, 
which sometimes assume great dimensions. Internally, the chief 
feature is the Iconostasis, which corresponds to the English rood 
screen, except that in Russia it forms a complete separation between 
the church and the sanctuary with its altar. 

One of the most remarkable churches is that of St Basil at Moscow 
(1 534-1 584), which in plan looks like a central hall, surrounded by 
eight other halls of smaller dimensions, all separated one from the 



388 



ARCHITECTURE 



[EARLY CHRISTIAN 



other by vaulted corridors ; this arrangement is not intelligible until 
one sees the exterior view, which accounts for the plan ; each one 
of these halls is crowned by lofty towers with bulbous domes, the 
centre one rising above all the others and terminated with an 
octagonal roof, probably derived from the Armenian conical roof. 
The oldest and most interesting church in Moscow is the church of 
the Assumption (1479), where the tsars are always crowned; but 
as it measures only 74 ft. by 50 ft., it is virtually little more than a 
chapel; the plan is that of a Greek cross with central dome and four 
others over the angles. One other church deserves mention — at 
Curtea de Argesh, in Rumania. It was built in 1517-1526, and 
though small (90 by 50 ft.), is built entirely of stone, instead of brick 
covered with stucco, as is the case with the churches in Moscow. 
The interior has been entirely sacrificed to the exterior, the domes 
being raised to an extravagant height. The relative proportion of 
width of nave to height of dome in St Sophia at Constantinople is 
about one to two; in the church at Curtea de Argesh it is about 
one to five; and yet there can be little doubt the design was made 
by one of those Armenian architects who seem to have been always 
employed at Constantinople, and who presumably based their 
designs there on St Sophia as regards its principal features. Here, 
however, he was working for Tatar employers who attached more 
importance to display than to good proportion. In general design 
the church is based on Armenian work. The elaborately carved 
panels and disks are copied from the inlays in the mosques in 
Damascus and of Sultan Hassan at Cairo, and the stalactite cornices 
and capitals of the columns are transcripts of the Mahommedan style 
of Constantinople, which was derived from the style developed by 
the Seljuks. 

We were only able to point to a single example of a tower in the 
Byzantine style, but in Russia the towers not only constitute the 
principal accessory to the church but were necessary adjuncts, in 
order to provide accommodation for bells, the casting of which has 
at all times formed one of the most important crafts in Russia. The 
chief examples, all in Moscow, are the tower attached to the church 
of the Assumption; the tower of Boris, inside the Kremlin; and 
that erected over the sacred gate of the same. But they abound 
throughout Russia, and in some cases form important features in 
the principal elevations on either side of the narthex. (R. P. S.) 

Early Christian Architecture 
Of the earliest examples of the housing of the Christian church 
few remains exist, owing partly to their destruction from time to 
time by imperial edicts, and partly to the fact that in most cases 
they were only oratories of a small and unpretending nature, which, 
immediately after the Peace of the Church, were rebuilt of greater 
size and with increased magnificence. In Rome itself, the principal 
religious centre was that which was found in the catacombs (q.v.), 
almost the only resort in times of persecution. In the houses of the 
wealthy Romans who had been converted, rooms were set apart for 
the reception of the faithful, and these may have been increased in 
size by the addition of side aisles. At all events, either in Rome or 
in the East, where greater freedom of worship was observed, the 
requirements of the religious had already resulted in a traditional 
type of plan, which may account for the similarity of all the great 
churches built by Constantine. It has often been assumed that the 
great Roman basilicas, if not actually utilized by the Christians, were 
copied so far as their design is concerned. This, however, is not 
borne out by the facts, there being very little similarity between the 
first churches built and the two great Roman basilicas, the Ulpian 
basilica and that built by Constantine; the latter was roofed with 
an immense vault, an imperishable covering, not attempted till two 
centuries later in Byzantium, and the former had its entrance in the 
centre of the longer side, and the tribunes at either end were divided 
off from the basilica by a double aisle of columns. The basilica plan 
was adopted because it was the simplest and most economical 
building of large size which could be erected, having an immense 
central area or nave well lighted by clerestory windows, and single or 
double aisles to divide the two sexes, and further because the immense 
supply of columns which could be taken from existing temples or 
porticoes enabled the architect to provide at small cost the colonnades 
or arcades between the nave and the aisles. On the other hand, there 
is no doubt that the temples, for which there was no further use, were 
largely appropriated, not only in Italy but in Greece, Sicily and 
elsewhere, and it is to this appropriation that we owe the preservation 
of the Parthenon, the Erechtheum and the temple of Theseus at 
Athens. There are some cases in which it is interesting to note the 
changes which were made to convert the temple into a church. In 
the temple of Athena at Syracuse, walls were built in between the 
columns of the peristyle, the cella was appropriated for the nave, and 
arcades were cut through the cella walls to communicate with the 
peristyle, so as to constitute the aisles. In the temple of Aphrodisias, 
in Asia Minor, a further development occurred. The walls of the 
cella were taken down, a wall was built outside the columns of the 
peristyle to form aisles, and the columns of the east and west end 
were taken down and placed in line with the others, in order to 
increase the length of the church. 

The earliest Christian basilica built in Rome was the Lateran, 
which has, however, been so completely transformed in subsequent 
rebuildings as to have lost its original character. The next in date 



was that of the old St Peter's, which was taken down in 1506, in 
consequence of its ruinous condition, in order to make way for the 
present cathedral, begun by Pope Julius II. It was of considerable 
size, covering an area of 73,000 ft. Its plan consisted of an atrium, 
or open court, having a fountain in the centre, and arcades round ; 
a nave, 275 ft. long and 77 ft. wide, with double aisles on each side; 
a transept, 270 ft. long by 54 ft. wide; and a semi-circular apse or 
tribune with a radius of 27 ft. : the high altar being in the centre of 
its choir, and ranges of marble seats and the papal throne in the 
middle, corresponding to the benches and the judge's seat of the 
Roman tribune. The nave, therefore, with its double aisles, was 
similar to that of the Ulpian basilica, but the aisles were not returned 
across the east end, and at the west end, in their place, was the great 
triumphal arch opening into the transept. The monolith columns of 
the nave and their capitals (together 40 ft. high) were all taken from 
ancient buildings, as also were those of the aisle arcades and in the 
atrium. 

The basilica of St Paul, outside the walls, was originally of com- 
paratively small dimensions, with its apse at the west end; in 
A.D. 386 the church was rebuilt on a plan similar to St Peter's, with 
nave and double aisles, divided by columns carrying arches, transept 
and apse. In the Lateran basilica, StPeter's, Santa Maria Maggiore, 
and St Lawrence (outside the walls), the columns of the nave were 
close-set (i.e. with narrow intercolumniations) and supported 
architraves, but in St Paul (outside the walls) the columns of the 
second church (a.d. 386) were wider apart and carried arches. The 
same feature is found in the church of St Agnes, founded A.D. 324, 
but rebuilt 620-640; here the arcade is carried across the west 
end and there are galleries above, the arches being carried on dosseret 
blocks above the capitals ; these are also found in the galleries over 
the western end of St Lawrence, added by Honorius (a.d. 620-640) ; 
the dosseret, a Byzantine feature, being derived either from Ravenna 
or from the East. In the church of Santa Maria-in-Cosmedin (a.d. 
772-795) another Byzantine feature appears in the triple apse at 
the east end, the earliest example in Europe. In this church, as 
also in those of San Clemente and San Prassede, piers are built at 
intervals to carry the arcades separating the nave and aisles. Those 
in the latter, however, were probably added when the great arches 
were thrown across the nave. The church of San Clemente was 
built in 1 108, above a much older church dating from 385 and 
restored later ; it is almost the only church in Rome which has pre- 
served its atrium intact ; the internal arrangement of the church 
also is different from that found elsewhere, the choir, enclosed with 
marble piers and screens removed from the lower church and erected 
in front of the tribune, dating from A.D. 514-523. The mosaics 
executed in 11 12 are in fine preservation. 

Other early churches in Rome are those of Santa Pudenziana 
(335); San Pietro-in-Vincoli (442), with Doric columns in the nave; 
SS. Quattro Coronati (450); Santa Sabina (450), an interesting 
church on account of the marble inlaid decoration in the arch 
spandrils of the nave, which date from 824; San Prassede (817), 
with arches thrown across the nave later; San Vincenzo ed Anastasio 
alle Tre Fontane (626) ; and Santa Maria in Domnica, where there 
are galleries over the aisles and across the east end as in St Agnes. 

Hitherto we have said little about the architectural design, the 
fact being that externally these churches had the appearance of 
barns ; it is only in a few cases, notably in St Peter's, that the 
principal fronts were decorated with mosaics. The magnificent 
materials employed internally, the monolith marble columns, the 
enrichment of the apse and the triumphal arch with mosaics, and 
probably the painting and gilding of the ceiling or roof, gave to 
the early basilican churches in Rome that splendour which 
characterizes those in Byzantium and in Ravenna. 

With the exception of the baptistery attached to St John Lateran, 
and the so-called tomb of Santa Constantia, both erected by Con- 
stantine, the circular form of church was not adopted in Rome; 
there is one remarkable circular building of great size, San Stefano 
Rotondo, at one time thought to have been a Roman market, but 
now known to have been erected by Pope Simplicius (468-482). 
It consisted of a central circular nave, 44 ft. in diameter, and double 
aisles round. In the arcade dividing the aisles the arches are carried 
on dosserets, the earliest known example of this feature in Rome. 

Although inferior in size, the two churches of S. Apollinare Nuovo, 
built by Theodoric (493-525) and Sant' Apollinare-in-Classe (538- 
549), both in Ravenna, have the special advantage that they were 
constructed in new materials, there being no ancient Roman temples 
there to pull down. The ordinary basilican plan was adhered to, 
but as the architects and workmen came from Constantinople, they 
incorporated in the building various details of the Byzantine style, 
with which they were best acquainted. Thus the contour of the 
mouldings, the carrying of the capitals and imposts, the dosseret 
above the capital, and the scheme of decoration of the interior with 
marble casing on the lower portion of the walls and mosaic above, 
are all Byzantine. Externally the churches are extremely plain, 
the wall surfaces of the nave and aisle walls being varied by blind 
arcades. 

The earliest building in Ravenna is the tomb of Galla Placidia, 
built 450, a small cruciform structure with a dome on pendentives 
over the centre, perhaps the earliest example known. The baptistery 
of St John, which was attached to the cathedral built by Archbishop 



EARLY CHRISTIAN] 



ARCHITECTURE 



389 



Ursus (380), now destroyed, is a plain octagonal building, 40 ft. in 
diameter, originally with a timber roof; when in 451 it was deter- 
mined to replace this by a vault, in order to resist the thrust, the 
upper part of the walls was brought forward on arches and corbels, 
and the interior richly decorated with paintings, stucco reliefs and 
mosaics in the dome. The most interesting building in Ravenna, 
however, from many points of view, is the church of San Vitale 
(fig. 30), built 539-547, its plan and design being based on the 
church of SS. Sergius and Bacchus at Constantinople. The propor- 
tions of the interior of St Sergius are much finer than those in San 
Vitale, where the dome is raised too high; the timber roofs also of 
San Vitale have deprived the church externally of that fine archi- 
tectural effect found in Byzantine churches. In order to lighten the 
dome, its shell was built with hollow pots, the end of one fitted into 
the mouth of the other. The interior of the church is of great beauty, 
owing to the alternating of the piers carrying the eight arches with 
the columns set back in apsidal recesses. Unfortunately the church 
has been much restored, but the magnificent mosaics in the choir 
and the variety of design shown in the capitals and dosserets render 




Scale of Feet 
o 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 8a 

Fig. 30. — Plan of S. Vitale, Ravenna. 

this church, though small, one of the most attractive in Italy. 
One other Ravenna building must be mentioned, though it would 
be difficult to know under what style to class it. The tomb of 
Theodoric, having a decagonal plan in two storeys, the lower one 
vaulted at the upper storey, set back to allow of a " terrace " round, 
once sheltered by a small arcade, and covered by a single stone 
35 ft. in diameter, belongs to no definite style; the mouldings of<the 
upper portion have some resemblance to the mouldings of some of 
the Etruscan tombs at Castel d'Asso, which was probably known to 
Theodoric. 

As Dalmatia and Istria both formed part of Theodoric's kingdom, 
we find there the same Byzantine influence as that which was 
asserted in Ravenna, in both cases the work being done by artists 
and masons from Constantinople. There is not much left in Dal- 
matia, but in Istria are two important examples, — the churches at 
Parenzo (535-543) and Grado (571-586). Like the two churches in 
Ravenna, they are basilican in plan, with apses, semi-circular 
internally and polygonal externally, the latter being a characteristic 
found in all the churches in Europe which were influenced directly 
by Byzantine custom. Although the monolith columns were derived 
from ancient Roman buildings, all the capitals were specially carved 
for the two churches, and they have the same variety of design 
and in many cases are identical with those in San Vitale, Sant' 
Apollinare Nuovo, Sant' Apollinare-in-Classe, and those brought 
over from Constantinople, which now decorate St Mark's at Venice 
internally as well as externally. The decoration of the lower part 
of the walls internally with marble slabs, and the upper portion and 
apsidal vaults with mosaic, follows on the same lines as those at 
Ravenna and Constantinople. The church at Parenzo still retains 
its baptistery and atrium, from which fragments of the mosaics 
which originally decorated the west front can be seen. The 
church at Aquileia was rebuilt in the nth century, and the 
Duomo of Trieste has been so altered as to lose its original Byzantine 
character. (R. P. S.) 

Early Christian Work in Central Syria 

Contemporaneously with the early developments of the Christian 
churches just described, another line of treatment was being evolved 
in central Syria, which would seem to have been quite independent 
of the others, though at first sight it bears considerable resemblance 
to the Byzantine style, and for that reason was probably classed 



and described under that head by Fergusson. But the leading 
characteristic of the Byzantine style is the dome over the centre of the 
church round which all other features are grouped, whereas in central 
Syria, with the exception of two examples — one a circular, the other 
a polygonal church — there are no domes. There is considerable Greek 
feeling in the mouldings and carvings of the capitals, but that is 
probably due to the fact that the masons were originally of Greek 
extraction. A comparison, for instance, of the design and carving 
of the largest church in central Syria, the famous building erected 
round the column of St Simeon Stylites at Kalat-Seman, dating 
from the 6th century, with any Byzantine church of the same date, 
shows very little resemblance, because the former was inspired more 
or less directly by the Roman remains in the country. A similar 
inspiration is found in the churches of St Trophime at Aries and St 
Gilles in the south of France, and at Autun and Langres in Burgundy. 
Both were founded on Roman work, and the mouldings of the 
pediments and archivolts and the fluting of the pilasters at Kalat- 
Seman, of the 6th century, are identical with what is found, quite 
independently, in Provence and Burgundy in the nth and 12th 
centuries. There is, however, another special characteristic found 
in the masonry of the churches in central Syria, which is peculiar 
to the whole of Palestine, and is found in the earliest remains there, 
as also in Roman work, and to a certain extent in much of the 
Mahommedan construction and in that of the Crusaders, viz. its 
megalithic qualities. Instead of building an arch in several vous- 
soirs, they preferred to do it in three or five only, and sometimes 
would cut the whole arch out of a single vertical slab. If they 
employed voussoirs, they were not content with ordinary depth, 
shown by the archivolt mouldings, but made them three or four 
times as deep. 

The masons, in fact, would seem to have retained the traditional 
Phoenician custom of the country to employ the largest stones they 
were able to quarry, transport and raise on the building. Subse- 
quently, in working down the masonry, they reproduced the archi- 
tectural features they found in Roman buildings; this was done, 
however, without any knowledge as to their constructional origin or 
meaning; thus, in copying a Roman pilaster, the capital and part 
of the shaft would be worked out of one stone, and the lower part 
of the shaft and the base out of another. It is only from this point 
of view that we can account for the peculiar development given to 
the decoration of their later work, where archivolts, wood mould- 
ings and window dressings are iooked upon as simply surface 
decoration to be applied round doorways and windows, without any 
reference to the jointing of the masonry. 

The immense series of monuments, civil as well as religious 
existing throughout central Syria, were almost entirely unknown 
before the publication of the marquis of Vogue's work, La Syrie 
centrale, in 1865-1867. This work, illustrated with measured plans, 
sections and elevations, with perspective views, and accompanied 
by detailed descriptions of the various buildings, forms an invaluable 
record of an architectural style, more or less completely developed, 
which flourished from the 3rd to the beginning of the 7th century. 
An American archaeological expedition made further investigations 
in 1899-1900, and its report, written by Mr H. C. Butler, contains 
additional plans and a large number of photogravures, which bear 
testimony to the truth and accuracy of the engraved plates of the 
marquis de Vogue. The preservation of these central Syrian remains, 
more or less intact, is considered to have been due either to the 
desertion of all the towns in which they were situated by the in- 
habitants at the time of the Mahommedan invasion, or, according 
to Mr H. C. Butler, to the deforesting of the whole country about the 
commencement of the 7th century. 

The monuments and buildings illustrated may be divided into 
three classes, — ecclesiastical, including monasteries; civil and 
domestic; and tombs. It is in the two first that the principal 
interest is centred. 

Churches. — The earliest of these date from the end of the 4th 
century, and the latest inscription on a church is 609, so that a 
little over 200 years includes the whole series. With one or two 
small exceptions all the churches follow the basilican plan, with 
nave and aisles separated by arcades, the arches of which are carried 
by columns, four arches on each side in the smaller churches, ten in 
the largest. The churches are all orientated, and have generally a 
semi-circular apse, and occasionally a square or rectangular sanctuary 
at the east end, on either side of which are square chambers, — the 
diaconicon, reserved for the priests, on the south side, and the 
prothesis, on the north side, in which the offerings of the faithful 
were deposited. Except in the earliest churches, the entrance was 
generally at the west end, and was sometimes preceded by a porch. 
In addition to the west entrance, there were sometimes doorways 
leading direct into the north and south aisles, with projecting 
porticoes. About the middle of the 6th century a change was made 
in the design of the arcades in the nave, and rectangular piers with 
arches of wide span were substituted for the ordinary arcade with 
columns. The effect as shown in the engravings and photogravures 
is so fine that it is strange that the scheme was never adopted in 
the earlier Romanesque churches of Europe. The two more 
important examples are at Kalb-Lauzeh (fig. 31) and Ruweiha, but 
three or four others are known, and this plan was adopted in the 
basilica erected in the great court of the temple at Baalbek. All 



39° 



ARCHITECTURE 



[EARLY CHRISTIAN 



the churches are built in fine ashlar masonry, with moulded archi- 
volts and architraves to doorways and windows, and moulded 
string courses and cornices of simple design. The principal decora- 
tion externally is found in the hood-mould or label round the 
windows, continued as a string-course and carried round other 
windows, and sometimes terminating in a disk with cross in centre. 
These hood-moulds are occasionally richly carved. All the churches 
in central Syria had open timber roofs which have now disappeared ; 
this is proved by the sinkings in the end walls to receive the purlins, 
and the corbels provided to carry the tie beams. The apses were 
always covered with semi-domes. The 
three most important churches were those 
of Turmanin, Kalb-Lauzeh and Kalat- 
Seman. The plans of the two first are 
similar, except that in Turmanin the 
nave arcade is of the ordinary type, 
with seven arches carried on columns, 
while in Kalb-Lauzeh (fig. 32) there are 
three wide arches on each side carried 
on two rectangular piers and responds. 
Both have entrance porches (fig. 33), 
which are flanked by angle buildings 
carried up as towers in three storeys; 
these probably contained wooden stair- 
cases to ascend to an open gallery, which 
consisted of four columns in-antis between 
the angle towers above the porch. The 
north and south walls were quite plain, 
except for window and door dressings 
and string courses; the apse was richly 
decorated, with wall shafts superimposed 
between the windows, and carrying a 
Fig. 31. — Plan of Church projecting cornice with alternate corbels, 
of Kalb-Lauzeh. The church at Ruweiha has a similar 

plan to that at Kalb-Lauzeh, but two 
transverse arches in stone are thrown across the nave, resting on 
abutments attached to the nave piers. 

The most remarkable example and by far the largest is the great 
basilica at Kalat-Seman (fig. 34), which was erected round the pillar 
on which St Simeon Stylites spent thirty years of his life. The base 
of the pillar stands in the centre of an immense octagonal court 
open to the sky. The plan consists of nave, transept and choir, all 
with side aisles, separated in the centre by the octagonal court 
which constitutes the crossing. The nave built on the side of a hill 
is raised on a crypt, and the principal entrance would seem to have 





Fig. 32. — Interior of the Church of Kalb-Lauzeh. 

been through the porch of the north transept, which occupies the full 
width of transept and aisles. There were, however, in addition two 
doorways with porches to each aisle, as well as portico and doors 
to the north transept. At the eastern end were three apses, the 
two outer ones, facing the aisles, being additions in the second half 
of the 6th century. St Simeon died in 459, and the church was 
probably begun shortly afterwards, but not completed till the 
6th century. The archivolts of the great arches on each side of the 



octagonal court consist of architrave, frieze and cornice, copied 
from the arch of the propylaea at Baalbek or other Roman work. 
Here, as in the great southern porch, the classic nature of the details 
is remarkable, the pilasters are all fluted, and the modillion and 
dentil, derived from Roman models, exist throughout. On the other 
hand, the carving of the foliage was certainly executed by Greek 
artists, and the well-known Byzantine capital, with the leaves 




Fig. 33. — Church of Turmanin. 

bending under the influence of the wind, is here reproduced. The 
great apse externally retains its decoration with superimposed shafts 
and cornice, as in Turmanin and Kalb-Lauzeh. 

The monastery of Kalat-Seman was built on the south side of the 
great church, and many of the rooms had roofs of slabs of stone 
carried on arches across the room, a method of construction univers- 
ally found in the Hauran, where the absence of timber necessitated 
this more permanent method of construction. The monasteries 




Fig. 34. — Plan of Church of Kalat-Seman. 

differ from the domestic work in being much plainer, and, instead 
of columns in the porticoes, having invariably square piers of 
stone. 

Among circular churches, the walls of the cathedral at Bozra are 
gone, so that the conjectural restoration shown in de Vogue's work 
is purely speculative, but in the church at Ezra (510) the central 
octagon is covered by a high dome of elliptical section. An aisle is 
carried round the octagon with similar recesses on the diagonal lines, 



EARLY CHRISTIAN] 



ARCHITECTURE 



39 1 



the whole being enclosed in a square ; in the apse at the east end the 
seats of the tribune are still preserved. 

Domestic Work. — The domestic work in central Syria is, in a way, 
even more remarkable than the ecclesiastical. Broadly speaking, 
there are two types of plan — those found in the towns and grouped 
together, and those which, with increased area, constituted a villa. 
At El Barah the average house occupied a site of about 80 ft. by 
60 ft., of which about 30 ft. in width was occupied by an open court ; 
facing this court, which was enclosed with high walls, is an open 
colonnade on two floors, which always faces south, occupies the 
whole front (80 ft.) of the house, and is the only means of approach 
to the rooms in the rear, three on each floor, side by side. In the 
centre of these rooms, 14 ft. wide each, an arch is thrown across on 
each floor, which carries slabs of stone covering the first floor and 
the roof; the upper storey was reached probably by a timber 
staircase, now gone, but in poorer dwellings an external flight of 
steps in stone led to an upper floor. All the houses face the same way. 
The colonnade of the house consisted of about fifteen columns on 
each storey. Each column, including its capital and base, was cut 
out of a single stone ; on the upper storey, between the columns, 
are stone vertical slabs forming a balustrade; the houses are all 
built in fine ashlar masonry with architraves and cornices to doors 
and windows, a luxury which in England could rarely be indulged 
in for ordinary houses. At El Barah, in an area of about 250 ft. by 
150 ft. as shown by de Vogue, there are about 100 monolith columns, 
12 ft. high, on the ground storey, alone. In a villa at El Barah the 
open court is surrounded on three sides by buildings, those at the east 
end of considerable extent and in three storeys. A smaller example 
at Mujeleia has two courts, one of them being for stables and other 
services; otherwise the residence of the proprietor is similar to the 
one above described. Here and there the fantasy of the artist has 
been allowed to revel in the carving of the balustrades, door lintels, 
&c. The capitals are of endless design, and show interpretations 
of Ionic and Corinthian capitals, in some cases not dissimilar to the 
Byzantine versions in St Mark's at Venice. 

Hostelries and public baths are amongst other civil buildings 
which are recognizable, the hostelries in some cases being attached 
to the monasteries. 

Tombs. — The principal tombs are either excavated in the rock, 
with an open court in front and an entrance portico, like the tombs 
of the kings at Jerusalem, and sometimes a superstructure of columns 
or a podium raised above them; or again they are built in masonry, 
and take the form of sepulchral chapels; in the latter case, if many 
sarcophagi have to be deposited, and the chapel is of great length, 
arches are thrown across, about 6 ft. centre to centre, to support the 
slabs of stone with which they are covered. This carries on the 
traditional custom of the Roman temples in Syria, the roofs of 
which, in stone, were similarly supported. Sometimes there will be 
two storeys, the upper one covered with a dome. Those which are 
peculiar to the country' are square tombs, with a pyramidal stone roof 
all built in horizontal courses, and either enclosed with a peristyle all 
round, on one or two storeys, or having a portico in front with flat 
stone roof. The cornices, string courses and lintels of the doors of 
these tombs of the 4th and 5th centuries, are enriched with carving, 
showing strong Byzantine influence, though probably due to the 
employment of Greek artists. (R. P. S.) 

The Coptic Church in Egypt 

The earliest places of Christian worship in Egypt were probably 
only chapels or oratories of small dimensions attached to the 
monasteries, which were spread throughout the country ; a wholesale 
destruction of these took place at various times, more especially by 
the order of Severus, about 200 B.C., so that no remains have come 
down to us. The most ancient examples known are those which are 
attributed to the empress Helena, of which there are important 
portions preserved in the churches of the White and Red monasteries 
at the foot of the Libyan hills near Suhag. 

Although the plan of the Coptic church is generally basilican, i.e. 
consists of nave and aisles, it is probable that they were not copied 
from Roman examples, but were based on expansions of the first 
oratories built, to which aisles had afterwards been added. There 
are no long transepts, as in the early Christian basilicas of St Peter's 
at Rome, and of St Paul outside the walls, and there is only one 
example of a cruciform church with a dome in the centre following 
the Byzantine plan. Even at an early period the nave and aisles 
were covered sometimes with barrel vaults, either semicircular or 
elliptical. The Coptic church was always orientated with the 
sanctuaries at the east end. The aisles were returned round the west 
end and had galleries above for women. Sometimes the western 
aisle has been walled up to form a narthex ; in many cases a narthex 
was built, but, in consequence of the persecution to which the Copts 
were subject at the hands of the Moslems, its three doors have been 
blocked up and a separate small entrance provided. The narthex 
was the place for penitents, but was sometimes used for baptism by 
total immersion, there being epiphany tanks sunk in the floor of the 
churches at Old Cairo, known as Abu Serga, Abu-s-Sifain (Abu 
Sefen) and El Adra ; these are now boarded over, as total immersion 
is no longer practised. 

There are a few exceptions to the basilican plan; and in four 
examples (two in Cairo and two at Deir-Mar-Antonios in the eastern 



desert by the Gulf of Suez) there are three aisles of equal widths, 
divided one from the other by two rows of columns with three in 
each row, thus dividing the roof into twelve square compartments, 
each of which is covered with a dome. 

The sanctuaries at the east end, as developed in the Coptic church, 
differ in some particulars from those of any other religious structures. 
There are always three chapels or sanctuaries, with an altar in each, 
the central chapel being known as the Haikal. The chapels are more 
often square than apsidal, and are always surmounted by a complete 
dome, a peculiarity not found out of Egypt. The seats of the tribune 
are still preserved in a large number of the sanctuaries, and there 
are probably more examples in Egypt than in all Europe, if Russia 
and Mount Athos be excepted. Those of Abu-Serga, El Adra and 
Abu-s-Sifain, with three concentric rows of seats and a throne in the 
centre, are the most important; but even in the square sanctuaries 
the tradition is retained, and seats are ranged against the east wall, 
and in one case (at Anba-Bish6i) three steps are carried across, and 
behind them is a segmental tribune of three steps, with throne in the 
centre. 

The most remarkable Coptic churches in Egypt are those of the 
Deir-el-Abiad (the White monastery) and the Deir-el-Akhmar (the 
Red monastery) at Suhag. These were of great size, measuring about 
240 ft. by 130 ft. with vaulted narthex, nave and aisles separated by 
two rows of monolith columns taken from ancient buildings, twelve 
in each row and probably roofed over in timber, and three apses, 
directed respectively towards the east, north and south. These 
apses are unusually deep and have five niches in each, in two storeya 
separated by superimposed columns. In the church of St John at 
Antinoe there are seven niches. A similar arrangement is found in 
the three apses, placed side by side, in the more ancient portion of 
St Mark's, Venice, built a.d. 820, and said to have been copied front 
St Mark's at Alexandria. There is no external architecture in the 
Coptic churches; they are all masked with immense enclosure 
walls, so as to escape attention. The walls of the interior still 
preserve a great portion of the paintings of scriptural subjects; 
the screens dividing off the Haikal and other chapels from the choir 
are of great beauty, and evidently formed the models from which 
the panelled woodwork, doors and pulpits of the Mahommedan 
mosques have been copied and reproduced by Copts. 

Illustrations are given in A. J. Butler's Ancient Coptic Churches of 
Egypt (1884); Wladimir de Bock's Materiaux archeologiques de 
I'Eeypte chretienne (1901) ; and A. Gayet's L'art coptique. 

(R. P. S.) 

Romanesque and Gothic Architecture in Italy 

" Romanesque " is the broad generic term adopted about the 
beginning of the 19th century by French archaeologists in order 
to bring under one head all the various phases of the round- 
arched Christian style, hitherto known as Lombard and Byzantine 
Romanesque in Italy, Rhenish in Germany, " Romane " and 
Norman in France, Saxon and Norman in England, &c. In 
character, as well as in time, the Romanesque lies between the 
Roman and the Gothic or Pointed style, but its first manifesta- 
tion in Italy has already been described in the section on " Early 
Christian Architecture," and it. only remains to deal with the 
subsequent development from the age of Charlemagne, .which 
marks an epoch in the history of architecture, and from which 
period examples are to be found in every country. 

In consequence of the lack of homogeneousness in the Roman- 
esque style as developed in Italy, owing to the mixture of styles, 
and the difficulty of tracing the precise influence of any one race 
in buildings frequently added to, restored or rebuilt, their 
description will be more easily followed if a geographical sub- 
division be made, the simplest being Northern or Lombard 
Romanesque, Central Romanesque and Southern Romanesque; 
after the latter would follow the Sicilian Romanesque, which, 
owing to the Saracenic craftsman, constitutes a type by itself. 
This leaves still one other phase to be noted, the influence 
recognized in northern Italy of the architectural style of the 
Eastern Empire at Byzantium, either direct or through Istria and 
Dalmatia. In the churches at Ravenna, this influence has 
already been referred to in the section on " Early Christian 
Architecture," but it appears again in the church of St Mark 
at Venice, and in much of its domestic architecture, so that it 
is necessary to recognize another term,, that of " Byzantine 
Romanesque." 

Northern or Lombard Romanesque. — Although the materials for 
forming an adequate notion of the earlier work of the Lombards are 
very scanty, after their conversion to the Catholic faith the Church 
probably exercised a powerful influence in their architectural work. 
Under Liutprand, towards the close of the 8th century, an order 



392 



ARCHITECTURE 



[ITALIAN ROMANESQUE 



known as the Magistri Commacini was established, to whom were 
given the privileges of freemen in the Lombard State. These 
Commacini, so named from the island in the lake of Como whence 
they sprang, were trained masons and builders, who in the 9th and 
10th century would seem to have carried the Lombard style through 
north and south Italy, Germany and portions of France. It was at 
one time assumed that they had influenced the church architecture 
throughout Europe, but this is not borne out by the evidence of the 
buildings themselves, except in the Rhenish provinces and in the 
districts on the slope of the Harz Mountains, where in sculpture a 
strange mixture is found of monstrous animals with Scandinavian 
interlaced patterns and Byzantine foliage, bearing a close resemblance 
to the early sculpture in Sant' Ambrogio at Milan and San Michele 
at Pavia (Plate V., fig. 72). Although the earliest Lombard buildings 
in Italy (such as those of San Salvatore in Brescia, San Vincenzo-in- 
Prato at Milan, the church of Agliate and Santa Maria delle Caccie 
at Pavia) were basilican in plan with nave and aisles, there are some 
instances in which the adoption of a transept has produced the 
Latin cross plan (e.g. San Michele at Pavia, Sant' Antonino at 
Piacenza, San Nazaro-Grande at Milan, and the cathedrals of Parma 
and Modena), though to what extent this is due to subsequent 
rebuilding is not known. In the early basilicas above mentioned, 
the columns, carrying the arcades between nave and aisles, were 
taken from earlier buildings, while the capitals, where not Roman, 
were either rude imitations of Roman, or Byzantine in style. The 
roofs were always in wood, and the exteriors of the simplest descrip- 
tion. In the external decoration, however, of the apses of the 
churches of San Vincenzo-in-Prato, Santa Maria delle Caccie, the 
church at Agliate and the ancient portion of S. Ambrogio at Milan, 
we find the germ of that decorative feature which (afterwards 
developed into the eaves-gallery) became throughout Italy and on 
the Rhine the most beautiful and characteristic element of the 
Lombard style. In order to lighten the wall above the hemispherical 
vault of the apse, a series of niches was sunk within the arches of the 
corbel table, which gave to the cornice that deep shadow where it 
was most wanted for effect. In addition to the churches above 
named, similar niches are found in the baptisteries of Novara and 
Arsago, the Duomo Vecchio at Brescia and the church of San 
Nazaro Grande at Milan. Towards the close of the nth century, 
the imposts of these niches take the form of isolated piers, with a 
narrow gallery behind, and eventually small shafts with capitals are 
substituted for the piers, producing the eaves-galleries of the apses, 
which in Santa Maria Maggiore at Bergamo (1137) and the cathedral 
of Piacenza are the forerunners of numerous others in Italy, and in 
the churches of Cologne, Bonn, Bacharach and other examples on the 
Rhine, constitute their most important external decoration. 

In the apses of San Vincenzo-in-Prato and of the church at Agliate 
(both of the 9th century) there is another decorative feature, destined 
afterwards to become one of the most 
important methods of breaking up or 
subdividing the wall surface, i.e. the thin 
pilasterstrips, which, at regular intervals, 
rise from the lower part of the wall to the 
corbel table of the cornice. 

The two most important churches of 
the Lombard Romanesque style are 
those of Sant' Ambrogio at Milan and S. 
Michele at Pavia, their importance being 
increased by the fact that they probably 
represent the earliest examples of the 
solution of the great problem which was 
exercising the minds of the church 

C builders towards the end of the nth 

century, the vaulting of the nave. In 
the original church, of the 9th century, 
, •.. '.: ,- . -._ ::••„.• |*^h the nave and aisles of Sant' Ambrogio 
/■^^l **jki\ J I were divided in the usual way with 
\^P/^i^£^V ■■■ arcades, and were covered with open 
timber roofs. In the rebuilding of the 
church (fig. 35) the nave (38 ft. wide) 
was divided into four square bays, and 
compound piers of large dimensions were 
built, to carry the transverse and 
diagonal ribs of the new vault. To resist 
the thrust, the walls across the aisles were 
built up to the roof, and had external 
buttresses; the diagonal ribs, instead of 
following the elliptical curve which the 
intersection of the Roman semicircular 
barrel-vault gave to the groin, were made 
semicircular, so that the web or vaulting 
surface which rested on these ribs rose 
upwards towards the centre of the bay, 
giving a distinct domical form to the 
vault. The aisles, being half the 
width of the nave, were divided into eight compartments, two 
to each bay of the nave, and were covered both in the ground 
storey and the triforium with intersecting groin vaults. When this 
rebuilding took place, the front of the church was brought forward, 
bearing a narthex, and the arcades of the atrium were rebuilt in 




Fig. 35. — Plan of 
S. Ambrogio. 



the first years of the 12th century. The triple apse, to the external 
decoration of which we have called attention, the crypt underneath, 
and the south campanile, are the only remains of the 9th century 
church. The campanile on the north side was built 1125-1149, and 
the decoration with pilaster strips, semi-detached shafts, and arched 
corbel table, is repeated on the facade of the church and on the arcade 
round the atrium. In the rebuilding, portions of the sculptural 
decoration of the 9th century church were utilized; this would 
appear to have been a Lombard custom, as in the church of San 
Michele the lower part of the main front is encrusted with sculptured 
decoration taken from the earlier churches built on the site. These 
ancient sculptures are of special interest, as they constitute the best 
records of the rude Lombard work of the 8th and 9th centuries, and 
are intermingled with Byzantine scroll work and interlaced patterns. 
If the plan of Sant' Ambrogio, with its comparatively thin enclosure 
walls, suggests its original construction as an ordinary basilica, this 
is not the case with San Michele (fig. 36), where all the external 
walls are of great thickness, showing that from the first it was intended 
to vault the whole structure. The church is much smaller than 
Sant' Ambrogio, there being originally only two square bays to the 
nave (in the 15th century the vaults were rebuilt with four bays) ; 
the transept, however, projects widely beyond the aisles, and as 
there is another bay given to the choir in front of the apse, the area 
of the two churches is about the same. The existing church was 




Fig. 36. — Plan of San Michele, Pavia. 

probably begun shortly after the destructive earthquake of 1 1 17, 
and was consecrated in 1 132. In Sant' Ambrogio the transverse 
and diagonal arches spring from just above the triforium floor, so 
that there was no room for clerestory windows, and consequently 
the interior is dark. In San Michele the ribs rise from the level of 
the top of the triforium arcades, and two clerestory windows are 
provided to each bay. The crossing of the nave and transept is 
covered with a dome, carried on squinches, which dates from the 
first building. The dome over the fourth bay of Sant' Ambrogio 
replaced the original vault about the beginning of the 13th century. 

The cathedral of Novara, originally of the ordinary basilica type 
of the 10th century with timber roofs, was reconstructed in the nth 
century, compound piers being built to carry the transverse and 
diagonal ribs, and walls built across the outer aisles to resist the 
thrust; on the other hand SS. Pietro and Paolo at Bologna is a 12th 
century church, which was designed from the first to be vaulted. 
To these, and still belonging to the basilican plan, must be added 
San Pietro in Cielo d'oro (1136) and San Teodoro, both in Pavia; 
S. Evasio at Casale-Monferrato, having a comparatively narrow 
nave with double aisles on either side and a very remarkable narthex 
or porch: S. Lorenzo at Verona (lately restored), which in the 12th 
century was rebuilt with compound piers to carry a vault (the apse 
and the two remarkable circular towers in the west front belong to 
the ancient church) ; and Sant' Abbondio at Como, often restored 
and partly rebuilt, retaining, however, some of the original sculpture 
of the early Lombard period. 

Of churches built on the plan of the Latin cross, examples are 
Sant' Antonino at Piacenza, with an octagonal lantern towerover 
the crossing; Parma cathedral (c. 11 75), with an octagonal pointed 
dome over the crossing; Modena cathedral, rebuilt and consecrated 



ARCHITECTURE 



Plate I. 




Photo, Anderson- 



Fig. 63— ST MARK'S, VENICE. 



'Plate II. 



ARCHITECTURE 




PJtafo, Nettrdein. 



p IG- 64.— AMIENS CATHEDRAL. 



Photo F. Frith & Co. 

Fig. 65.— BURGOS CATHEDRAL. 



!i fff 




.fJT 




"-.'■"«*^. 66 ._ ST PAUL'S, LONDON. 



Photo. F. Frith & Co. „ 

Fig. 67.— ELY CATHEDRAL. 



ITALIAN ROMANESQUE] 



ARCHITECTURE 



393 



in 1 1 84 ; San Nazaro-Grande at Milan ; and San Lanf ranco at Pavia, 
the two latter without aisles. 

Reference has already been made to the eaves-galleries of the 
apses of the Lombard churches. A similar gallery was carried across 
the main front, rising with the slope of the roof, as in San Michele, 
Pavia; also on the west fronts of San Pietro in Cielo d'oro and San 
Lanfranco, at Pavia; and in the cathedrals of Parma and Piaccnza. 
In all these cases the galleries are not quite continuous, vertical 
buttresses or groups of shafts or single shafts being carried up through 
them to the corbel tables. In S. Ambrogio at Milan the central 
original lantern is surrounded with two tiers of galleries. The finest 
example of their employment, however, is in the magnificent central 
tower of the Cistercian church at Chiaravalle, near Milan, where the 
two lower storeys form the drum of the internal dome, the two 
storeys above are set back, and the upper storey consists of a lofty 
octagonal tower wittti conical spire. 

One of the serious defects in the front of the church of San Michele 
at Pavia is that it forms a mask, and takes no cognizance of the aisle 
roofs, which are at a lower level, and the same is found in San 
Pietro-in-Cielo d'oro at Pavia. This mask is carried to an absurd 
extent in the church of Santa Maria della Pieve at Arezzo, in which, 
above the ground storey of the arcades, are three galleries forming 
strong horizontal lines, which suggest the numerous floors of a civic 
building instead of the vertical subdivisions of a church. This 
defect is not found in the church of San Zeno at Verona, which is one 
of the finest of the Lombard churches; the church is basilican in 
plan, the nave being divided into five bays with compound piers, 
as in Sant' Ambrogio, as if it were intended to vault it ; this, however, 
was never done, but stone arches arc thrown across the two western- 
most bays of the nave as if to carry the root (now concealed by a 
wooden ceiling). The facade is of marble and sandstone, with 
pilaster-strips rising from the base to the arched corbel table, and 
the outline of th" nave and aisles is preserved in the front, in which 
all the mouldings and carving are of the utmost delicacy. Both here 
and in the cathedral are fine examples of those projecting porches, 
the columns ot which are carried on the backs of lions or other beasts. 
At Piacenza, Parma, Mantua, Bergamo and Modena are porches of 
a similar kind, and in the cathedral of Modena the columns which 
support the balcony on the entrance to the crypt are all carried on 
the backs of lions. The cathedral of Verona has suffered so much 
from rebuilding and restoration that little remains of the earlier 
structure, but the apse of the choir, decorated with a close set range 
of pilaster-strips, with bases and Corinthian capitals and crowned 
with a highly enriched entablature, is quite unique in its design. 

Among circular buildings, the Rotonda at Brescia was at one 
time considered to date from the 8th century, owing to its massive 
construction and the simplicity and plainness of its external design. 
Later discoveries, however, have shown that the early date can only 
be given to the crypt of San Filasterio situated to the eastward of the 
Rotonda. The church of Santo Sepolcro at Bologna, as its name 
implies, is one of those reproductions of the church of the Holy 
Sepulchre at Jerusalem which were built by the Templars during 
the crusades. Of much earlier date is the circular church of San 
Tommaso-in-Limine, an early Lombard work of the 9th century, to 
which period belong also the baptisteries of Albenga, Arsago, Biella, 
Galliano and Asti. One of the most beautiful examples is the 
baptistery of Santa Maria at Gravedona, at the northern end of the 
lake of Como, built in black and white marble. The plan is unusual, 
and consists of a square with circular apses on three sides. 

Byzantine Romanesque. — Although in the first basilican church of 
St Mark at Venice, erected in 929 to receive the relics of the saint 
recovered from St Mark's in Alexandria, the capitals of the columns 
and other decorative accessories showed Greek influence, its trans- 
formation into a five-domed Byzantine structure was not begun till 
about the middle of the nth century. The date given by Cattanco 
is 1063, the same year in which the cathedral of Pisa was begun; 
it is probable, however, that the scheme had already been in con- 
templation for some years, as the problem was not an easy one to 
solve, owing to the restrictions of the site, and to the desire to 
reproduce in some way the leading features of the church of the Holy 
Apostles at Constantinople. This church was destroyed in 1464, 
but its description by Procopius is so clear, and corresponds so closely 
with St Mark's, completed towards the end of the nth century, as to 
leave little doubt about the source of its inspiration. From what has 
already been said with reference to the great changes made when it 
was proposed to vault the early Lombard basilican churches, those 
of equal importance which were carried out in St Mark's will be 
better understood. The nave was divided into three square bays 
(fig. 37), with additional bays on the north and south to form tran- 
septs; the five square bays thus obtained were covered with domes 
carried on pendentives, as in St Sophia at Constantinople, and on 
wide transverse barrel vaults; the domes over the north and south 
transepts and the choir were of slightly less dimensions than those 
over the nave and crossing, in consequence of the limitations in area 
caused by the chapel of St Theodore on the north, the ducal palace 
on the south, and the ancient apse of the original basilica which it 
was desired to retain. In the reconstruction, many of the old columns, 
capitals and parapets were utilized again in the arcades carrying the 
galleries and in the balustrades over them. Externally the brick 
walls were decorated with blind arcades and niches of Lombard 



style, and all the roof vaults were covered with lead as in Constanti- 
nople. The subsequent decoration of the exterior took two centuries 
to carry out, not including the florid work of later date. There is no 
precedent in the East for the superimposed columns and capitals 
exported from Constantinople and Syria which now decorate the 
north, south and west fronts (Plate I., fig. 63), though the materials 
were all of the finest Byzantine type. Internally, the mosaic decora- 
tion of the domes, vaults and the upper part of the walls, was carried 
out by Greek artists from Constantinople, who probably also were 
employed for the marble panelling of the lower part of the walls. 
The marble casing of the front was certainly executed by Constanti- 
nopolitan artists, since the moulded string known as the " Venetian 
dentil " is a direct reproduction of that in St Sophia. At a later 
date the domes were all surmounted by lanterns in wood, covered 
with lead, and the roofs were all raised. So far, therefore, the build- 
ing departs from its prototype, the church of the Apostles. A 
similar transformation took place in the church of Santa Fosca at 




I Ancient umrlt prior to 1083. 

1 Oomenico Contarini, 1063-tOTI. 

/•Decoration (Marble Mosaics), V00-T350. 

I Work done about 1300. 

1 Renaissance. 

Scale of Feet 
? 5 *.° 2 9' 3? 4° 5° 6° 7° <*° 9° l oo 



A. Chapel of St. Isidort, 

B. Baptistery. 

C. Treasury. 

D. Chapel of St.Zem 



From R. P. Spiers's Architecture, East and West. 

Fig. 37.— Plan of St Mark's, Venice. 

Torcello, where a single large dome was contemplated over the centre 
of the original basilican church, but was never built. The cathedral 
of Torcello and the church at Murano are richly decorated with 
carved panels, capitals, choir screens and other features, either 
imported from the East or reproduced by Greek artists or Italians 
trained in the style. The influence of St Mark's in this respect 
extended far and wide on the east coast of Italy ; and at Pomposa, 
Ancona, and as far south as Brindisi, Byzantine details can be traced 
everywhere. The designs of the churches of San Ciriaco at Ancona 
and of Sant' Antonio at Padua were both based on St Mark's. 
Sant' Antonio's had six domes, there being two over the nave; 
and in all cases the domes were surmounted by domes in timber like 
those of St Mark's. 

In domestic work, Venice is richer in Byzantine architecture than 
Constantinople, for with the exception of the Hebdomon palace the 
continual fires there have destroyed all the earlier palaces and houses. 
The Fondaco-dei-Turchi, built probably in the nth century, is one 
of the most remarkable; the front on the great canal is 160 ft. long, 
having a lofty arcade with ten stilted arches on the ground storey 
and an arcade of eighteen arches above ; the pavilion wings at the 
east end are in three storeys, with blind arcades and windows pierced 
in the central arcade. The whole was built in brick encased with 
marble, with panels or disks enriched with bas-reliefs or coloured 
marbles. A second example is found in the Palazzo Loredan, having 



394 



ARCHITECTURE 



[ITALIAN ROMANESQUE 



similar arcades, stilted arches and marble panelling; and there are 
two others, one on the Grand Canal and the other on the Rio-Ca- 
Foscari. Throughout Venice the decoration of these Byzantine 
palaces would seem to have influenced those of later date; for the 
Venetian dentil, interlaced scroll-work and string courses, with the 
Byzantine pendant leaf, are found intermingled with Gothic work, 
even down to the 15th century, and the same to a certain extent is 
found at Padua, Verona and Vicenza. 

Central Romanesque. — -The builders in the centre of Italy would 
seem to have followed more closely the Roman basilican plan, for 
in two of the earliest churches, Santa Maria Fuorcivitas at Lucca 
f and San Paolo a Ripa d'Arno at Pisa, the T-shaped plan of St Peter's 
and St Paul's, with widely projecting transepts, was adopted; the 
difference also between the north and central developments is very 
marked, as in the place of the massive stone walls, compound piers, 
and internal and external buttresses deemed necessary to resist the 
thrusts of the great vaults, and the low clerestory of the northern 
churches, those in the south retain the light arcades with classic 
columns, the wooden roofs, and the high clerestory of the Roman 
basilicas. Instead of the vigorous sculpture of the Lombards in 
the Tuscan churches, marbles of various colours take its place, the 
carving being more refined in character and much quieter in effect. 

The earliest church now existing is that of San Frediano at Lucca, 
dating from the end of the 7th century. Originally it was a five- 
aisled basilica, with an eastern apse, but when it was included 
within the walls in the nth century the apse and the entrance 
doorway changed places, and a fine eaves-gallery was carried round 
the new apse; the outer aisles were also transformed into chapels. 
So many of the churches in Pisa and Lucca had new fronts given to 
them in the nth or 12th century, that it is interesting to find, in 
the church of San Pietro-in-Grado at Pisa, an example in which 
the external decoration with pilaster strips and arched corbel tables 
is retained, showing that in the 9th century, when that church was 
built, the Lombard style prevailed there. Other early churches are 
those of San Casciano (9th century), San Nicola and San Frediano 
(1007), all in Pisa. 

Of early foundation, but probably rebuilt in the nth century, 
are two interesting churches in Toscanella, Santa Maria and San 
Pietro; they are both basilican on plan, but the easternmost bay is 
twice the width of the other arches of the arcade, and is divided 
from the nave by a triumphal arch. In both churches the floor of 
the transept is raised some feet above the nave, and a crypt occupies 
the whole space below it. 

One of the earliest and most perfect examples of this subdivision 
is the church of San Miniato, on a hill overlooking Florence. . The 
church was rebuilt in 1013, and some of the Roman capitals of the 
earlier building are incorporated in the new one. It is divided into 
nave and aisles by an arcade of nine arches, and every third support 
consists of a compound pier with four semi-detached shafts, one of 
which, on each side of the nave, rises to the level of the summit of 
the arcade and carries a massive transverse arch to support the roof. 
The east end of the church, occupying the last three bays of the 
arcade, is raised 1 1 ft. above the floor of the nave, over a vaulted 
crypt extending the whole width of the church and carried under the 
eastern apse. The interior of the church, which is covered over 
with an open timber roof, painted in colour and gilded, is decorated 
with inlaid patterns of black and white marble of conventional 
design, and the same scheme is adopted in the main facade, enriching 
the panels of the blind arcade on the lower storey, and above an 
extremely classic design of Corinthian pilasters, entablature and 
pediment. 

As none of the facades of the Pisan churches was built before the 
middle of the nth century, it is possible that Buschetto, the architect 
of the cathedral of Pisa, may have profited by the scheme suggested 
in the lower storey of San Miniato ; if so he departed from its classic 
proportions. There are seven blind arcades in the lower storey of 
the Pisan cathedral, the arcades are loftier, and the position of the 
side doors which open into the inner aisle on each side is of much 
better effect. The cathedral was begun in 1063, the year following 
the brilliant capture of Palermo by the Pisans, when they returned 
in triumph with immense spoils. In plan it consists of a Latin cross, 
with double aisles on either side of the nave extending to the east 
end, a central apse, transepts with single aisles on each side, and 
north and south transepted apses (fig. 38). The nave arcade, with 
its Corinthian capitals and monolith stone columns, is of exceptional 
boldness, and as it is carried across the transept up to the east end 
(a length of 320 ft.) it forms a continuous line greater than that 
in any other cathedral. The crossing is covered by a dome, elliptical 
on plan, being from east to west the length of the transept and 
aisles. The result is unfortunate, and detracts both externally and 
internally from its beauty ; otherwise the exterior decoration, which 
must have been schemed out in its entirety from the beginning (with 
the exception of the dome, which is of later design), has the most 
satisfactory and pleasing effect. The lofty blind arcade of the lower 
storey and the open gallery above on the facade (the latter repre- 
sented by a blind arcade), are carried round the whole building, 
and the horizontal lines of the galleries of the upper storeys accord 
with the roofs of the aisles and nave respectively and the blind arcade 
of the clerestory. The walls are faced within and without with 
white and grey marble, and the combination of sculpture and inlay 



which enriches the arcades of the facades gives an additional attrac- 
tion to the building. The cathedral is sometimes quoted as Byzantine 
in style, but its plan and design are of widely different character 
from those of any building found in the East, and the mosaics, 
which constitute the finest decorative element in that style, were not 
added till the 14th century, and formed no part of the architect 
Buschetto's scheme. 

The Baptistery, begun in 1153, was not completed till towards the 
close of the 13th century, when important alterations were made 
in the design to bring it into accordance with the new Gothic style. 
The crocketed gables, and the upper gallery, substituted for the 
arcades, which followed on the lines of those in the cathedral, have 
taken away the quiet repose found in the latter; the lower storey, 




Fig. 38. 

however, with its lofty blind arcades, similar to those of the cathedral, 
and the principal doorway, are of great beauty. The central area 
of the baptistery, which is surrounded by aisles and triforium 
gallery, is covered by a conical dome; internally as well as ex- 
ternally this can never have been a beautiful feature, and the 
additions of the 13th century have made it one of the ugliest roofs 
in existence. 

The Campanile or leaning tower was begun in 1 1 74. Owing, 
however, to the treacherous nature of the ground, the piles driven 
in to support the tower gave way on the south side, so that, when 
only 35 ft. above the ground, a settlement was noticed, and slight 
additions in height were made from time to time in order to obtain 
a horizontal level for the stone courses; but this was without avail, 
and on the completion of the third gallery above the ground storey 
the work was suspended for many years. In 1350 it was re- 
commenced, three more gallery storeys were added, and the upper 
or belfry stage was set back in the inner wall. The tower is now 1 78 ft. 
high, and overhangs nearly 14 ft. on the south side; its design is 
made to'harmonize with the cathedral.but shows much less refinement 
and grace. 



ITALIAN ROMANESQUE] 



ARCHITECTURE 



395 



The Campo Santo, an immense rectangular court 350 ft. long by 
70 ft. wide, surrounded by a cloister 35 ft. wide, was begun in 1280; 
the details are refined, but the poverty in the design of the tracery 
with which the arcades were fitted in at a much later date detracts 
from its interest, which is now mainly concerned with the beautiful 
frescoes which decorate its walls. 

As might have been expected, the cathedral of Pisa set the model 
not only for the restoration of existing churches but also for new 
ones, in Pisa itself and also at Lucca, Pistoia and Prato. In Pisa, 
the church of San Paolo a Ripa d'Arno was rebuilt about 1060, 
possibly by the architect of the cathedral; San Pietro-in-Vincoli 
and San Nicola date from the early years of the 12th century. At 
Lucca the churches of Santa Giulia, San Giusto, San Martino, San 
Michele, and the restored front of Santa Maria Fuorcivitas, are the 
principal examples in which the Pisan cathedral has suggested the 
design; and at Pistoia we can point to the cathedral, Sant' Andrea, 
San Pietro and San Giovanni Fuorcivitas, the latter with a south 
wall decorated with three stages of blind arcades of great richness. 
The cathedral of Lucca was either restored or rebuilt at the beginning 
of the 14th century, and has a distinctly Gothic effect. The lower 
storey of the facade presents the unusual feature of an open porch 
across the whole front with three great archways. This porch with 
the three galleries above was added to the cathedral at the beginning 
of the 13th century. 

Southern Romanesque. — The influences exerted in the early 
development of the Romanesque style in the south of Italy are 
much more complicated than in the north, since two new elements 
come into the field, the Norman and Saracenic. Of early work very 
little remains, owing to the general rebuilding in the nth century; 
what is more remarkable, there is scarcely any trace of the result 
of the Byzantine occupation for so many centuries; the only 
exception being the church of San Gregorio at Bari, a small basilican 
structure in which the arches of the arcades separating the nave 
from the aisles are stilted like those of the Fondaco-dei-Turchi at 
Venice. 

One of the chief characteristics noticeable in the plan is the 
almost universal adoption of a transept projecting north and south 
slightly beyond the aisle walls, and in some cases raised over a crypt, 
as in the churches at Toscanella. Since, however, there is no 

choir bay, and the central apse 
opens direct into the transept, the 
plan is not that of the Latin cross. 
The most complete development of 
this arrangement is found in the 
cathedral and in the church of San 
Nicola at Bari (fig. 39) ; both being 
basilican churches with a triumphal 
arch opening into the transept, — in 
this respect similar to the churches 
of St Peter and St Paul at Rome, 
except that the transepts project 
only slightly, beyond the aisles. 
There is one peculiarity in both 
these churches, as also in that of 
the cathedral at Molfetta. East of 
the transept, and at the north and 
south sides, are towers, between 
which is carried a wall which hides 
the apse, the only indication of its 
existence being the round arched 
window, which lights it. A similar 
arrangement exists in the cathedrals 
of Giovenazzo, Bitetto and Bitonto. 
The central bay of the transept 
of the cathedral at Bari is sur- 
mounted by an octagonal drum, the 
dome within which is carried on 
squinches; a similar dome was 
projected in San Nicola, but never built. In the cathedral at Bari, 
as also in San Nicola, the lofty nave is covered with a timber roof, 
and has an arcade on the ground storey and a fine triforium and 
clerestory windows above. 

Externally these churches depend for their effect more on 
their fine masonry than on any decorative treatment; the blind 
arcades of the lower storey have very little projection, and the 
pilaster strips which in the Lombard churches break up the wall 
surface are not found here ; the arched corbel table is freely employed 
but rarely the open gallery. There is one remarkable example in 
Bitonto cathedral; above the aisle chapels, and approached from 
the triforium, is an open gallery, the arches of which rest on widely 
projecting capitals sculptured with animals and foliage, half Lom- 
bardic and half Byzantine in style. The small shafts supporting 
these capitals are of infinite variety of design, with spirals, chevrons, 
fluting and vertical mouldings of many kinds. 

The cathedral at Molfetta is in plan quite different from those 
already described, and consists of square bays with aisles, transept 
and apse, having domes over the nave and crossing. The Byzantine 
influence here comes in, but it is much more pronounced in La 
Cattolica at Stilo, a small church square on plan with four columns 
carrying the superstructure, which consists of a central and four 




Scale of Feet 

10 w « jo 50 



Fig. 39. — Plan of S. Nicola 
at Bari. 



domes on the angles. Other domed churches are those of the 
Immaculata at Trani; San Sabino, Canosa; and San Marco, 
Rossano. The lower part of the cathedral at Troja shows the direct 
influence of the cathedral at Pisa. The cathedral at Trani has the 
same plan as the churches at Bari, except that the earlier apses are 
not enclosed. The cathedral of Salerno retains still the fine atrium 
by Robert Guiscard in 1077. In the cathedrals of Acerenza, Aversa 
and Venosa, the French chevet was introduced towards the end of 
the 12th century. 

In the magnificent octagonal tower which encloses the dome on the 
crossing in the cathedral of Caserta-Vecchia, we find the interlacing 
blind arcades of the Norman architecture in Sicily, as also in the 
cathedral at Amalfi. The porches, entrance doorways and windows 
being the chief decorative feature of the south Italian churches, 
were enriched with splendid sculptures. So were the pulpits of the 
cathedrals of Sessa, Ravello, Salerno and Troja, the rich mosaic 
inlays at Sessa, Ravello and Salerno according in design with the 
Cosmati work in Rome, though they possibly had an earlier origin 
in Sicily. 

Sicilian Romanesque. — Although the earliest remains in Sicily date 
from the Norman occupation of the island, they are so permeated 
with Saracenic detail as to leave no doubt that the conqueror 
employed the native workmen, who for two centuries at all events 
had been building for the Mahommedans, and therefore, whether 
Arab or Greek, had been reproducing the same style as that found 
in Egypt or North Africa. 

It is possible that, so far as the Norman palaces of the 12th century 
are concerned, they were based on those built under the Saracenic 
rule, but the requirements of a mosque and of a church are entirely 
different, and therefore in the earliest church existing (San Giovanni- 
dei-Leprosi, at Palermo, built by Robert Guiscard in A.D. 1071) we 
find a completely developed Christian structure, having nave, 
aisles and transepts, with a dome over the crossing and three apses. 
The next church, at Troina (1078), was similar on plan, but had 
three square wings at the east end instead of apses. The next two 
churches, La Martorana and San Cataldo (1129), at Palermo, 
followed the plan of the Greek church, with four columns carrying 
the superstructure and three domes over the nave bays carried on 
Saracenic squinches, similar to those in San Giovanni-dei-Leprosi. 
San Giovanni-degli-Eremiti (T-shaped on plan) has no aisles, but 
carries domes over the nave and three smaller domes on the transept. 
The most important feature found in all these churches is the pointed 
arch, of Saracenic origin imported from the East, which was employed 
for the nave, arcades, the crossing, and in the squinches carrying 
the domes. The blind arcades which decorate the walls of San 
Cataldo and of the Norman palaces — La Favara, the Torre della 
Ninfa, La Ziza and La Cuba (all in or near Palermo), — in two or 
three orders, and sometimes (as in the Favara palace) of great height, 
have all pointed arches and no impost mouldings or capitals. The 
distinguishing characteristic of these blind arcades (and the same is 
found in the open arcades) is the very slight projection of the outer 
order of arch. 

The finest early example of Norman architecture in Sicily is the 
Cappella Palatina, at Palermo, consecrated in 1 140, and attached 
to the palace. The plan consists of nave, aisles, transept and triple 
apse, the arches, all pointed and stilted, being carried on monolith 
columns of granite and marble alternately. The nave is covered 
over with a timber roof with stalactitic coves and coffered ceiling, 
richly decorated in colour and gilded, the borders of the panels 
bearing Arabic inscriptions in Cufic characters. Similar inscriptions 
exist on the upper part of the walls of the Cuba and Ziza palaces, 
proving that they were built by Saracenic workmen. The plans of 
the cathedrals of Palermo, Messina (destroyed 1908), Cefalu and 
Monreale are all similar, with nave and aisles separated by arcades, 
in which the arches are all pointed and stilted, transepts projecting 
north and south beyond the aisle walls, and square bays beyond, 
with apsidal terminations. That of Palermo has much suffered 
from restorations, but the cathedral of Monreale is in perfect condi- 
tion. It was begun in 1 176 and consecrated in 1182. The pro- 
portions of the arcade are much finer than in the Cappella Palatina, 
where the stilted arch was of the same height as the shaft of the 
columns, whereas here it is only half the height. The columns are 
all of granite with extremely fine capitals, some of which were taken 
from ancient buildings. All the roofs are in wood, with coffered 
ceilings richly decorated in gold and colour. The walls to a height 
of 22 ft. are all lined with slabs of marble with mosaic friezes, and 
all the surfaces of walls and arches are covered above with mosaics 
representing scenes from the Old and New Testaments, while in the 
apse at the east end a gigantic figure of Christ dominates the whole 
church. The same is found at Cefalu, where the mosaic decorations, 
however, are confined to the apses. Externally the walls are com- 
paratively plain, the decoration being confined to the east end, 
where the three apses are covered with a series of blind intersecting 
arcades of pointed arches. This class of enrichment prevails through- 
out the great Sicilian churches, and extends sometimes to the smaller 
churches, as that of the Chiesa-dei-Vespri. Of the conventual build- 
ings attached to the cathedral of Monreale, which occupied an 
immense site, there remain only the cloisters, about 140 ft. square, 
enclosed by an arcade with pointed arches carried on coupled 
columns, the shafts of which are elaborately carved and inlaid with 



39^ 



ARCHITECTURE 



[FRENCH ROMANESQUE 



mosaic ; the capitals are of the most varied design and of exquisite 
execution. 

Italian Gothic. — Italy is poorer than any other country in examples 
of the transition from round arched to pointed arched buildings. 
The use of the pointed arch was accepted at last as a necessity, 
and cannot be said ever to have been welcomed. The first buildings 
in which it is seen worked out fully in detail are those of Niccola 
Pisano, and but few examples exist of good Gothic work earlier than 
his time. The elaborately arcaded and sculptured west front of 
Ferrara cathedral is a screen to an early building. The cathedral 
and other churches at Genoa are certainly exquisite works, but they 
appear to owe their internal design rather to the influence of (perhaps) 
Sicilian taste than north Italian, and the exquisite beauty of the 
west front owes a good deal, at any rate, to French influence, 
softened, refined and decorated by the extreme taste of an Italian 
architect. The feature which most marks all Italian Gothic is the 
indifference to the true use of the pointed arch. Everywhere arches 
were constructed which could not have stood for a day had they 
not been held together by iron rods. There was none of that sense 
of the unities of art which made a northerner so jealous to maintain 
the proper relations of all parts of his structure. In Niccola Pisano's 
works the arch mould rarely fits the capital on which it rests. The 
proportions of buttresses to the apparent work to be done by them 
are bad and clumsy. The window traceries look like bad copies of 
some northern tracery, only once seen in a hurry by an indifferent 
workman. There is no life, or development, or progress in the 
work. If we look at the ground-plans of Italian Gothic churches, 
we shall find nothing whatever to delight us. The columns are 
widely spaced, so as to diminish the number of vaulting bays, 
and to make the proportions of the oblong aisle vaulting bay very 
ungainly. Clustered shafts are almost unknown, the columns being 
plain cylinders with poorly sculptured capitals. There are no 
triforium galleries, and the clerestory is generally very insignificant. 
In short, a comparison of the best Gothic works in Italy with the 
most moderate French or English work would show at once how 
vast its inferiority must be allowed to be. Still there were beauties 
which ought not to be forgotten or passed over. Such were the 
beautiful cloisters, whose arcades are carried on delicate coupled 
shafts, — e.g. in St John Lateran and St Paul's at Rome. Such also 
were the porches and monuments at Verona and elsewhere ; and the 
campaniles, — both those in Rome, divided by a number of string- 
courses into a number of storeys, and those of the north, where there 
are hardly any horizontal divisions, and the whole effort is to give 
an unbroken vertical effect ; or that unequalled campanile, the tower 
of the cathedral at Florence by Giotto, where one sees in ordered 
proportion, accurately adjusted, line upon line, and storey upon 
storey, perhaps the most carefully wrought-out work in all Europe. 

The Italian architects were before all others devoted to the display 
of colour in their works. St Mark's had led the way in this, but, 
throughout the peninsula, the bountiful plenty of nature in the 
provision of materials was seconded by the zeal of the artist. They 
were also distinguished for their use of brick. Just as in parts of 
Germany, France, Spain and England, there were large districts 
in which no stone could be had without the greatest labour and 
trouble; and here the reality and readiness which always marked 
the medieval workman led to his at once availing himself of the 
natural material, and making a feature of his brickwork. 

The Gothic of Italy has, it must be admitted, no such grand works 
to show as more northern countries have. Allowance has to be made 
at every turn for some incompleteness or awkwardness of plan, 
design or construction. There is no attempt to emulate the beauties 
of the best French plans. Milan cathedral, magnificent as its scale 
and material make it, is clumsy and awkward both in plan and 
section, though its vast size makes it impressive internally. San 
Francesco, Assisi, is only a moderately good early German Gothic 
church, converted into splendour by its painted decorations. At 
Orvieto a splendid west front is put, without any proper adjustment, 
against a church whose merit is mainly that it is large and in parts 
beautifully coloured. 

The finest Gothic interiors are of the class of which the Frari at 
Venice and Sant' Anastasia at Verona are examples. They are 
simple vaulted cruciform churches, with aisles and chapels on the 
east side of the transepts. But even in these the designs of the 
various parts in detail are poor and meagre, and only redeemed 
from failure by the picturesque monuments built against their walls, 
by the work of the painter, and by their furniture. In fine, Gothic 
art was never really understood in Italy, and, consequently, never 
reached to perfection. 

Whilst the Pointed style was almost exclusively known and prac- 
tised in northern Europe, the Italians were but slowly improving in 
their Gothic style ; and the improvement was more evinced in their 
secular than in their ecclesiastical structures. Florence, Bologna, 
Vicenza, Udine, Genoa, and, above all, Venice, contain palaces and 
mansions of the 12th, 13th, 14th and 15th centuries, which for 
simplicity, utility and beauty far excel most of those in the same 
and other places of the three following centuries. The contemporary 
churches do not exhibit the same degree of improvement in style 
that is conspicuous in these domestic works, for there are no works in 
Europe more worthy of study and admiration than the Ducal Palace 
at Venice, and some of the older works of the same class, and even 



of earlier date. The town halls of Perugia, Piacenza and Siena, and 
many houses in these cities, and at Corneto, Amalfi, Asti, Orvieto 
and Lucca, the fountains of Perugia and Viterbo, and the monuments 
at Bologna, Verona and Arezzo, may be named as evidence of 
the interest which the national art affords to the architectural 
student even in Italy, as late as the end of the 14th century; but 
after this it gradually gave way to the new style, though in 
some instances its influence may be traced even when it had been 
overborne by it. (R. P. S.) 

Romanesque and Gothic Architecture in France 

Most generally, Romanesque art is thought of as that period 
of art which followed and partook of the nature of Roman 
art and yet was too far removed from it to be classed as Roman. 
The difference, however, was not merely one of decay; it is rather 
in positive factors that we shall find the true characteristics of 
the style. Its formation was parallel to the development of the 
Romance languages, and like them it acquired barbaric elements. 

In Rome itself hardly any, if any, contributions were made 
to its growth, and there as late as the 12 th century the early 
Christian form of basilican church continued to be built. It 
may, perhaps, best be conceived as a Germano-Roman product, 
for even in Spain and north Italy, which became such strong 
centres of the art, the Visigoths and Lombards provided the 
Teutonic element. Besides this change of " blood " in the style, 
there is another element of change in the influences obtained from 
the more rapidly developed art of the East. This influence 
indeed was so strong and constant that, having it in view, we 
might almost describe the Romanesque style as Germano- 
Byzantine. 

In the 6th and 7th centuries we have, on the one hand, the 
almost pure traditional early Christian art of Rome and indeed 
of western Europe, and on the other the direct establishment of 
matured Byzantine art at Ravenna, Parenzo, Naples and even 
in Rome. Then followed the mixture of these and of barbaric 
elements in the formation of several preJR.omanesque varieties, 
one of which has been named Italo-Byzantine. It was not until 
the age of Charlemagne that a centre was established strong 
enough for the formation of a new western school which should 
persist. From this time a progressive style was developed which 
led straight forward to the Gothic, and it is this movement which 
is best called Romanesque. This art was a perfect ferment of 
striving and experiment, of gathering and even of research; 
Roman, Byzantine and Saxon elements entered into its com- 
position. It is probable also, as a result of Saracenic pressure 
on Syria, Asia Minor, North Africa and Spain, that artists, 
" bringing their crafts with them," drew together from still 
remoter parts to gain the protection of the great ruler of the 
West and to help in the formation of Carolingian art. With the 
disintegration of the empire of Charlemagne many local schools 
arose in Germany, France and Lombardy, which — especially 
after the year 1000, when there appears to have been a renewed 
burst of building energy — resulted in considerable differentiation 
of styles. The centre of energy seems to have been now here, 
now there, yet with all the differences there was a general 
resemblance over the whole field. Until the exact date of a 
very large number of monuments is more perfectly established, 
it will be impossible to trace out exactly the intricate windings of 
the line of advance. In fact there are two conflicting sides to the 
question presented by Romanesque art. In the first place we have 
to consider the several schools in regard to a standard of absolute 
attainment, and in the second as relative to the line of persistence 
and to the formation of Gothic, which was so largely the culmina- 
tion, and then the decay, of the forces present in Romanesque 
art. Some of the most beautiful and complete of the Romanesque 
schools contributed least, some of the most inchoate gave the 
most, to that which was to be. 

The most important existing monument of the age of Charlemagne 
is the cathedral of Aix-la-Chapelle (see fig. 44) , which was being built 
in the year 800. It has an octagonal central area, covered by a 
dome and surrounded with two storeys of aisles both completely 
vaulted. The interior surface of the dome was encrusted with 
mosaic. Another important work of about the same time is the 
church of Germigny-des-Pres near Orleans, which also is of the 
" central type," having a square tower above four piers surrounded 



ARCHITECTURE 



Plate IIL 




Fig. 69— INTERIOR OF ST PETER'S, ROME. 



Plate IV. 



ARCHITECTURE 




Photo, Koch. 



Fig. 70.— TOWN HALL, BREMEN. 




Photo, liro s i. 



Fig. 71.— VENDRAMINI PALACE. VENICE. 



FRENCH GOTHIC] 



ARCHITECTURE 



397 



by an aisle with semicircular apses in the centre of each external 
wall, the apse to the east having a mosaic. 

From the 9th to the nth century the great problem worked out 
was that of perfecting the standard plans of large churches. In the 
MS. plan of the monastic church of St Gall, drawn about 820, we 
find a great nave with aisles, apsidal terminations both to the east 
and the west, transepts and probably a central tower (cf. the abbey 
church of Saint-Riquier near Abbeville, built c. 8oo, of which a slight 
representation has been preserved). In St Martin at Tours was 
probably evolved the most perfect type of plan, that with an ambu- 
latory and radiating chapels surrounding the eastern apse. A 
magnificent church of this form was built here at the beginning of 
the 1 1 th century , but not for the first time. Excavations have shown 
that the plan was probably suggested by a still earlier church in 
which five tomb-niches surrounded the central apse and tomb of 
St Martin. At Jumieges (begun 1040) it has recently been found 
that the plan terminated to the east with parallel apses, as at St 
Albans in England ; this is a second important type. A third type 
is that in which the transepts as well as the east end are finished 
with apses, like St Mary-in-the-Capitol at Cologne. 

When we come to the developed Romanesque of the end of the 
nth century, we find not only several French varieties, but strong 
schools in Lombardy and on the Rhine. Without distinguishing too 
minutely, four broad types representing schools of the east and west, 
north and south (or rather north-east, north-west, south-east and 
south-west) of France, may be spoken of, and all of these were 
engaged in the task of completely covering with vaults large churches 
of basilican plan — the typical problem of this period. In the east 
of France we have a school represented by the monastic church of 
Tournus, where the nave was vaulted by a series of compartments 
placed transversely to the axis of the church. This church, which 
has a plan of the type of St Martin's at Tours, was begun in 1019, but 
the nave vaults were not reached until after 1066. This style of 
vaulting persisted in Burgundy, and from thsnce it spread to Foun- 
tains Abbey in England, where it is found over the aisles. The most 
beautiful class of buildings in eastern France is that of which the 
church at Issoire is the most perfect example. The external walls 
are here ornamented with patterns countercharged in light and 
dark stone. The wonderful church at Le Puy also belongs to this 
group, but here strong Moorish influence is to be traced. The inlays 
were probably derived from a late Gallo-Roman source. Counter- 
charging of stones of two colours was a favourite method of building 
in Romanesque churches erected between 1 100 and 1 150. We find 
it at Vezelay, a magnificent abbey church of Burgundy, at Le Mans 
cathedral, and as far north-west as Exeter and Worcester. In the 
west (south-west) the most prominent school was that of Perigord, 
of which the church of St Front, Perigueux, may be taken as the 
example. St Front was rebuilt after a fire in 1120, but there are 
many earlier specimens, two of the most important being at 
Angouleme (1105-1128) and Fontevrault. This school applied a 
series of domes of eastern fashion not only at the centre but over 
the whole extent of the church. St Front so closely resembles St 
Mark's, Venice, that it must be derived from it or from some similar 
eastern church. The method largely influenced the Angevin school 
of vaulting, but it does not seem to have been effective as a protec- 
tion from the weather. Some examples were covered by external 
roofs, as was St Front itself at a late time. St Ours at Loches, 
originally a small church covered by domes, had spire-like pyramids 
substituted for them when the church was enlarged about 1 168. 

The third class of vaulting we may for symmetry's sake associate 
with the south, though it is found widely distributed. The chapel 
in the Tower of London is an example, and its true centre' seems 
to be the Auvergne. The vaults of this type run along with the 
axis of the space to be covered. In the case of large churches the 
central span is frequently supported by quadrant vaults leaning 
against it on either side. One of the most noble churches in which 
the central span is covered by such a barrel vault is that of St 
Savin near Poitiers, where very much has been preserved of the com- 
plete series of paintings which once adorned it and the walls beneath. 

The most characteristic buildings of the south are the churches 
of Moissac, St Trophime at Aries, St Gilles near Nimes and St 
James of Compostella, where there is much sculpture of a Lombardic 
type. There was a great revival of sculpture, going together with a 
study of the antique, in Lombardy at the end of the nth century. 
Wiligelmus, who later worked at San Zeno, Verona, signed some 
sculptures at Modena in 1099. 

Of the schools of the north, Normandy took the lead. It was 
adventurous, if somewhat barbaric. It derived much from Germany 
and gave much to the Gothic style. About the middle of the nth 
century the Normans began to experiment with cross-groined vaults 
and their application to the church problem. This from the first 
contained an important possibility of future development, in that 
it allowed of windows of considerable height being placed in the 
lunettes of these vaults. Soon a very great step in advance was made 
by the invention or application of diagonal ribs under the inter- 
section of the plain groined vault. This association of strengthening 
ribs in a cross form to each bay of the structure forms the ogive, the 
characteristic form from which the alternative name to Gothic, 
"ogival," has been derived. The first instance we know of the use 
of this system is at Durham cathedral, where the aisles of the east 



end were so covered about 1093, and where the high vault erected 
about 1 104^ was almost certainly of the same kind. Another outcome 
of the genius of Norman builders seems to have been the donjon or 
keep type of castle. 

The word " Gothic " was applied by Italian writers of the 
Renaissance to buildings later than Roman, which in some cases 
(e.g. Theodoric's works at Ravenna) might be properly so named. 
What we now call Gothic the same writers called Modern. 
Later the word came to mean the art which filled the whole 
interval between the Roman period and the Renaissance, and 
then last of all, when the Byzantine and Romanesque forms of 
art were defined, Gothic became the art which intervened 
between the Romanesque era and the Renaissance. 

As remarked above, Gothic architecture is to a large extent 
the crown of Romanesque. It is agreed that its chief element 
of construction was the ogival vaulting which was being widely 
used by Romanesque builders in the first half of the 12th century; 
and pointed arches appeared as early. 

The eminent architect, G. E. Street, writing 1 of what we have 
called the standard plan of great 12th-century churches, says, 
" In whatever way the early chevets (as the French term them) 
grew up there is no doubt that they contain the germ of the 
magnificent chevets in the complete Gothic churches of the north 
of France." Architecture of the middle ages having been con- 
tinuously developed, it is necessarily somewhat arbitrary to 
mark off any given period; all are agreed, however, that about 
the year 1 150 there was a time of rapid change towards a slen- 
derer and more energetic type of building, and the forms which 
followed for about four centuries we now call Gothic. The 
special character which the architecture of this period took 
was partially conditioned by the fact that the expanding power 
of the French kingdom, with its centre at Paris, was situated 
in a particular artistic environment. The body of ideas on which 
it for the most part worked was furnished by the Romanesque 
art of north France, the German borderland and Burgundy. 
A great contributory cause was the immense monastic activity 
of the time, and the need of- accomplishing large results with 
limited means resulted in a casting aside of old ornamental 
commonplaces and in innovations of planning and structure. 
This was especially the case with the Cistercian order, which 
carried certain transitional Gothic forms of building into England, 
Germany, Italy and Spain. If, however, we make the transition 
to Gothic date from the first use of " ogival " vaults in north- 
west Europe, then Durham cathedral is, so far as we now know, 
the earliest example of the transitional style. The next step, the 
appearance of Gothic itself, may best be held to date from 
the systematic but not exclusive use of pointed arches in associa- 
tion with ogival vaults about the middle of the 12th century. 

At this time was waged a war of domination amongst the 
styles, a war which resulted not necessarily in the victory of the 
most beautiful nor even of the strongest, but one in which 
political and geographical considerations had much to do with 
the decision. When the French kingdom took the lead in western 
civilization, it was settled that a northern form of art, one which 
had perforce to make a chief element of the window, should be 
followed out. The consequent development of the window is, 
after all, as the first observers thought, the great mark of the 
mature style. As to the position of France in the movement, 
Mr Street may again be quoted: — " When once the Gothic 
style was well established, the zeal with which the work of 
building was pursued in France was almost incredibly great. 
A series of churches exists there within short distances of each 
other, so superb in all their features that it is impossible to 
contest their superiority to any corresponding group of buildings. 
The old Domaine Royale is that in which French art is seen in 
its perfection. Notre Dame, Paris, is a monument second to 
nothing in the world; but for completeness in all its parts 
it would be better to cite the cathedral of Chartres, a short 
description of which must suffice as an explanation of what French 
art at its zenith was. The plan has a nave with aisles, transepts 
with aisles on each side, a choir with two aisles all round it, 
and chapels beyond them. There are two immense steeples 
1 Article " Architecture," Ency. Brit., 9th ed. 



398 



ARCHITECTURE 



[FRENCH GOTHIC 



at the west end, two towers to each transept and two towers at 
the junction of the choir with its apse. The doorways are triple 
at the west end, whilst to each transept is a vast triple porch in 
front of the three doorways. The whole of these doorways 
are covered with sculpture, much of it refined, spirited and 
interesting in the highest degree. You enter and find the interior 
surpassing even the exterior. The order of the columns and 
arches, and of all the details, is so noble and simple that no 
fault can be found with it. The whole is admirably executed; 
and, finally, every window throughout its vast interior is full of 
the richest glass coeval with the fabric. As compared with 
English churches of the same class, there are striking differences. 
The French architects aimed at greater height, greater size, 
but much less effect of length. Their roofs were so lofty that 
it was almost impossible for them to build steeples which should 
have the sort of effect that ours have. The turret on Amiens 
cathedral is nearly as lofty as Salisbury spire, but is only a turret; 
and so throughout. Few French churches afford the exquisite 
complete views of the exterior which English churches do; but, 
on the other hand, their, interiors are more majestic, and man I 
feels himself smaller and more insignificant in them than in ours. 
The palm must certainly be given to them above all others. 
There is no country richer in examples of architecture than 
France. The student who wishes to understand what it was 
possible for a country to do in the way of creating monuments 
of its grandeur, would find in almost every part of the country, 
at every turn and in great profusion, works of the rarest interest 
and beauty. The 19th century may be the consummation of all, 
but the evidences of its existence to posterity will not be one- 
tenth in number of those which such a reign as that of Philip 
Augustus has left us, whilst none of them will come up to the 
high standard which in his time was invariably reached." 

The remarks which have been made as to the variation in 
style visible in various parts of the same country, apply with 
more force, perhaps, in what we now call France than to any other 
part of Europe. For the purposes of complete study it would 
be necessary to keep distinct from each other in the mind the 
following important divisions: — (1) Provence and Auvergne; 
(2) Aquitaine; (3) Burgundy; (4) Anjou and Poitou; (5) 
Brittany; (6) Normandy; (7) the lle-de-France and Picardy; 
(8) Champagne; and, finally, (9) the eastern border-land (neither 
quite German nor quite French in its character), the meeting- 
point of the two very different developments of French and 
German art. Speaking generally, it is safe to say that Gothic 
architecture was never brought to its highest perfection in any 
portion of the south of France. Aquitaine, Auvergne and 
Provence were too wedded to classic traditions to excel in an art 
which seems to have required for its perfection no sort of looking 
back to such a past. Hence there is no Gothic work in the south 
for which it is possible to feel the same admiration and enthusiasm 
as must be felt by every artist in presence of the great works of 
the north. In Anjou this is less the case; but even there the 
art is extremely inferior to that which is seen in Normandy and 
the lle-de-France. Brittany may be dismissed from considera- 
tion, as being, like Cornwall, so provincial and so cut off from 
neighbours, that its art could not fail to be very local, and 
without much influence outside its own borders. 

There are examples of true Gothic outside its proper habitat, 
almost pure French works being found as far south as Laon and 
Burgos, as far east as Strassburg and Lausanne and as far north 
as Canterbury and Cologne. Westminister Abbey was pro- 
foundly influenced by direct study of French work. Normandy, 
Burgundy, and the land as far north as Tournay seem to have 
shared in the work of transition; but the Gothic area proper is 
the lle-de-France with Picardy and Champagne, then Burgundy, 
Normandy and England. 

Four remarkable buildings best represent the early phase of the 
Gothicstyle, theabbey church of StDenis, and thecathedralsof Noyon, 
Senlis and Sens. The first was begun in 1137, and the choir was 
consecrated in 1 143. The few parts of this work which remain are 
sufficient to show how stately and yet fresh the whole work must 
have been. Npyon cathedral, begun after a fire which occurred in 
1 13 1, had its choir consecrated in 1157. The cathedral of Senlis was 



begun in 1 155. Sens cathedral, begun about the same time, or even 
earlier, is the first of the great cathedrals. Many other buildings 
belong to the first years of the style ; such are the abbey churches of 
St Remi at Reims, Notre Dame at Chalons and St Germain-des- 
Pres, Paris. The choir of this last was consecrated in 1163, and in 
the same year Notre Dame, Paris, was begun This mighty building, 
although very complete, was altered as to its effect by the substitu- 
tion, early in the 13th century, of large two-light windows for the 
earlier lancets of the clerestory. The sculptures of the west front 
are exquisite. Laon cathedral, another of the great churches, is of 
about the same age as Notre Dame. It also has beautiful sculpture 
in its western porches, but its most marked characteristic is the group 
of six great and romantic towers which flank the fronts to the west, 
the north and the south. In the 13th century, the church was ex- 
tended to the east and the original chevet was destroyed. From the 
evidence furnished by fine double-staged chapels to the transepts, 
it is most probable that three similar chapels were set about the 
ambulatory of the apse, the upper chapels opening from the fine 
vaulted triforium. Such an arrangement existed at the noble church 
of Valenciennes, now destroyed, but well recorded. At the end of 
the 12th century Chartres cathedral was begun, perhaps its most 
notable constructive feature being the high development that the 
flying buttresses have here attained. It was followed in the early 
years of the 13th century by Rouen cathedral, which derived much 
from its prototype. St Omer, a fine early church, in. turn followed 
Rouen. 

The second stage of Gothic, introducing the traceried window, 
was opened by the building of the cathedral of Reims, begun in 121 1. 
This is in every way one of the most perfect of cathedrals, as well for 
its sculpture and glass as for its structure. Reims was followed by 
the still greater cathedral at 
Amiens (fig. 40), which was 
begun in 1220 at the west front, 
so that the superb sculpture 
(Plate II., fig. 64) of the porches 
is earlier than that of Reims. 
Beauvais cathedral was begun 
in 1247 on a still vaster scale, 
and with an ambition that 
o'erleaped itself. Auxerre cathe- 
dral, and the very beautiful 
collegiate churches of St Quentin 
and Semur, also followed Reims. 
Two other cathedrals of the 
first rank which must be men- 
tioned are those of Bourges and 
Le Mans, each of these having 
double aisles about the apse, 
with a large clerestory to the 
inner one of the two, above 
which rises the great clerestory. 
This scheme is one of the great 
feats of Gothic construction. 
Le Mans again furnished the 
most highly developed form 
of chevet planning (fig. 41). On 
this point Mr Street may again 
be cited. " It was in the plan- 
ning of the apse, with its 
surrounding aisles and chapels, 
that all their ingenuity and 
science were displayed. A 
simple apse is easy enough of 
construction, but directly it is 
surrounded by an aisle or 
aisles, with chapels again beyond 
them, the difficulties are great. 
The bays of the circular aisle, 

instead of being square, are very much wider on one side than 
the other, and it is most difficult to fit the vaulting to the unequal 
space. In order to get over this, various plans were tried. At Notre 
Dame, Paris, the vaulting bays were all triangular on plan, so that 
the points of support might be twice as many on the outside line of 
the circle as on the inside. But this was rather an unsightly con- 
trivance, and was not often repeated, though at Bourges there is 
something of the same sort. At Le Mans the aisle vaulting bays are 
alternately triangular and square; and this is, perhaps, the best 
arrangement of all, as the latter are true and square, and none of 
the lines of the vault are twisted or distorted in the slightest degree. 
The arrangement of the chapels round the apse was equally varied. 
Usually they are too crowded in effect; and, perhaps, the most 
beautiful plan is that of Rouen cathedral, where there are only three 
chapels with unoccupied bays between, affording much greater relief 
and variety of lighting than the commoner plan which provided a 
chapel to every bay. The planning and design of the chevet is the 
great glory of the French medieval school. When the same thing 
was attempted, as at Westminster, or by the Germans at Cologne, 
it was evidently a copy, and usually an inferior copy, of French 
work. No English works led up to Westminster Abbey, and no_ 
German works to the cathedral at Cologne." 




Fig. 40. — Plan of Cathedral 
at Amiens. 



SPANISH GOTHIC] 



ARCHITECTURE 



399 



The variety in the planning of the chevets must be remarked. 
There might be only one chapel opening from the semicircular 
ambulatory, as at Langres, Sens, Auxerre, Bayeux and Lausanne. 
Canterbury cathedral, designed by William of Sens, is perhaps the 
most perfect example. There were three separated chapels, as at 
Rouen, St Omer, Semur, &c, or there might be five filling the whole 
space, which became the general later scheme. Chartres furnishes an 
intermediate plan, in having the alternate chapels much shallower 
than the others. The chapels might be circular or polygonal or 
alternately square and round. Of the last the cathedral of Toledo 
is a wonderful example. The plan with parallel apses also continued 
in use, as at the beautiful abbey church at Dijon and St Urbain at 
Troyes. Apsidal transepts were built at Noyon, Soissons and 
Valenciennes. 

Another stage of development was reached with the building of 
the Sainte Chapelle in Paris, begun in 1244. With this work the 
Gothic system reached complete maturity. Here for the first time 
large traceried windows seem to have been perfected, and, moreover, 
the structure was so organized into a series of wide window spaces, 
only divided by strong far-projecting buttress piers, that the stained 
glass ideal found full expression and the building became a lantern 
for its display. 

During the next half-century the influence of the Sainte Chapelle 
is to be traced everywhere, and its system of construction was 
developed to the furthest possible point in St Urbain at Troyes, 
begun in 1260. Exploration of the Gothic theory of structure 
could be carried no further. From this point the style turned in on 




Fig. 41. — Cathedral of Le Mans. East end and Chevet. 

itself, becoming more unreasonably intricate, artificial and manner- 
ized. One of the finest examples of the style of the early 14th century 
is the eastern limb of St Ouen, Rouen; Troyes cathedral is also an 
important example of later work. As Mr Street says: " Later 
French architecture ran a very similar course to that in England. 
The 13th century was that in which it was seen at its best. In the 
14th the same sort of change took place as elsewhere; and art was 
beautiful, but it was too much an evidence of skilf ulness and adroit- 
ness. It was harder and colder also than English work of the same 
age; and when it fell, it did so before the inroads of a taste for what 
has been called Flamboyant architecture, — a gay and meretricious 
style which trusted to ornament for all its effect, and, in spite of 
many beauties, had none of the sturdy magnificence of much of our 
English Perpendicular style." 

M. Enlart has recently accepted the view that the germs of 
flamboyancy in the later French Gothic are to be found in the flowing 
curvilinear forms of early 14th-century work in England. 

Up to the middle of the 16th century, magnificent works in the 
national style were still being executed. St Vulfran at Abbeville, 
St Maclou in Rouen, and the facade of the cathedral of Rouen, 
may be mentioned ; some of the last works were the immense 
transepts of Beauvais cathedral and the facade of Tours. 

We have necessarily spoken most of churches, but the palaces, 
castles and civic buildings form another great class hardly less 
interesting. The castles of Coucy and Chateau Gaillard may rival 
any cathedral. Among civic buildings may be mentioned the palais 
de justice at Rouen and the h6tel de ville at Compiegne, both late 
but beautiful and impressive types. The royal palace of Paris is now 
represented by the Sainte Chapelle, but accounts of its splendid hall 
and general arrangements have been preserved. At Poitiers is still 
extant the hall of the palace of the counts of Poitou; at Laon the 
episcopal palace is almost entire ; there are considerable remains of 
the bishops' palaces of Beauvais, Evreux, Rouen, Reims: and the 
pope's palace at Avignon must also be mentioned in this connexion. 



The most perfect existing great houses of the middle ages are those 
of Jacques Cceur at Bourges and of the abbot of Cluny in Paris. 
A large number of fine houses on a small scale, dating from the 12th 
and 13th centuries, are still preserved at Beauvais, Auxerre, Chartres, 
Cordes, &c. The house of the musicians at Reims, c. 1280, is adorned 
by a series of seated life-sized figures playing instruments, in sculpture 
of a very high order. A good and concise account of the smaller houses 
in France is given in Hudson Turner's Some Account of Domestic 
Architecture, and in C. Enlart's Manuel d'archeologie, the best and 
most recent survey of the whole field of medieval antiquities in 
France. (W. R. L.) 

Romanesque and Gothic Architecture in Spain 
What strikes the architectural student most forcibly in Spain 
is the concurrent existence of two schools of art during the best 
part of the middle ages. The Moors invaded Spain in 711, and 
were not finally expelled from Granada until 1492. During the 
whole of this period they were engaged, with more or less success, 
in contests for superiority with the Christian natives. In those 
portions of the country which they held longest, and with the 
firmest hand, they enforced their own customs and taste in art 
almost to the exclusion of all other work. Where their rule was 
not permanent their artistic influence was still felt, and even 
beyond what were ever the boundaries of their dominion, there 
are still to be seen in Gothic buildings some traces of acquaint- 
ance with Arabic art not seen elsewhere in Europe, with the 
exception, perhaps, of the southern part of the Italian peninsula, 
and there differing much in its development. The mosque of 
Cordova in the 9th century, the Alcazar and Giralda at Seville 
in the 13th, the Court of Lions in the Alhambra in the 14th, several 
houses in Toledo in the 15th century, are examples of what the 
Moors were building during the period of the middle ages in 
which the best Gothic buildings were being erected. Some 
portions of Spain were never conquered by the Moors. These 
were the greater part of Aragon, Navarre, Asturias, Biscay 
and the northern portion of Galicia. Toledo was retaken by the 
Christians in 1085, Tarragona in 1089, Saragossa in n 18, Lerida 
in 1 149, Valencia in 1238 and Seville in 1248. In the districts 
occupied by the Moors Gothic architecture had no natural 
growth, whilst even in those which were not held by them 
the arts of war were of necessity so much more thought of 
than those of peace, that the services of foreign architects were 
made use of to an extent unequalled in any other part of Europe. 

Of early Christian buildings erected from the 9th to the nth 
century remains of some twenty to thirty are known, and there are 
probably others which will be found when the communications in 
the country become more extended. The most interesting of these 
is Santa Maria de Naranco near Oviedo, originally built in 848 as 
part of a palace. It consisted of a rectangular hall, 42 ft. long and 
16 ft. wide, with entrance doorways in the centre of each side, and 
at each end an arcade of three arches, carried on piers and coupled 
columns, which led to an open loggia from which the hall was 
lighted. Fifty to sixty years later it was converted into a church 
by blocking up the end of the east loggia. The church is remarkable 
for its barrel vault, built in fine masonry, and for the knowledge 
that is displayed in meeting its thrust. Internally, in order to lessen 
the span, the upper part of the walls is brought forward and carried 
on a series of arches on each side, which are supported on piers 
consisting of four coupled columns, virtually constituting an interior 
abutment. Externally, the thrust is met by buttresses, features not 
found in France until about a century and a half later. All the 
columns are spiral-fluted, and a twisted-cord torus-moulding decorates 
the capitals and other features in the church. The transverse ribs 
of the hall, which are of slight projection, are carried on broad 
bands with disks in the spandrils of the arches, the disks having 
badges in the centre, and being bordered, as well as the bands, with 
twisted cords. Underneath the church is a spacious vaulted crypt, 
which was built as a cellar or basement storey, to raise and give 
more importance to the palace. The twisted cord seems to have 
been a favourite device in all the early churches, and is extensively 
employed in the decoration of San Miguel de Lino, a small church 
about a quarter of a mile from Santa Maria de Naranco and coeval 
with that church. Externally the church of San Miguel has all the 
character of a Byzantine church ; the windows in the front are 
pierced with Moorish tracery, probably brought there by those 
Christians who were flying to the sanctuaries of Asturias from 
the incursions of the Moors. In another church, about 15 m. south 
of Oviedo, Santa Christina de Leon, all the attached staffs are 
decorated with spiral fluting. The choir is raised, and approached 
by steps on either side through a screen of three arches, of the type 
known as Transennae in the earlier Christian of Rome. Here, as 



400 



ARCHITECTURE 



[SPANISH GOTHIC 



in Santa Maria de Naranco, the church is covered with a barrel 
vault with similar constructive and decorative features. Externally 
the buttresses are in great profusion, there being two to each bay. 
The screen, the pierced marble slabs between the columns carrying 
it, and the decoration of the capitals, all show Byzantine influence. 
Other early churches are those of San Pablo del Campo (930) and 
San Pedro de las Puellas, both in Barcelona, the fine church at the 
village of Priesca near Villaviciosa (915), the monastery of Valdedios 
(893) and that of San Salvador (1218), in which, notwithstanding 
its late date, there is a distinct Moorish influence. This influence 
is also to be noticed in the north of Spain, although it was never 
occupied by the Moors. Thus in the earliest church known, at 
Banos de Cerrato near Palencia (founded in 662, but restored in 
711), there is a horse-shoe barrel vault over the square apse. Again 
in San Miguel de Escalada (913) near Leon, there are horse-shoe 
arches in the nave, and the three apses are horse-shoe on plan. 
San Pedro at Zamora is a vaulted church with horse-shoe arches in 
the nave, but otherwise Byzantine in style. In the church of Corpus 
Christi at Segovia the nave is Moorish in style, and the octagonal 
columns of the nave have capitals with fir cones, as in the well-known 
Santa Maria la Blanca at Toledo, originally a synagogue. The most 
remarkable church of all, so far as Moorish style is concerned, is the 
church of the monastery of Santiago de Penalva, near Villafranca 
del Vierzo, built between 931 and 951, and therefore coeval 'with 
Cordova. The church is 40 ft. long by 20 ft. wide, covered by a 
barrel vault with transverse horse-shoe arch in the centre carrying 
the same. At each end is an apse with horse-shoe arches carried on 
marble shafts with Byzantine capitals. Though of later date, there 
is another interesting Romanesque example in the Templars' church 
of La Vera Cruz at Segovia (1204), which is twelve-sided with three 
apses, and in the centre has a chapel built in imitation of the Holy 
Sepulchre at Jerusalem. 

The buildings which come next in point of date are all evidently 
derived from or erected by the architects of those which were at 
the time being built in the south of France. These churches are 
uniform in plan, with central lanterns and three eastern apses. The 
nave has usually a waggon or barrel vault, supported by quadrant 
vaults in the aisles, and the steeples are frequently polygonal in 
plan. If these churches are compared with examples like that of the 
cathedral at Carcassonne on the other side of the Pyrenees, their 
identity in style will at once be seen. A still more remarkable 
evidence of similarity has been pointed out between the church of 
St Sernin, Toulouse, and the cathedral of Santiago. The plan, 
proportions and general design of the two churches are identical. 
Here we see a noble ground-plan, consisting of nave with aisles, 
transepts, central lantern and chevet, consisting of an apsidal choir, 
with a surrounding aisle and chapels opening into it at intervals. 
This example is the more remarkable, inasmuch as the early Spanish 
architects very rarely built a regular chevel, and almost always pre- 
ferred the simpler plan of apsidal chapels on either side of the choir. 
And its magnificent scale and perfect preservation to the present day 
combine to make it one of the most interesting architectural relics 
in the country. 

Among the more remarkable buildings of the 12th and the begin- 
ning ci the 13th century are San Isidoro, Leon; San Vicente, Avila; 
several churches in Segovia; and the old cathedral at Lerida. 
They are much more uniform in character than are the churches 
of the same period in the various provinces of France, and the 
developments in style, where they are seen at all, seldom have much 
appearance of being natural local developments. This, indeed, is 
the most marked feature of Spanish architecture in all periods of its 
history. In such a country it might have been expected that many 
interesting local developments would have been seen; but of these 
there are but one or two that deserve notice. One of them is illus- 
trated admirably in the church of San Millan, Segovia, where 
beyond the aisles of the nave are open cloisters or aisles arcaded 
on the outside, and opening by doors into the aisles of the nave. A 
similar external south portico exists in San Miguel de Escalada, 
already referred to, Santo Domingo, Burgos, and San Esteban at 
Segovia. It would be difficult to devise a more charming arrange- 
ment for buildings in a hot country, whilst at the same time the 
architectural effect is in the highest degree beautiful. The uni- 
versality of the central tower and lantern has been already men- 
tioned. This was often polygonal, and its use led to the erection of 
some lanterns or domes of almost unique beauty and interest. The 
old cathedral at Salamanca, the church at Toro and the cathedral 
of Zamora, all deserve most careful study on this score. Their 
lanterns are almost too lofty in proportion to be properly called 
domes, and yet their treatment inside and outside suggests a very 
beautiful form of raised dome. They are carried on pointed arches, 
and are circular in plan internally and octagonal on the exterior, 
the angles of the octagon being filled with large turrets, which add 
much to the beauty of the design, and greatly also to its strength. 
Between the supporting arches and the vault there are, at Salamanca, 
two tiers of arcades continued all round the lantern, the lower one 
pierced with four, and the upper with twelve lights, and the vault or 
dome is decorated with ribs radiating from the centre. On the 
exterior the effect is rather that of a low steeple covered with a stone 
roof with spherical sides than of a dome, but the design is so novel 
and so suggestive, that it is well worth detailed description. Nothing 



can be more happy than the way in which the light is admitted, 
whilst it is also to be noted that the whole work is of stone, and that 
there is nothing in the design but what is essentially permanent 
and monumental in construction. The only other Spanish develop- 
ment is the introduction, to a very moderate extent, of features 
derived from the practice of the Moorish architects. This is, how- 
ever, much less seen than might have been expected, and is usually 
confined to some small feature of detail, such, e.g. as the carving of a 
boss, or the filling in of small tracery in circular windows, where 
it would in no way clash with the generally Christian character of 
the art. 

The debateable period of transition which is usually so interesting 
is very sterile in Spain. A good model once adopted from the French 
was adhered to with but little modification, and it was not till the 
13th-century style was well established in France and England that 
any introduction of its features is seen here; and then, again, it is 
the work of foreign architects imported for the work and occasion, 
bringing with them a fully developed style to which nothing whatever 
in Spain itself led up by a natural or evident development. The 
three great Spanish churches of this period are the cathedrals of 
Toledo, Leon and Burgos (Plate II., fig. 65). Those of Siguenza, 
Lerida and Tarragona, fine as they are, illustrate the art of the 
12th rather than of the 13th century, but these three great churches 
are perfect Early Pointed works, and most complete in all their parts. 
The cathedral of Toledo is one of the most nobly designed churches in 
Europe. In dimensions it is surpassed only by the cathedrals of 
Milan and Seville, whilst in beauty of plan it leaves both those great 
churches far behind. The chevet, in which two broad aisles are carried 
round the apse with chapels alternately square and apsidal opening 
out of them, is perhaps the most perfect of all the schemes we know. 
It is as if the French chevets, all of which were more or less tentative 
in their plan, had culminated in this grand work to which they had 
led the way. The architectural detail of this great church is generally 
on a par with the beauty and grandeur of its plan, but is perhaps 
surpassed by the somewhat later church at Leon. Here we have a 
church built by architects whose sole idea was the erection of a 
building with as few and small points of support as possible, and 
with the largest possible amount of window opening. It was the 
work of men whose art had been formed in a country where as much 
sun and light as possible were necessary, and is quite unsuited for 
such a country as Spain. Nevertheless it is a building of rare beauty 
and delicacy of design. Burgos, better known than either of the 
others, is inferior in scale and interest, and its character has been 
much altered by added works more or less Rococo in character, so 
that it is only by analysis and investigation that the 13th-century 
church is still seen under and behind the more modern excrescences. 

The next period is again marked by work which seems to be that 
of foreigners. The fully developed Middle Pointed or Geometrical 
Gothic is indeed very uniform all over Europe. Here, however, its 
efforts were neither grand in scale nor interesting. Some of the 
church furniture, as, e.g. the choir screens at Toledo, and some of 
the cloisters, are among the best features. The work is all correct, 
tame and academical, and has none of the dignity, power and 
interest which marked the earlier Spanish buildings. Towards the 
end of the 14th century the work of Spanish architects becomes 
infinitely more interesting. The country was free from trouble with 
the Moors; it was rich and prosperous, and certainly its buildings 
at this period were so numerous, so grand and so original, that they 
cannot be too much praised. Moreover, they were carefully designed 
to suit the requirements of the climate, and also with a sole view to 
the accommodation conveniently of enormous congregations, all 
within sight of the preacher or the altar. This last development 
seems to have been very much the work of a great architect of 
Majorca, Jayme Fabre by name. The grandest works of his school 
are still to be seen in Catalonia. Their churches are so vast in their 
dimensions that the largest French and English buildings seem to 
be small by comparison, and being invariably covered with stone 
vaults, they cannot be compared to the great wooden-roofed churches 
of the preaching orders in Italy and elsewhere, in which the only 
approach is made to their magnificent dimensions. The cathedral of 
Gerona is the most remarkable example. Here the choir is planned 
like the French chevet with an aisle and chapels round it, arid opens 
with three lofty arches into the east wall of a nave which measures 
no less than 73 ft. in the clear, and is covered with a stone vaulted 
ceiling. In Barcelona there are several churches of very similar 
description; at Manresa another, but with aisles to its nave; and 
at Palma in Majorca one of the same plan as the last, but of even 
much larger dimensions. Perhaps there is no effort of any local 
school of architects more worthy of study and respect than this 
Catalonian work of the 14th and 15th centuries. Such a happy 
combination of noble design and proportions with entirely practical 
objects places its author among the very greatest architects of any 
time. It is one thing to develop patiently step by step from the 
work of one's fathers in art, quite another to strike out an entirely 
new form by a new combination of the old elements. In comparison 
with the works just mentioned the other great Spanish churches of 
the 15th century are uninteresting. But still their scale is grand 
and though their detail is over-elaborated and not beautiful, it is 
impossible to deny the superb effect of the interior of such churches 
as those of Seville, Segovia and Salamanca (new cathedral). They 



ARCHITECTURE 



Plate V. 




Photo, A linari. 

Fig. 72— DOOR OF SAN MICHELE, PAVIA. 




Photo, Lacoste, 

Fig. 73.— UNIVERSITY, SALAMANCA. 




Fig. 74.— TOWN HALL, SEVILLE. 



PlAIE VI. 



ARCHITECTURE 




Photo, F. Frith & Co. 



Fig. 76. -WOLLATON HALL. 



UMoujui 




Fig. 77— HAMPTON COURT. 



ENGLISH ROMANESQUE] 



ARCHITECTURE 



401 



are very similar in their character, their columns are formed by the 
prolongation of the reedy mouldings of the arches, their window 
traceries are poorly designed, and their roofs are covered with a 
complex multitude of lierne ribs. Yet the scale is fine, the admission 
of light, generally high up and in sparing quantity, is artistic, and 
much of the furniture is either picturesque or interesting. The tout 
ensemble is generally very striking, even where the architectural 
purist is apt to grumble at the shortcomings of most of the detail. 

The remarks which have been made so far have been confined to 
the fabrics of the churches of Spain. It would be easy to add 
largely to them by reference to the furniture which still so often 
adorns them, unaltered even if uncared for; to the monuments of 
the mighty dead ; to the sculpture which frequently adorns the 
doorways and screens; and to the cloisters, chapter-houses and 
other dependent buildings, which add so much charm in every way 
to them. Besides this, there are very numerous castles, often planned 
on the grandest scale, and some, if not very many, interesting remains 
of domestic houses and palaces; and most of these, being to some 
extent flavoured by the neighbourhood of Moorish architects, have 
more character of their own than has been accorded to the churches. 
Finally, there are considerable tracts of country in which brick was 
the only material used ; and it is curious that this is almost always 
more or less Moorish in the character of its detail. The Moors were 
great brickmakers. Their elaborate reticulated enrichments were 
easily executed in it, and the example set by them was, of course, 
more likely to be followed by Spaniards than that of the nearest 
French brick building district in the region of Toulouse. The brick 
towers are often very picturesque ; several are to be seen at Toledo, 
others at Saragossa, and, perhaps the most graceful of all, in the old 
city of Tarazona in Aragon, where the proportions are extremely 
lofty, the face of the walls everywhere adorned with sunk panels, 
arcading, or ornamental brickwork, and at the base there is a bold 
battered slope which gives a great air of strength and stability to 
the whole. On the whole, it must be concluded that the medieval 
architecture of Spain from the 12th century is of less interest than 
that of most other countries, because its development was hardly 
ever a national one. The architects were imported at one time 
from France, at another from the Low Countries, and they brought 
with them all their own local fashions, and carried them into 
execution in the strictest manner; and it was not till the end of 
the 14th century, and even then only in Catalonia, that any build- 
ings which could be called really Spanish in their character were 
erected. (R. P. S.) 

Romanesque and Gothic Architecture in England 

Pre-Conquest. — The. history of English architecture before the 
Norman Conquest is still only imperfectly known. Its parentage 
is triple; Roman, Celtic and Teutonic. To the first belongs the 
general building tradition of the Romanized West, and the influ- 
ence of the mission of Augustine at the end of the 6th century, 
and of such men as Wilfrid in the 7th. The Celtic element is 
due to the Scottish (Irish) church, which never gained much 
hold on the south of England, while the Teutonic influence 
shows itself in the later developments, which are allied to the 
early buildings of kindred peoples in Germany. Fragments of 
existing early churches have been attributed to the time of the 
Roman occupation, but all are doubtful, with the exception of the 
remains of what is believed to have been a Christian church 
excavated at Silchester in 1892. This was a basilica of ordinary 
form, comprising an apse with western orientation, nave and 
aisles, transepts of slight projection, and narthex. Augustine's 
cathedral church of Canterbury, which he had learned ' was 
originally constructed by the labours of Roman believers (Bede), 
was also a basilica with western apse; its eastern apse and 
confessio beneath were probably a later addition. Remains of 
early churches are found on several sites where churches are 
recorded to have been built during the missionary period. Of 
these, Reculver (c. 670) and Brixworth (c. 680) have aisled 
naves and eastern apses. At Brixworth a square bay intervenes 
between the apse and the nave. St Pancras, Canterbury, of 
the time of Augustine, Rochester (604), and Lyminge (founded 
633). show unaisled naves of relatively wide proportion, with 
eastern apses of stilted curve. In some of these churches there 
was a triple arcade in front of the sanctuary,, in place of the usual 
" triumphal arch." The technique shows Roman influence, and 
Roman materials are largely used. The existing crypts of 
Hexham and Ripon were built by Wilfrid, c. 675. The descrip- 
tion of Wilfrid's church at Hexham gives the impression of an 
elaborate structure (columnis variis et porticibus multis suffultam) . 
Wilfrid also built at Hexham a church of central plan, with 



projections (porticus) on the four sides, a type of which no 
example has survived in England. Escomb (Durham) and parts 
of Monkwearmouth and Jarrow, which are attributed to the 
same period, have plans of an entirely different type — a relatively 
long and narrow nave, with small square-ended chancel — a plan, 
usually attributed to Celtic influence, which is most extensively 
represented in churches recognized as Saxon. 

The evolution of the characteristic features of pre-Conquest 
architecture was slow, and was doubtless greatly hindered by the 
invasions of the Northmen from the end of the 8th century onward, 
but germs of the fully developed style are to be found in the earliest 
buildings. The western tower, usually of tall and slender proportion, 
was developed from the western porch found at St Pancras, Canter- 
bury, and Monkwearmouth ; sometimes, as in the latter church, 
actually raised over the older porch. The lateral chapels of St 
Pancras, which existed also in the Saxon cathedral of Canterbury, 
were developed into a transept, culminating in the cruciform plan 
with central tower. The characteristic " long-and-short " work, 
which consists of tall upright stones alternating with stones bedded 
flat bonding into the rubble work of the wall, has its prototype in 
the western arch of the porch of Monkwearmouth, and in the jambs 
of the chancel arch at Escomb. Sometimes the flat stones are cut 
back on the face, so that the plaster which covered the rubble 
extended up to the line of the upright stones, thus giving the quoin 
the appearance of a narrow pilaster. The repetition of these pilasters 
on the face of the walling constitutes rib-work, and these ribs are 
frequently connected by semicircular or so-called " triangular " 
arches, forming a kind of rude arcading (Earls Barton, Barton-on- 
Humber.) Windows in the earliest Saxon work are generally wide 
in proportion, and splayed on the inside only ; in the later work they 
commonly have splays both on the inside and outside. Doorways 
have square jambs, without splay or rebate; sometimes the jambs 
of doorways and windows are inclined, as in early buildings in Ireland. 
Imposts to doorways, tower arches or chancel arches are often square 
projecting blocks, sometimes chamfered on the lower edge. The 
mid-wall shaft is a characteristic feature in the belfry openings of 
Saxon towers; it supports an impost or through-stone, of the full 
thickness of the wall, which receives the semicircular arches over the 
openings. The method is analogous to that commonly found in 
northern Italy and the Rhineland. Sometimes the mid-wall shaft 
is a baluster, turned in a lathe. In some of the later belfry openings, 
a capital intervenes between the mid-wall shaft and the impost. 
The dating of buildings of this style is at present a matter of con- 
siderable difficulty, but certain points, such as the development of 
the cruciform plan, are useful for comparison. A fully developed 
cross church was built at Romsey in 969, having also a single axial 
western tower, and this seems to have been the normal type of a 
large church in the later years of the style. Cruciform plans, not 
yet fully developed, are found at Deerhurst, Breamore and St Mary 
in the castle at Dover, and fully developed at Norton (Durham) 
and Stow (Lincolnshire). The most advanced detail which occurs 
in pre-Conquest buildings is the recessing of arches in orders. But 
for the Conquest, English architecture might have developed some- 
what, on the lines of contemporary work in Germany. It must be 
remembered, however, that, although the Norman Conquest marks 
the beginning of a new epoch in English architecture, the Norman 
manner had already been introduced into England under Edward 
the Confessor, as is proved by the considerable remains of that king's 
work at Westminster Abbey. 

The succeeding periods of English architecture have been 
divided into so-called "styles" or "periods," though it should 
be recognized that all such hard and fast divisions are purely 
artificial, and that, apart from the objection that they exaggerate 
the importance of mere details, they tend to obscure the fact 
that the history of Gothic architecture is a history of continuous 
development. The following classifications, those of Thomas 
Rickman and Edmund Sharpe, are in most general use for the 
present by such students as are not content with a nomenclature 
based on simple chronology: — 

Rickman. Sharpe. 

1066-1189 Norman. 1066-1145 Norman. 

1145-1190 Transitional. 

1189-1307 Early English. 1190-1245 Lancet. 

1245-1315 Geometrical. 

1307-1377 Decorated. 1315-1360 Curvilinear. 

1377-1546 Perpendicular. 1360-1550 Rectilinear. 

Norman Conquest to c. 11 50. — At the time of the Conquest of 
England, the Norman school was already one of the most ad- 
vanced Romanesque schools of western Europe. Its marked 
individuality and logical character are clearly expressed in the 
abbey churches of Jumieges and St Etienne and Sainte-Trinite 
at Caen, and it quickly supplanted the less advanced Romanesque 



4-02 



ARCHITECTURE 



[ENGLISH GOTHIC 



manner of the conquered English. As soon as the conqueror had 
made himself master in his new kingdom, cathedral and abbey 
churches were rebuilt on a scale hitherto unknown either in 
Normandy or England. As the effect of the Norman Conquest 
was to incorporate the church in England more closely with 
western Christendom, so its effect on architecture was to bring it 
into line with the best continental achievement of its time. 
The immense energy of the Norman bishops and abbots gave such 
a stimulus to architecture that by the close of the nth century, 
England, rather than Normandy, had become the real foyer of 
the Norman school. 

The plans of the larger churches show greater development in 
the length of choir, transept and nave than was usual in Normandy. 
Many follow the type of choir plan generally represented in the 
contemporary churches of Normandy which have survived — a 
central apse, flanked by an apse terminating each aisle, but the two 
bays usual in the Norman churches frequently became four in 
England. The Confessor's church of Westminster seems to have 
had an ambulatory with radiating chapels, a plan which, although 
rare in the surviving churches of Normandy, was adopted in several 
of the more important English churches (St Augustine's, Canterbury ; 
Winchester; Worcester; Gloucester; Bury St Edmunds; Norwich; 
Tewkesbury). Some of these have great vaulted crypts extending 
under the choir and its aisles. The transept, generally of consider- 
able length, has one or more apsidal chapels on the east side of each 
arm, or an eastern aisle, or even (as at Winchester and Ely) both 
eastern and western aisles. The lantern-towes over the crossing 
was a characteristic feature in England, as in Normandy. Frequently 
the nave was of great length, extending to twelve bays at Winchester, 
thirteen at Ely, and fourteen at Norwich. Some churches, as Ely, 
Bury St Edmunds, and later Peterborough (Plate VIII., fig. 81), 
show a western transept, with corresponding development of the 
west front. Two western towers are most usual, but Ely (Plate II., 
fig. 67), and, originally Winchester, had the single western tower, 
a survival from pre-Conquest times, which is found also in number- 
less parish churches. In their general design, the Norman churches 
show great skill in composition, and in the logical expression of 
structure, and sure grasp of the problems to be solved. The sub- 
ordination of arches (arches built in rings, or orders, recessed one 
within the other) was carried further than in other Romanesque 
schools, and with this went the subordination of the pier, planned 
with a shaft to receive each order of the semicircular arch. Some- 
times the shafted piers of the great arcades alternate with cylindrical 
(or later with octagonal) pillars; sometimes, as at Gloucester and 
Tewkesbury, all the pillars are cylindrical. The triforium usually 
has a single wide semicircular arched opening, enclosing two or more 
minor semicircular arches springing from detached shafts. Usually 
the aisle wall is carried up to form a complete triforium storey, 
unvaulted, and Jighted by windows in the outer wall. The clerestory 
has a single window in each bay, with a wall passage between the 
window and an internal arcade, usually of three semicircular arches 
on shafts, the central arch being wider than the side arches. Most 
frequently naves and transepts were unvaulted, and finished with 
wood ceilings, while the aisles were covered with groined vaults of 
rubble, on transverse arches. The general design of the greater 
churches indicates, however, that the Norman builders were aiming 
at a completely vaulted structure. The half-barrel vault over the 
triforium of Gloucester, and the transverse arches over the triforium 
of Chichester, seem to be constructed to afford the necessary abut- 
ment to vaults over the choir, such indeed as still exist over some 
choirs in Normandy built before the end of the nth century. The 
problem was only successfully solved by the introduction of the 
diagonal rib, which completed the structural membering of the vault. 
Durham, begun in 1093 ( n g- 4 2 )> is the earliest example in England 
of this important innovation, and it precedes by some quarter of a 
century the earliest ribbed vaults of the lle-de-France. The abutting 
arches under the roof of its triforium are actually rudimentary flying- 
buttresses, and we have here all the essential elements of Gothic 
architecture, except the pointed arch, which is only systematically 
used in h-nglish vaulted construction from about the middle of the 
1 2th century. The decorative forms of the earlier buildings of the 
Norman school are severely simple. Arches, which at first were 
usually unmoulded, soon received effective mouldings of rolls and 
hollows, continuing a tradition of the latest pre-Conquest architec- 
ture. Two types of capitals are found in the earlier buildings after 
the Conquest ; the volute capital, descended from the Corinthian, 
which was the normal type in Normandy; and the cubic or cushion 
capital, formed by the penetration of a segment of a sphere, or 
segments of cones, with a cube, a type which, appearing earlier in 
England than in Normandy, was doubtless derived from pre-Conquest 
models, and in the 12th century developed into the scalloped capital. 
The decoration of wall-surfaces by arcades, frequently of inter- 
secting semicircular arches, is characteristic of the Norman school. 
Windows are splayed in the interior, and in the more important 
buildings are enriched with shafts and moulded arches. Ornamenta- 
tion is frequently concentrated on the doorways, which are often of 
many orders, with a shaft under each order. Based chiefly on 



geometric forms, such as the chevron or zigzag, star, fret and cable, 
the decoration becomes richer and more refined as the 12th century 
advances, though in sculpture the Norman was less advanced than 
some other Romanesque schools. 

The foregoing generalization applies more particularly to the 
greater churches, but numberless parish churches present similar 
characteristics. Chancels are sometimes apsidal, but by far the most 
prevalent type of plan is the aisleless oblong nave and square-ended 



Scale of Feet 
3 10 20304050 607080' 




From Rickman's Styles oj Architecture, by permission of Parker & Co. 
Fig. 42. — Plan of Durham Cathedral. 

chancel, with or without a western tower. Other types of aisleless 
plans are the cruciform church with central tower, or simply nave and 
chancel with central tower. Even where subsequent alterations and 
rebuildings have destroyed almost everything, the influence of these 
plans on the later work is the key to a right understanding of the 
history of the greater number of English medieval churches. 

12th Century {second half) . — The second half of the 1 2th century 
is the period of transition par excellence — of transition from 
Romanesque to Gothic. The school of the lle-de-France, which 
up to c. 11 20 was one of the most backward of the Romanesque 
schools, had made enormous progress when the ambulatory of 
Suger's church of Saint-Denis was built (1 140-1 144), and thence- 
forth it continued to lead the way. There is no doubt that, 
from the middle of the 12th century, English architecture was 
continuously influenced by the lle-de-France, for the most part 
through Normandy, but it must be considered to be a develop- 
ment on parallel lines, with strongly marked characteristics of 
its own, and not merely as an importation of forms already 
developed elsewhere. At the same time, the influence of the 
Cistercian revival was considerable, not so much in the introduc- 
tion of foreign forms as in the direction of simplicity and severity, 
which acted as a valuable check to the prevalent tendency to 
exaggerate the importance of surface decoration. 

The substitution of the square east-end for the apse in the plans of 
the greater churches, already effected at Romsey, was furthered by 
the simple plans of the Cistercian churches. The altar spaces pro- 
vided by the radiating chapels of the French chevet were in England 
obtained by returning the aisles across the square east-end of the 
choir, or by an eastern tra rssect. The latter occurs first here in 



ENGLISH GOTHIC] 



ARCHITECTURE 



403 



" the glorious choir of Conrad " of the beginning of the 12th century 
at Canterbury, which affords also the first example of the eastward 
extension of the choir, which became so characteristic a feature of 
English planning. The reconstruction of Conrad's choir after the 
fire of 1 1 74 led to a further extension eastward, with the eastern 
chapel, which was adopted in many of the greater churches, either 
in the form of a lower building, sometimes of three spans, eastward 
of the east gable, or of an extension of the choir itself to its full height. 
The work of William of Sens at Canterbury(ii75-ii78)was naturally 
more French in character than other contemporary works in England, 
but the work of his successor, William the Englishman (1179-1184), 
shows the beginnings of what became the characteristically English 
manner of the 13th century. 

The second half of the 12th century was a period of rapid develop- 
ment of architectural forms in the direction of increased elegance and 
refinement. The pointed arch, employed at first for the arches of 
construction, entirely superseded the semicircular arch in doorways, 
windows and arcades by the end of the century, and its adoption 
finally solved the problem of vaulted construction. The abutting 
arches under the triforium roofs of the earlier churches were developed 
into flying buttresses above the roofs, springing from buttresses of 
increased projection, and weighted by pinnacles. Mouldings became 
more graceful and subtle in their profiles. Capitals reverted to the 
volute type, transformed and refined. The massive Romanesque 
pier was gradually developed into the lighter Gothic pier, in which 
detached shafts were extensively adopted. The use of Purbeck 
marble for these shafts must be considered in relation to the painted 
decoration of the wall-surfaces, which, although now almost entirely 
lost, was an important factor in the internal effect. 

ijth Century (first half). — The last decade of the 12th century 
marks the achievement of a fully developed Gothic style, with 
strongly marked national individuality. During the 13th 
century, English Gothic follows the same general course of 
evolution as that of northern France, but the parallelism is 
less close than in the preceding century. 

St Hugh's choir at Lincoln (begun 1192) had indeed an apse, with 
ambulatory and radiating chapels, though its plan does not appear 
to have been controlled by the vaulting as in the French chevets, and 
what there is of French influence seems to have come rather through 
Canterbury than by a more direct route. This choir has the eastern 
transept which characterizes several of the greater churches of 
the first half of the 13th century — Salisbury (fig. 43), Beverley, 
Worcester, Rochester, Southwell. The square eastern termination, 
the less ambitious height, and the comparatively simple buttress- 
system, combine to give the English Gothic cathedral an air of 
greater repose than is found in the magnificent triumphs of French 
Gothic art. In its structural system, too, English Gothic retained 
something of the Romanesque treatment of wall-surface; the sup- 
pression of the wall, and the concentration of the masonry in the 
pier, was never carried so far as in the complete Gothic of France. 
The general tendency during the 13th century, as in the 12th, was 
in the direction of increased lightness and elegance. The employ- 
ment of detached shafts, and the extensive use of marble (generally 
Purbeck) for these shafts, is a distinguishing feature of the first half 
of the century. The vaulting system is fully developed; the most 
usual form is the simple quadripartite, but the tendency to introduce 
additional ribs (tiercerons) and ridge-ribs already makes its appear- 
ance in the nave of Lincoln and the presbytery of Ely (Plate VIII., 
fig. 82), to be yet further developed in the second half of the century. 
Capitals are cither simply moulded, an elaboration of the plain bell 
capitals of the latter part of the 12th century, or finely sculptured, 
with conventional, or "stiff-leaved," foliage of the crocket type. 
The use of the circular abacus, begun in the preceding century, 
entirely supersedes the square abacus, which was retained in France. 
Mouldings are profiled with great refinement, the alternation of rounds 
and hollows producing effective contrasts of light and shade, and 
the far more complicated profiles of arch mouldings provide another 
feature which distinguishes English work of this period from French. 
Windows of single pointed lights, the so-called " lancet," though 
frequently by no means sharply pointed, are the prevalent type, 
grouped in pairs, triplets, &c, and arranged in tiers in the large 
gables, or sometimes with only a single group of tall lights, like the 
" five sisters " of the north transept of York. Few works are more 
admirably designed than some of the towers of this period. Probably 
the greatest excellence ever attained in English art of the 13th 
century was reached in the great Yorkshire abbeys; for purity of 
general design, excellence of construction, and beauty of detail, they 
are unsurpassed by the work of any other period. 

13th Century (second half) . — The grouping together of " lancet" 
windows, the piercing of the wall above them with foiled circles, 
and the combination of the whole under an enclosing arch, 
soon led to the introduction of tracery, for which the design of 
earlier triforium arcades had also afforded a suggestion. 

Bar-tracery appears just before the middle of the 13th century, 
and the great tracery window filling the whole width of a bay, or 



the entire gable-end, soon becomes a most characteristic feature. 
The earlier tracery windows show only simple geometrical forms, 
foiled arches to the heads of the lights, and foiled circles above, of 
which the abbey-church and the chapter-houses of Westminster 
and Salisbury afford most beautiful examples. In some particulars, 
such as its chevet plan and its comparatively great height, West- 
minster approaches more nearly to the French type than other 
English churches of the 13th century, but its details are character- 
istically English and of great beauty. In the last quarter of the 
century, pointed trefoils or quatrefoils are largely used in tracery, 
and the foliations frequently form the lines of the tracery, without 
enclosing circles. Contemporary with this change is the gradual 




ir 






Fig. 43. — Plan of Salisbury Cathedral. 

absorption of the triforium into the clerestory, of which Southwell 
and Pershore are precocious examples. Contemporary also was the 
adoption of an excessively naturalistic type of foliage. The art of 
masonry and stone-cutting was rapidly developed. The detached 
shaft, always structurally weak, was abandoned for the pier with 
engaged shafts separated by mouldings. The mouldings of arches 
become less deeply undercut, and the greater use of the fillet tends 
to give a more liney effect. The whole practice of art was growing 
more scholarly, perhaps, but at trie same time it was more conscious, 
and the cleverness of the mason was almost as often suggested as 
the noble character of his work. 

14th Century (first half). — The juxtaposition of the foliations 
without enclosing circles in tracery windows produced curves 
of contraflexure, which led insensibly to the complete substitu- 
tion of flowing lines for geometrical forms in tracery. 

Flowing tracery makes its appearance in England about 13 10, 
and lasts some fifty years. Up to the end of the 13th century, 
window tracery had developed in France and England on parallel 
lines, though the English work was always slightly behind France 
in point of date. All this is changed with the adoption of flowing 
tracery in England ; its development was purely national, and owed 
nothing to France. Indeed, the French flamboyant only makes its 
appearance at the time when flowing tracery was being abandoned 
in England. Not only window traceries, but mouldings, carvings 
and other details are changed in character. The ogee form is used 
in arches, in wall-arcades of great beauty and elaboration, as in the 
Lady-chapel at Ely, and in the canopies of tombs, such as the 
magnificent Percy tomb at Beverley. Niches and arcades are richly 
ornamented, and small decorative buttresses are used in the jambs 
of doorways, windows and niches. The moulded capital is still used, 
along with the capital with a continuous convex band of wavy foliage. 
Many of the most beautiful English towers and spires date from this 
period, the work of which is perhaps seen at its best in the parish 
churches of south Lincolnshire. 



4°4 



ARCHITECTURE 



[SCOTTISH AND IRISH 



From Middle of 14th Century. — The over-elaboration of flowing 
tracery inevitably led to a reaction. The beauty of the lines 
of the tracery had controlled everything, and the resulting forms 
of the openings, which presented serious difficulties for the glass 
painter, had been a secondary consideration. Hence an endeav- 
our to return to a simpler and more dignified, if more mechanical, 
style of building. The splendid exuberance of the earlier 14th 
century style gave way to the introduction of vigorous, straight, 
vertical and horizontal lines. 

The beginnings of the new manner are to be seen in the south 
transept of Gloucester before 1337. After the great interruption of 
building works caused by the Black Death of 1349 and its recurrence 
in following years, the so-called " Perpendicular " style became 
general all over the country. The preference for straight in place of 
flowing lines became more and more developed. Doorways and 
arches were enclosed within well-defined square outlines; walls 
were decorated by panelling in rectangular divisions; vertical lines 
were emphasized by the addition of pinnacles, and buttresses were 
used as mere decorations, while horizontal lines were multiplied in 
string-courses, parapets and window transoms. Capitals were fre- 
quently omitted, and the mouldings of arches were continued down 
the piers. The use of the depressed " four-centred " arch became 
common. Vaulting, which had already been enriched by the 
multiplication of ribs, was further complicated by cross-ribs (liernes), 
subdividing the simple spaces naturally produced by the inter- 
section of necessary ribs into panels; these, again, were filled with 
tracery. The fan-vault was developed by. giving to all the ribs the 
same curvature; the outline of the fan is bounded by a horizontal 
circular rib, and its effect is that of a solid of revolution upon whose 
surface panels are sunk. The cloister of Gloucester presents the 
earliest and perhaps the most beautiful example. Finally, the builders 
displayed their mechanical skill by introducing pendants, as in 
Henry VII. 's chapel at Westminster. This latest period of English 
Gothic was a purely national development of which it has been too 
much the fashion to speak disparagingly ; for it is futile to call such 
works as the nave of Winchester or the choir and Lady-chapel of 
Gloucester "debased." Perhaps the worst that can be said of this 
period is that there was too great a love of display, and too much 
mechanical repetition, but it is none the less true that it is to the 
15th century that a very large number of English parish churches 
owe their fine effect. East Anglia and Somersetshire possess some 
of the choicest examples, and few things can be more beautiful than 
the central towers of Gloucester and Canterbury, and the towers of 
the Somersetshire churches. The open timber roofs, as, for instance, 
those of the East Anglian churches, are superb, while many of the 
churches of this period are still full of interesting furniture and 
decoration. Finally, a word must be said of the wealth of interesting 
examples of domestic architecture, which yet count among the 
ornaments of the country. 

After the middle of the 16th century the practice of Gothic archi- 
tecture virtually died out, though traces of its influence, especially 
in rural districts, were hardly lost until the end of the 17th century. 
Good, sound, soiid and simple forms, well constructed by men who 
respected themselves and their work, and did not build only for the 
passing hour, were still popular and general, so that the vernacular 
architecture to a late period was often good and never absolutely 
uninteresting. 

Scotland. — A few words will suffice for Scottish and Irish archi- 
tecture, since the development in these countries followed much the 
same course of change as in England. 

The earliest ecclesiastical structures which still survive in Scotland 
follow the same general type as those of Ireland. The monastic 
foundations of Queen Margaret and her sons introduced into Scotland 
the Norman manner then universal in England. The best examples, 
such as the nave of Dunfermline, which is an obvious inspiration 
from Durham, Kelso of the later 12th century, and the parish 
churches of Dalmeny and Leuchars, present the same characteristics 
as are found in English churches of somewhat earlier dates than the 
buildings in question, and some Romanesque forms survive to a later 
period than in England. In the 13th century, too, the style of the 
Scottish churches corresponds very closely with that of England, 
though the details are generally simpler, and the structures are 
smaller. It is naturally allied most closely with the north of England, 
where Cistercian influence in the direction of simplicity and severity 
had been exercised with the best results. The transept of Dryburgh, 
the choir and crypt of Glasgow cathedral, the nave of Dunblane, 
the choir of Brechin, and later Elgin cathedral, exhibit the style at 
its purest and best. The disturbed condition of the country during 
the 14th century was unfavourable to architecture, and when 
building revived at the beginning of the 1 5th century its sty le became 
more national. During the first half of the 15th century, it shows a 
certain borrowing from English architecture of the flowing-tracery 
period. Later, many features are borrowed both from England and 
France, and architecture develops in picturesque and interesting 
fashion. Melrose is one of the most characteristic, as it certainly is 
one of the most charming of Scottish buildings; its earlier parts 
bQi* a close resemblance to the earlier 14th-century work at York, 



while its later parts show more similarity to English " Perpendicular" 
than is common in Scotland. One of the most characteristic features 
of Scottish architecture in the 15th century is the pointed barrel 
vault, which directly supports the stone flagged roof. French in- 
fluence is seen in the employment of the polygonal apse for the 
termination of choirs, and in some approaches to Flamboyant 
tracery. The details of the later Gothic churches have but slight 
connexion either with France or England, and show a curious 
revival of earlier motives. The semicircular arch is in frequent use, 
and the " nail-head " and " dog-tooth " ornament, as well as the use 
of detached shafts, are revived. One of the most remarkable build- 
ings of the 15th century in Scotland is the collegiate church of 
Roslin, which has a pointed barrel vault over its choir, with trans- 
verse barrel vaults over the aisles, and is distinguished by the 
extreme richness of its decoration. 

The domestic remains in Scotland aj-e full of picturesque beauty 
and magnificence. They are a distinctly national class of buildings 
of great solidity, and much was sacrificed by their builders to the 
genius of the picturesque. They can only be classed with the latest 
Gothic buildings of other countries, but the mode of design shown in 
them lasted much later than the late Gothic style did in England. 
The vast height to which their walls were carried, the picturesque 
use made of circular towers, the freedom with which buildings were 
planned at various angles of contact to each other, and the general 
simplicity of the ordinary wall, are their most distinct characteristics. 
Ireland.— The chief interest of the medieval architecture of 
Ireland belongs to the buildings which were erected before the 
English conquest of the 12th century. The early monastic settle- 
ments seem to have resembled the primitive Celtic fortresses, and 
consisted of a series of huts or cells, surrounded by an enclosing wall. 
The so-called " bee-hive " cell, which goes back to pre-Christian 
times, was built of rough stone rubble without mortar, and roofed in 
the same manner by corbelling over the courses of masonry. Some 
of these were certainly dwellings, but others were oratories. The 
largest of those in Skellig Michael is four-sided, and from this type 
the stone-roofed church of oblong plan was developed. The later 
type, with oblong nave and small square-ended chancel, retained 
much of the character of these primitive structures, and their barrel 
vaults were sometimes independent of the stone roof-covering, a 
system which lasted into the 12th and 13th centuries. A certain 
megalithic character, and the inclined jambs of doorway openings, 
are marked features of these early churches. The round towers so 
frequently associated with them are believed to be not earlier than 
the 9th century. Before the introduction of Norman forms, Ireland 
possessed a Romanesque style of her own, characterized by the 
survival of horizontal forms and their incorporation into the round- 
arched style, the retention of the inclined jambs of doorways, rich 
surface decoration, and the use of certain ornamental motives of 
earlier Celtic origin. King Cormac's chapel at Cashel is one of the 
best examples of the imported Norman manner of the 12th century, 
and here we find much of the influence of the earlier native style. 
The English conquest may be said to have been the introduction to 
Ireland of Gothic art, and it was the local variety of western England 
and south Wales which the conquerors introduced. Among the 
buildings erected by the English in Ireland, Kilkenny cathedral 
and the two 13th-century cathedrals of Dublin — Christ Church and 
St Patrick's — are the most remarkable, but there are many others. 
Their style is most plainly that of the English conqueror, with no 
concession to, or consideration of, earlier Irish forms of art. The 
result of the conquest was that the native style of construction was 
never applied to large buildings, though it did not at once disappear, 
as is witnessed by the church St Doulough near Malahide, which 
appears to be a 14th-century building. The characteristic features 
of later medieval Irish buildings, such as the stepped battlements, 
the retention of flowing lines in the tracery, and the peculiar treat- 
ment of crockets, are matters of no great importance in the history 
of architecture, and indeed it is hardly to be expected that a country 
with so stormy a history could have given rise to any systematic 
developments. Of the monastic remains those of the friaries are 
the most numerous, Ireland having many more friars' churches to 
show than England, but such peculiarities as they possess belong 
rather to the order than to any local influences. (J. Bn.) 

Romanesque and Gothic Architecture in Germany 
With the exception of the church built at Treves (Trier) by the 
empress Helena, of which small portions can still be traced in the 
cathedral, there are no remains of earlier date than the tomb-house 
built by Charlemagne at Aachen (Aix-la-Chapelle), which, though 
much restored in the 19th century, is still in good preservation. It 
consists (fig. 44) of an octagonal domed hall surrounded by aisles in 
two storeys, both vaulted; externally the structure is a polygon of 
sixteen sides, about 105 ft. in diameter, and it was preceded by a 
porch flanked by turrets. It is thought to have been copied from 
S. Vitale at Ravenna, but there are many essential differences. The 
same design was repeated at Ottmarsheim and Essen, and a simpler 
version exists at Nijmwegen in the Netherlands, also built by 
Charlemagne. Although no remains exist of the monastery of St 
Gall in Switzerland (see Abbey), built in the beginning of the 9th 
century, a valuable manuscript plan was found in the 17th century, 
in its library, which would seem to have been a design for a complete 



GERMAN ROMANESQUE] 



ARCHITECTURE 



405 



monastery. It contains features which are peculiar to the early 
German churches and are rarely found elsewhere, and is therefore 
of considerable interest, suggesting that some of the accessories of a 
monastery, supposed to have been the result of subsequent develop- 
ment, were all clearly set forth at this early period. The plan shows 
an eastern apse with a crypt, and a choir in front; a western apse, 
nave and aisles, with a series of altars down the latter; and on the 
west side, but detached from the apse, two circular towers with 
staircases in them. Unfortunately there are no churches remaining 
of the same date from which we might judge how far these arrange- 
ments were followed ; but there are three early churches in the island 
of Reichenau on the Lake of Constance, in one of which, Mittelzell, 
is a western apse with staircases (here 
built up into a central tower), nave, and 
aisles with altars at the side between 
every window. The eastern portion has 
been rebuilt. At Oberzell, at the south 
end of the island, is a vaulted crypt, 
which dates from the end of the loth 
century. In the third and much 
smaller church, Unterzell, there was no 
crypt, but three eastern apses and a 
western apse, which was destroyed 
when the present nave was built. At 
Gernrode in the Harz is a church with 
western and eastern apses with vaulted 
crypts underneath (one of which dates 
from 960 when the church was founded), 
and circular towers with staircases in 
them on either side of the western apse. 
The church was completed about a 
century later. In the arcade between 
the nave and aisles piers alternate 
-Plan of Cathedral w ' tn tne columns. Alternating piers 
are found also in Quedlinburg (the crypt 
of which dates from 936 and the church 
above about 1030) and many other early churches. Western apses 
exist at Drubeck, Dbenstadt, Treves, Huyseberg, St Michael and St 
Godehard at Hildesheim, Mainz, the Obermunster at Regensburg, 
Laach, Worms, andat a later date at Naumbergand Bamberg, showing 
that it was a feature generally accepted in early and late periods. 
It has, however, one great defect, that of depriving the west end of 
the church of those magnificent porches which are the glory of the 
churches of France; the cathedral of Spires (Speyer), the church at 
Limburg near Diirkheim, the cathedrals of Erfurt and Regensburg, 
being the few examples where a dignified entrance is given ; and 
further, that on entering the church from the side, one is distracted 
by the rivalry of the two apses, and it is only when turning the back 
on one or the other that one is able to judge of the monumental.effect 
of the interior. 

The greater number of the churches above mentioned were 
covered over with open timber roofs or flat ceilings ; but the problem 




Scale of Feel 

Fig. 44- 

at Aix-la-Chapelle. 






Fig. 45. — Plan of Cathedral 
at Mainz. 



Fig. 46. — Plan of Cathedral 
at Worms. 



to be solved in Germany, as well as in Italy, was that of vaulting 
over the nave, and the cathedrals of Spires, Worms and Mainz 



(fig. 45) are the three most important churches in which this was 
accomplished. The dates of their vaults have never been quite 
settled; that of Spires would seem to have been the earliest built, 
probably after 1162, when the church was seriously damaged by a 
conflagration, and the vault is groined only. In Worms (fig. 46) 
and Mainz there are diagonal moulded ribs, which suggest a later date. 
Although of great height and width, the absence of a triforium 
gallery in these cathedrals is a serious defect, as it deprives the 
interior of that scale which the smaller arcades in such a gallery 
give to the nave arcade below and the clerestory above, and of those 
horizontal lines given by string courses which are entirely wanting 
in these churches. Seeing that in some of the earlier churches, as 
at Gernrode, St Ursula (Cologne), and Nieder-Lahnstein, the tri- 
forium had already been introduced, and that it was repeated in the 
later examples at Limburg on the Lahn, 
Bacharach, Andernach, Bonn, Sinzig, 
and St Gereon (Cologne), it is difficult 
to understand why, in the three great 
typical German Romanesque churches, 
they should have been omitted. Exter- 
nally the design is extremely fine, 
owing to the grouping of the many 
towers at the west and on either side 
of the transept or choir. In this 
respect the cathedral of Mainz is the 
most superb structure in Germany, and 
to the cathedral of Spires with its fine 
entrance porch (fig. 47) must be given 
the second place. 

One of the most perfect examples of 
the Rhenish-Romanesque styles is the 
church of the abbey of Laach, completed 
shortly after the middle of the 12 th 
century. The eastern part of the 
church resembles the ordinary type, 
but at the west end there is a narrow 
transept flanked by circular towers, 
and a western apse enclosed in an 
atrium with cloisters round, which 
forms the entrance to the church. The 
sculptures in the capitals of the atrium 
are of the finest description and repre- 
sent the perfected type of the German p IGi 47. — pi an D f Cathedral 
Romanesque style. In addition to the a t Spires, 

two circular towers flanking the west 

transept, a square tower rises in the centre of the west front, two 
square towers flank the choir and a crystal lantern crowns the 
crossing of the main transept, and the grouping of all these features 
is very fine and picturesque in effect. A small church at Rosheim in 
Alsace is quite Lombardic in its exterior design, the pilaster strips 
and arched corbel tables being almost identical. The same applies 
to the church at Marmoutier, but the towers flanking the main front 
and the square tower on the crossing of the western transept produce 
a composition which one looks for in vain in the greater number of 
the churches in Italy. 

In describing the Lombardic churches of North Italy, reference 
has been made to the probable origin of the eaves-gallery, best 
represented in the eastern apse of Santa Maria Maggiore, Bergamo. 
This feature was largely adopted throughout the Rhine churches, 
and in the Apostles' church and St Martin's at Cologne receives its 
fullest development, being in addition to the eastern apse carried 
round the apses of the north and south transepts, which in these two 
churches and in St-Mary-in-the-Capitol, also in Cologne, constitute 
a special treatment. In the Apostles' church, where round towers 
are built at the junction of the three apses, the effect is extremely 
pleasing. In the church at Bonn, the single apse is flanked by two 
lofty towers which give great importance to the east front. 

The steeples of the same period have a character of their own. 
They are either square or octangular in plan, arcaded or pierced 
with windows, and roofed with gables or with spires rising out of the 
gables. 

One peculiarity found in some of the German churches, and 
specially those in the north-east, is that the nave and aisles are of 
the same height. To these the term Hallenkirchen is given. This 
type of design is very grand internally, owing to the vast height of 
the piers ana arches. It also dispenses with the necessity for flying 
buttresses, as the aisles, which are only half the width of the nave, 
carry the thrust of the vault direct to the external buttresses. The 
nave, however, is not so well lighted, though the aisle windows are 
sometimes of stupendous height. The principal examples are those 
of the church of St Stephen, Vienna, where both nave and aisles are 
carried over with one vast roof; at Munster, the Wiesenkirche at 
Soest; St Lawrence, Nuremberg; St Martin's, Landshut; Munich 
cathedral, and others. 

St Gereon (1200-1227) and St Cunibert (1205-1248), in Cologne, 
besides churches at Naumburg, Limburg and Gelnhausen, in which 
the pointed arch is employed, are almost the only transitional 
examples in Germany, and respond to work of a century earlier in 
France. Toward the end of the 13th century the Romanesque style 
was supplanted by a style which in no way grew out of it, but was 



4-o6 



ARCHITECTURE 



[GERMAN GOTHIC 



rather an imitation of a foreign style, the earliest examples being in 
the Liebfrauenkirche at Treves (1227-1243), and the churches at 
Marburg (1235-1283) and Altenberg (1255-1301). In the latter 
church is a French chevet with seven apsidal chapels. This brings 
us to the great typical cathedral of Germany at Cologne (fig. 48), 
which had the advantages of having been designed at the best age 
and completed on the original design, so that with small exceptions 
a uniformity of style reigns throughout it. It was begun in 1270 
and apparently based on the plan of Amiens, the transepts however 
having an additional bay each, and the two first bays of the nave 
having thicker piers so as to carry the enormous towers and spires 
which flank the chief facade. The principal defect of the building 
is its relative shortness, owing to its disproportionate height. This 
has always been felt in the interior, and now that the lofty buildings 




Fig. 48. — Plan of Cathedral at Cologne, 
all round have been taken down, isolating the cathedral on all sides, 
it has the appearance of an overgrown monster. The length of the 
cathedral is 468 ft., 17 ft. less than the cathedral at Ulm, the longest 
in Germany. The height of the nave vault is 155 ft., and as the width 
is only 41-6 (about one in four) the proportion is very unpleasing. 
There is also a certain mechanical finish throughout the design, 
which renders it far less poetical than the great French cathedrals. 
Where, however, it excels is in the extraordinary vigour of its 
execution, the depth of the mouldings, and the projection given to 
the leading architectural features ; and in this respect, when com- 
pared with St Ouen at Rouen, about fifty years later, the latter 
(which is even more mechanical in its setting out) looks wire-drawn 
and poor. The twin spires of the facade rise to the height of 510 ft. ; 
they were completed only in the latter part of the 19th century, 
and would have gained in breadth of effect if there had been some 
plain surfaces left. In this respect the spire of Freiburg cathedral, 
which is simple in outline and detail, is finer, and gains in contrast 
on account of the simpler masonry of the lower part of the tower. 
The spire at Ulm cathedral, only recently terminated, rises to the 
height of 530 ft. In both these cases the single tower is preferable 



to the double towers of Cologne, when elaborated to the same extent, 
as they are in all these examples; and perhaps that is one of the 
reasons why the spires of Strassburg and Antwerp cathedrals are 
more satisfactory, as the twin towers were never built. The front 
of Strassburg cathedral (1277-1318), by Erwin von Steinbach, is 
too much cut up by vertical lines of masonry, owing to the tours-de- 
force in tracery of which the German mason was so fond. On the 
whole the most beautiful of German spires is that of St Stephen's 
at Vienna, and one of its advantages would seem to be that its 
transition from the square base to the octagon is so well marked 
in the design that it is difficult to say where the tower ends and the 
spire begins. The strong horizontal courses under the spires of 
Strassburg or Freiburg are defects from this point of view. 

In domestic architecture nothing remains of the palace at Aix-la- 
Chapelle, but at Lorsch near Mannheim is the entrance gateway 
of the convent which was dedicated by Charlemagne in 774. It is 
in two storeys, in the lower one three semicircular arches flanked 
by columns with extremely classic capitals. The upper storey is 
decorated with what might have been described as a blind arcade, 
except that instead of arches are triangular spaces similar to some 
windows found in Saxon architecture; the whole gateway being 
crowned with a classic cornice. The palaces at Goslar (1050) and 
Dankwarderode in Brunswick (1150-1170) still preserve their great 
halls, and in the palace built (1 130-1 150) by the emperor Frederick I. 
at Gelnhausen there remain portions extremely fine and vigorous in 
style, and showing a strong Byzantine influence. The largest and 
most important castle is that of the Wartburg at Eisenach, which 
is in complete preservation. 

To sum up, the German Complete Gothic is essentially national in 
its complete character. It has many and obvious defects. From 
the first there is conspicuous in it that love of lines, and that desire 
to play with geometrical figures, which in time degenerated into 
work more full of conceit and triviality than that of any school of 
medieval artists. These conceits are worked out most elaborately 
in the traceries of windows and panelling. The finest early examples 
are in the cathedral at Minden; a little later, perhaps, the best 
series is in the cloister of Constance cathedral; and of the latest 
description the examples are innumerable. But it is worth observing 
that they rarely at any time have any ogee lines. They are severely 
geometrical and regular in their form, and quite unlike our own late 
Middle Pointed, or the French Flamboyant. In sculpture the 
Germans did not shine. They, like the English, did not introduce 
it with profusion, though they were very prone to the representations 
of effigies of the deceased as monuments. 

In one or two respects, however, Germany is still possessed of a 
wealth of medieval examples, such as is hardly to be paralleled in 
Europe. The vast collection of brick buildings, for instance, is un- 
equalled. If a line be drawn due east and west, and passing through 
Berlin, the whole of the plain lying to the north, and extending 
from Russia to Holland, is destitute of stone, and the medieval 
architects, who always availed themselves of the material which 
was most natural in the district, built all over this vast extent of 
country almost entirely in brick. The examples of their works in 
this humble material are not at all confined to ecclesiastical works; 
houses, castles, town-halls, town walls and gateways, are so plentiful 
and so invariably picturesque and striking in their character, that 
it is impossible to pass a harsh verdict on the architects who left 
behind them such extraordinary examples of their skill and fertility 
of resource. 

This development is largely due to the fact that all these countries 
in north-east Germany were connected and very much influenced by 
the confederation of the Hanse towns, and hence the similarity in 
the design of all their buildings. Although some of the earliest 
buildings date from the 12th century, the chief development took 
place in the 14th and 15th centuries, and in the 16th century formed 
the basis of the transitional works of the Renaissance. The principal 
Hanse towns are Hamburg, Liibeck and Danzig. The chief buildings 
in Hamburg were destroyed by the fire in 1842, and it is in Liibeck 
that the most important churches are to be found. The church of 
St Mary (Marienkirche) , 1304, is the most striking on account of its 
dimensions, 346 ft. in length, the nave being 123 ft. high, with two 
western towers 407 ft. high. Great scale is given to the building in 
consequence of the small material (brick) used, and some of the 
windows in this or other churches are nearly 100 ft. in height, with 
lofty mullions, all in moulded brick. The Dom or cathedral of 
Liibeck, though slightly larger, is not so good in design, but has a 
remarkable north porch in richly moulded brick, with marble shafts 
and carved capitals. In the church of St Catherine the choir is 
raised above a lofty vaulted crypt, similar to examples in some of 
the Italian churches. The Marienkirche at Danzig (1345-1503), 
built by a grand master of the Teutonic knights, to whom the chief 
development of the architecture of north-east Germany is largely 
due, is one of those examples already mentioned as Hallenkirchen. 
The nave, aisles, side chapels, transept and aisles, and choir with 
square east end, are all of the same height; as the church Is 280 ft. 
long and 125 ft. wide, with a transept 200 ft. long, the effect is that 
of one stupendous hall, but as the light is only obtained through the 
windows of the side chapels, the interior, though impressive, is 
somewhat gloomy. The same is found in the choir of the Franciscan 
church at Salzburg, where five slender piers, 70 ft. in height and 



NETHERLANDS GOTHIC] 



ARCHITECTURE 



407 



4 ft. in diameter, carry the vault over an area 160 ft. long by 66 ft. 
wide. Right up in the north of Germany, in Pomerania, are many 
fine examples in brick and sometimes of great size, such as those at 
Stralsund, Stettin, Stargard, Pasewalk, and in the island of Riigen. 
The Marienkirche at Stralsund, owing to its massive construction 
and picturesque grouping, is an interesting example. Its western 
transept or narthex with tower in centre is a common type of the 
churches in Pomerania, and though very inferior in design is a 
version of those which in England are seen in Ely and Peterborough 
cathedrals. 

In the entrance gateways to the towns and in domestic archi- 
tecture north Germany is very rich ; the palace of the grand master 
of the Teutonic Order at Marienburg is a vast and imposing 
structure in brick (1276-1335), in which the chapter house of the 
grand master, with its fan-vaulted roof, resting on a single pillar 
of granite in the centre, and the entrance porch of the church richly 
carved in brick, are among the finest examples executed in that 
material. (R. P. S.) 

Romanesque and Gothic in Belgium and Holland 
Of early Romanesque work neither Belgium nor Holland retains 
any examples; for with the exception of the small building at 
Nijmwegen built by Charlemagne, there are no churches prior to the 
nth century, and at first the influence in Belgium would seem to 
have come from Lombardy, through the Rhine Provinces. As all 
her large churches are built in the centres of her most important 
towns, it is probable that the older examples were pulled down to 
make way for others more in accordance with the increasing wealth 

and population. In the 13th 
century they came under the 
influence of the great Gothic 
movement in France, and two 
or three of their cathedrals 
compare favourably with the 
French cathedrals. The finest 
example of earlier date is that 
of the cathedral of Tournai 
(fig. 49), the nave of which 
was buiit in the second half of 
the nth century, to which a 
transept with north and south 
apses and aisles round them 
was added about the middle 
of the 12th century. These 
latter features are contem- 
poraneous with similar ex- 
amples at Cologne, and the 
idea of the plan may have 
been taken from them; exter- 
nally, however, they differ so 
widely that the design may be 
looked upon as an original 
conception, though the nave 
arcades, triforium storey, and 
clerestory resemble the con- 
temporaneous work in Nor- 
mandy. The original choir 
was pulled down in the 14th 
century, and a magnificent 
chevet of the French type 
erected in its place. The 
grouping of the towers which 
flank the transept, with the 
central lantern, the apses, and 
lofty choir, is extremely fine 
(fig. 50). The sculptures on 
the west front, dating from 
the 12th to the 16th century, protected by a portico of the late 15th 
century, are of remarkable interest and in good preservation. They 
are in three tiers, the two lowest consisting of bas-reliefs, the upper 
tier with life-size figures in niches, resting on corbels. The 
Romanesque tower of the church of St Jacques in the same town, 
with angle turrets, is a picturesque and well-designed structure. 

Other early examples are those of St Bartholomew at Liege (a.d. 
1015) and the churches at Roermonde and St Servais at Maastricht, 
both belonging to Holland. The latter is an extremely fine example, 
which recalls the work at Cologne, and in its great western narthex 
follows on the lines of the German churches at Gernrode, Corvey and 
Brunswick. 

Among other churches of later date are St Gudule at Brussels, 
with Gothic 13th century choir and a 14th century nave with great 
circular pillars, the west front of later date, approached by a lotty 
flight of steps, having a very fine effect; Ste Croix at Liege, with a 
western apse; St Martin at Ypres and St Bavon at Ghent, both 
with 13th-century choir %nd 14th-century nave; Tongres, 13th 
century with great circular pillars and an early Romanesque cloister; 
Notre Dame de Pamele at Oudenarde; and Notre Dame at Bruges, 
14th century. Of 15th and 16th century work (for the Gothic style 
lasted without any trace of the Renaissance till the middle of the 
16th century) are St Gommaire at Lierre (1425-1557); St Martin, 
Alost (1498); St Jacques, Antwerp; and St Martin and St Jacques, 




Fig. 49. 



-Plan of Cathedral at 
Tournai. 



both at Liege. The largest in area, and in that sense the most im- 
portant church in Belgium, is Notre Dame at Antwerp (misnamed the 
cathedral). It was begun in 1352, but not completed till the 16th 
century, so that it possesses many transitional features. It is one 
of the few churches with three aisles on each side of the nave, the 
outer aisle being nearly as wide as the nave, which is too narrow 
to have a fine effect. Only one of the two spires of the west front 
is built, perhaps to its advantage; the upper portion presents in its 
pierced stone spires one of those remarkable tours-de-force of which 
masons are so proud, and having a simple substructure it gains by 
contrast with and is much superior to the spires of Cologne, Vienna 
and Ulm. 

Among the most remarkable features in these Belgian churches 
are the rood screens, the earliest of which is in the church of St 




Fig. 50. — Tournai Cathedral. 



Peter at Lo,uvain, dating from 1400, in rich Flamboyant Gothic, 
retaining all its statues. In the church at Dixmuiden, St Gommaire 
at Lierre (1534), and in Notre Dame, Walcourt (1531), are other 
examples all in perfect preservation; the last is said to have been 
given by the emperor Charles V., and in the same church is a lofty 
tabernacle in Flamboyant Gothic. 

Owing to the comparatively late date of many of the Belgian 
churches, they are all more or less unfinished, as the religious fervour 
of the citizens who built them would seem to have changed in favour 
of their town halls and civic buildings immediately connected with 
trade. The Cloth Hall at Ypres (1200-1334) with a frontage of 
460 ft., three storeys high with a lofty central tower and a hall on 
the upper storey 435 ft. long, one of the finest buildings of the period 
in Europe; Les Halles at Bruges, originally built as a cloth hall, 
also with a lofty central tower; and a simple example at Malines, 
are the earliest buildings of this type. 

There follow a series of magnificent town halls, of which that at 
Brussels is the largest, but the tower not being quite in the centre 
of its facade gives it a lopsided appearance. There is no tower to the 
town hall at Louvain (1448-1469), but this is compensated for by 
the angle turrets, and the design is far bolder. In both these examples 
the vertical lines are too strongly accentuated, and seeing that they 
are in two or three storeys, the latter should have been maintained 
in the design of the facades. In this respect the town hall of 
Oudenarde (1 527-1 535) is more truthful, and as a result is far superior 
to them ; the tower also is in the centre of the principal front, 
which at all events is better than at Brussels, though as a matter of 
composition it would have been more effective and picturesque if it 



408 



ARCHITECTURE 



[RENAISSANCE 



had been placed at one end of the facade. In the town hall at Mons 
there is no tower, but a fine upper storey with ten windows filled 
with good tracery. Of the town hall at Ghent only one half is Gothic 
(1480-1482), as it was not completed till a century later, and though 
overladen with Flamboyant ornament it has fine qualities in its design. 
Although but few examples still exist of the Gothic structures 
belonging io the various gilds, owing to their having been rebuilt 
in the Renaissance style, those of the Bateliers at Ghent (1531), and 
of the Fishmongers at Malines (1519), bear witness in the rich 
decoration to the wealth of these corporations. 

Holland is extremely poor in church architecture, but there are 
two examples which should be noted, at Utrecht and Bois-le-Duc 
('s Hertogenbosch). Of the former only the choir exists. It is of 
great height (115 ft.), and belongs to the finest period of Gothic 
architecture (1251-1267). The nave was destroyed by a hurricane 
in 1674, and so seriously damaged that it was all taken down (a wall 
being built to enclose the choir) and an open square left between 
it and the lofty west tower. The cathedral of St John at Bois-le- 
Duc, though founded in 1300, was rebuilt in the Flamboyant period 
(1419-1497). It is of great length (4O0 ft.) with a fine chevet, and 
possessed originally a magnificent rood screen in the early Renais- 
sance style (1625) ; this seemed to the burghers to be out of keeping 
with the Gothic church, so it was taken down and sold to the South 
Kensington Museum, being replaced by a very poor example in 
Modern Gothic. 

There is only one Gothic town hall of importance in Holland, 
that at Middleburg (1468), a fine example, and quite equal to those 
in Belgium. The ground and upper floors are kept distinct, and as 
the wall surface of these lower storeys is in plain masonry, the 
traceried windows and the canopied niches (all of which retain their 
statues) gain by the contrast. There is a small picturesque specimen 
at Gouda, and at Leeuwarden in the house of correction (Kanselary) 
a rich example in brick and stone, with a remarkable stepped gable 
in the centre having statues on its steps. 

Both in Belgium and Holland there are numerous examples of 
domestic architecture in brick with quoins and tracery in stone, in 
both cases alternating with brick courses and arch voussoirs and with 
infinite variety of design. (R. P. S.) 

The Renaissance Style: Introduction 

The causes which led to the evolution of the Renaissance 
style in Italy in the 15th century were many and diverse. The 
principal impulse was that derived from the revival of classical 
literature. Already in the 14th century the coming movement 
was showing itself in the works of the painters and sculptors, 
especially the latter, owing to the influence of the classic sculpture 
which abounded throughout Italy. Thus in , the tomb of St 
Dominic (1221) at Bologna, the pulpits of Pisa (1260) and 
Siena (1268), and in the fountain of Perugia (1277-1280) by 
Niccola Pisano and his son Giovanni, all the figures would seem 
to have been inspired in their character by those found in Roman 
sarcophagi. A classic treatment is noticeable in the doorway 
of the Baptistery of Florence by Andrea Pisano (1330), probably 
influenced by Giotto, in whose paintings are found the representa- 
tion of imaginary buildings in which Gothic and Classic details 
are mixed up together. The time for its full development, how- 
ever, did not come till the following century, when, with the 
papal throne again firmly established under Martin V., the 
amelioration of the city of Rome was commenced, and discoveries 
were made which awakened an archaeological interest fostered 
by the Medici at Florence, who not only became enthusiastic 
collectors of ancient works of art, but promoted the study of 
the antique figure. In addition to the acquisition of marbles 
and bronzes, ancient manuscripts of classic writers were sought 
for and supplied by Greek exiles who seemed to have foreseen 
the breaking up of the eastern empire; everything, therefore, 
at the beginning of the 1 5th century fostered the spread of the 
new movement. Accordingly, when a great architect like 
Brunelleschi, who for fifteen years had been making a special 
study of the ancient monuments in Rome and who possessed 
in addition great scientific knowledge, brought forward his 
proposals for the completion of the cathedral built by Arnolfo di 
Lapo, and showed how the existing substructure could be 
covered over with a dome like the Pantheon at Rome, his designs 
were accepted by the town council of Florence, and in 1420 he was 
entrusted with the work. Subsequently he carried wit other 
works, in which pure classic architectural forms are the chief 
characteristics. There were, however, other causes which not 
only promoted the encouragement of the revival, but extended 



it to other countries, though at a later period; the most im- 
portant of these was the invention of printing (1453), which in a 
sense revolutionized art, not so much in its enabling classical 
literature to be more extensively studied and known, as in its 
taking away to a certain extent from the painter and sculptor 
and indirectly the architect one of their principal missions, so 
far as ecclesiastical architecture is concerned. Henceforth 
these who had hitherto taught their lessons in sculpture, painting 
stained glass and fresco, could, through the printed book, bring 
them more immediately before and directly to mankind. Victor 
Hugo's pithy saying, " ceci luera cela; le livre tuera I'gglise," 
expressed not only the fall of architecture from the position it 
occupied as the principal teacher, but to a certain extent the 
change in the channel by which religious teachers and the writers 
of the day, the poets and philosophers, could best make their 
works known. 

With the invention of printing came the partial cessation of 
fresco painting, stained glass and sculpture, which subsequently 
came to be regarded more as decorative adjuncts than as having 
educational functions. But this transfer from the Church to 
the Book, the extinction of the one by the other, led to another 
important change. Henceforth the architect or master-mason, 
as he was then known, could no longer count on the co-operation 
of the various craftsmen, men often of greater culture than himself ; 
and the individuality of the man, which has sometimes been put 
forward as a gain to humanity, was a loss so far as architecture 
is concerned, since it was scarcely possible that the imagination 
and conceptions of a single individual, however brilliant they 
might be, could ever reach to the high level of the joint product 
of many minds, or that there could be the same natural expression 
in what had hitherto been the traditional work of centuries. 

In France the introduction of the Revival resulted at first in a 
transitional period during which classic details gradually crept 
in, displacing the Gothic. In Italy this does not seem to have 
been the case to the same extent. It is true that in Florence and 
Venice, where an independent style existed, the new buildings 
in their general principles of design were, copied from the old, 
but with no mixture of details as in France; in Brunelleschi's 
church, Santo Spirito at Florence, the capitals and details are 
all pure Italian, as pure as if they had been carried out in the 3rd 
or 4th century, the fact being that already before the 15th 
century the craftsman's work was approaching the new move- 
ment, and this was facilitated by the numerous remains still 
existing of Roman architecture. In the four or five years 
Brunelleschi spent in Rome, he had the opportunity of studying 
a far larger number of Roman buildings than are preserved at the 
present day, so that the purity of style in the work which he 
carried out in Florence was due to his previous training; the 
same is found in Alberti's work, and with these two great men 
leading the way it is not surprising that throughout the earlier 
Renaissance period in Italy we find a classic perfection of detail 
which it took half a century to develop in other countries. 

It is difficult to say what might have been its ultimate develop- 
ment if another discovery had not been made about 1452, 
that of the manuscript of Vitruvius, a Roman architect who 
lived in the time of the emperor Augustus; his work on architec- 
ture gives an admirable description of the building materials 
employed in his day (c. 25 B.C.), and among other subjects, a 
series of rules regulating the employment of the various orders 
and their correct proportions. These rules were based on the 
descriptions which Vitruvius had studied of Greek temples, 
but as he was not acquainted with the examples quoted, never 
having been in Greece or even in south Italy at Paestum, his 
knowledge was confined to the architectural monuments then 
existing in Rome. Vitruvius's manuscript, entitled De re aedi- 
ficatoria, was illustrated by drawings, none- of which have 
however been preserved; when therefore in subsequent years 
translations of the architectural portion' of the manuscript were 
printed and published by various Italian architects, among 
whom Vignola and Palladio were the more important, they were 
accompanied by woodcuts representing their interpretation of 
the lost illustrations, and thus copybooks of the orders were 



ITALIAN RENAISSANCE] 



ARCHITECTURE 



409 



published, with more or less fidelity to those of existing Roman 
monuments, in which attempts were made to adhere to the rules 
laid down by Vitruvius. In Rome and other parts of Italy, 
where ancient monuments or portions of them still remained 
in situ, architects could study their details and base their designs 
on them, but in other countries they were bound to follow the 
copybook, and thus they lost that originality and freedom of 
design which characterizes the earlier work of the Renaissance. 

On the other hand, there is no doubt that the publications of 
Vignola and Palladio, based as they were on the remains of 
ancient Rome, then much better preserved than at the present 
day, tended to maintain a high standard in the employment of 
the Classic orders, with correct proportions and details; so 
much so, that in referring to the influence which those works 
exerted from the middle of the 16th century in France and 
Spain, and during the 17th and 18th centuries in England 
and to a certain extent in Spain, Germany and the Netherlands, 
it is generally spoken of as the introduction of the pure Italian 
style. The tendency, however, of such hard and fast rules leads 
eventually to an excess in the opposite direction, and the works 
of Borromini in Italy and Churriguera in Spain in the middle of 
the 17 th century resulted in the production of what is generally 
referred to as the Rococo style. This style was fostered in 
France by the attempts to reproduce, externally and in stone, 
ornamental decoration of a type which is only fitted for internal 
work in stucco, and in Germany and the Netherlands by repro- 
ductions of fantastic designs published in copybooks, which led 
to the bastard style of the Zwinger palace in Dresden and the 
Dutch architecture of the 18th century. Vignola's work on the 
five orders was published in 1563, and Palladio's in 1570; they 
were preceded by a publication of Serlio's in 1 540, giving examples 
of various architectural compositions, and to him is probably 
due the introduction of the pure Italian style in the Louvre in 
1546. They were followed by other authors, as Scamozzi in 
Italy, Philibert de l'Orme in France, and, at a later date, 
Sir William Chambers in England. 

The term given to the earlier Renaissance or transition work 
in Italy is the Cinque-cento style, though sometimes that title 
is given to buildings erected in the 16th century; in France it 
is known as the Francois I. style, in Spain as the Plateresque 
or Silversmiths' style, and in England as the Elizabethan and 
Jacobean styles. 

There is still another and very important difference to be noted 
between the styles of the middle ages and those of the Renaissance. 
Although the names of the designers in the former are occasion- 
ally known and have been handed down to us, they were only 
partially responsible, as the works were carried out by other crafts- 
men working on traditional lines, whereas in the latter they are 
of much more importance because of the independent thought and 
study of the individual; and though to a certain extent the 
development of each man's work may have been influenced by 
others working in the same direction, his special object was to 
acquire personal fame and by his own fancy or predilection 
to produce what he conceived to be an original work peculiar 
to himself. Consequently in our description the name of the 
architect who designed a particular building, as well as the date 
of its erection, are necessarily given to show the progress made 
in his studies or otherwise. (R. P. S.) 

Renaissance Architecture in Italy 

In the styles hitherto described a chronological order has been 
followed, as far as possible, in order to show the gradual develop- 
ment of the style; that course is adopted here to a certain extent, 
when dealing with the Renaissance, though the introduction of 
the personal element, to which reference has been made, brings 
in a change of some importance. Henceforth the career of the 
individual has to be taken into consideration, and at times it 
may be an advantage when describing a building by an -architect 
of eminence to mention other works by him, and so depart from 
the chronological sequence. 

Ecclesiastical. — The classic revival in Italy, though foreshadowed 
in other branches of art, as in painting and sculpture, and also to 



a marked degree in literature, was virtually introduced by one 
great man, Filippo Brunelleschi of Florence, who, trained as a 
sculptor, and disappointed with his want of success in the competi- 
tion held in 1403 for the bronze gates of the baptistery at Florence, 
determined to devote himself to architecture, possibly in the hope 
that he might some day be able to solve the great problem of erecting 
over the crossing of Arnolfo di Lapo's great cathedral the dome 
projected by the latter but never executed. Having spent some 
years in Rome, Brunelleschi returned to his native town about 1410, 
with a profound knowledge of classic architecture and of Roman 
construction, as shown in the Pantheon, the thermae, Colosseum 
and other remains, then in much better preservation than at the 
present day. Some years passed in the production of various schemes 
and in deliberations with the council of Florence, but eventually in 
1420 the completion of the cathedral was entrusted to him, and he 
undertook to construct the dome without centreing, and to raise it 
on a drum so as to give it greater importance than Arnolfo had 
contemplated, as shown in the fresco of the Spanish chapel of Santa 
Maria Novella, Florence. The dome as projected by Brunelleschi 
was of considerable size, being 130 ft. in diameter and 135 ft. from 
the cornice to the eye of the dome, including the drum on which it 
was raised; it was octagonal in plan, and built with an inner and 
outer casing partly in brick, with angle and two intermediate ribs 
on each face, which were in stone. The construction of the dome was 
completed in 1434; but the lantern, built on the basis of the model 
he had made, was not carried out till 1462, some years after his death. 
Brunelleschi 's other works in Florence consisted of the church of San 
Lorenzo, which he rebuilt in 1425 after a fire, and the church of 
Santo Spirito (1433), a very remarkable building, the design of which 
was based on the medieval basilicas of Rome, with such modifica- 
tions in plan and section as his knowledge of ancient Roman work 
suggested. This church consists of nave, transept and choir, with 
aisles all round, the centre or crossing being covered with a dome 
on pendentives, which henceforth became the chief characteristic in 
all the Renaissance churches. Brunelleschi's earliest work was the 
Pazzi chapel, an original conception which is more remarkable for 
the pure classic feeling and refinement in all its details than for the 
design. The weakness of the archivolt round the central archway, 
and the mass of panelled wall carried on columns (far too slight in 
their dimensions), detract seriously from the effect of the facade; 
internally the structural function of the pilasters is not sufficiently 
maintained, and instead of a simple hemispherical dome, as in the 
cathedral, a quasi-Gothic type was built, with twelve ribs and 
scalloped cells, which destroys its dignity. 

Brunelleschi was followed by another great Florentine architect, 
Leon Battista Alberti, who was also a great mathematician and a 
scholar, and further promoted the study of classic architecture by 
writing a treatise in Latin, Opus praestantissimum de re aedificatoria, 
which was based partly on that of Vitruvius and was published in 
1485,^ after his death, accompanied by illustrations. The first 
building with which he was connected was the church of San Fran- 
cesco at Rimini, to which in 1440 he added the front. In this he 
was evidently inspired by the Roman triumphal arch in that city, 
and his interpretation of it, to meet the requirements in its facade 
which were imposed upon him by the existing nave, was admirable. 
Unfortunately the principal front was never completed, but on the 
south_ side he designed a series of recesses to hold the sarcophagi 
containing the remains of the friends of his client, Sigismondo 
Malatesta, the effect of which is simple and grand. Alberti's largest 
work, the church of Sant' Andrea at Mantua (1472), in which the 
nave, transept and choir are all covered with barrel vaults, recalls 
the vaulted corridors of the Colosseum. There are no aisles, but a 
series of rectangular chapels on each side, the division walls of which 
act as buttresses to resist the thrust of the great vault. The lofty 
arched openings to the chapels, separated by Corinthian pilasters 
with entablature supporting the coffered vault and a central dome 
(since rebuilt), complete the structure, which has served since as the 
model for all the Renaissance churches of the same type. The 
principal front is not satisfactory, as it takes no cognizance of 
the width of the nave, and the side doors have no use or meaning ; 
here Alberti seems to have been led astray in his triumphal arch 
treatment, which is inferior to his scheme for the church at Rimini. 

In 1462 Michelozzo, another Florentine architect, built the chapel 
of St Peter at the east end of the church of Sant' Eustorgio, Milan. 
Externally it has little attraction, but internally the dome, with its 
magnificent frieze of winged angels in relief with a painted back- 
ground of arcades and other accessories, is the most beautiful 
composition of the Renaissance. Michelozzo's first work was the 
Dominican monastery and church of San Marco at Florence (1439- 
I45 2 ). but he is better known for his secular work, to which we shall 
return. 

The next great architect chronologically is Bramante d" Urbino, 
to whom was entrusted the commencement of the church of St Peter 
at Rome. His first important work was the church of Santa Maria 
della Consolazione at Todi (1472), which consists of a square nave 
with immense semicircular apses, one on each side. The nave is 
covered with a dome raised on a drum, and carried on pendentives, 
and the apses with hemispherical vaults butt against the nave walls 
and form externally a very fine group. Bramante was the architect 
of the chapel in the cloisters of San Pietro-in-Montorio, Rome (1472), 



4io 



ARCHITECTURE 



[ITALIAN RENAISSANCE 



• small circular building covered with a dome and surrounded with a 
peristyle of columns of the Doric order; and of the dome of the 
church of Santa Maria delle Grazie in Milan, as also of the three 
apses, which are decorated with pilasters and baluster shafts with 
circular medallions enclosing busts, all in terra cotta. Before passing 
to his work at St Peter's there are some other early churches we must 
notice. The Certosa, near Pavia, was begun in 1396, and in one sense 
suggests the revival of classic architecture, in that all its arches 
have semicircular heads. The magnificent facade of the church was 
commenced in 1473 from the designs of Borgognone, a Milanese 
architect: it is one of the few examples in Italy of large size in 
which the transition is noticeable, for although there are no Gothic 
details the design follows that of the middle ages, and instead of 
great pilasters of the Corinthian order, buttresses with niches 
containing statues divide the facade and accentuate the internal 
divisions of the church; the open galleries above the entrance 
doorway crossing the upper storey of the central portion are all 
derived from well-known Lombardic features. The upper part of 
the facade is inferior to the lower, Borgognone's design having been 
departed from. The enrichment of the whole front, from the lower 
plinth to the string course under the first gallery, with bas-reliefs, 
panelled pilasters, niches, medallions and other decorative acces- 
sories, all in white marble, so completely covers the whole surface 
that scarcely any portion is left plain, which to a certain extent 
detracts from its effect as a whole ; but there is an endless variety of 
design, and the baluster or candelabrum shafts dividing the windows 
and the friezes and cresting above their cornices, are ofgreat beauty. 
The circular rose window above, with its enclosing frontispiece of 
later date, shows the coming influence of the later Italian style. 
The cloisters adjoining are surrounded with a light arcade, with 
enrichments in the spandrils and frieze, all in terra cotta. 

The cathedral of Como is also a transitional example, where 
buttresses are employed all round the church, and it is only in the 
finials which surmount them, the great projecting cornice which 
crowns the structure, and the doorways and windows, that we find 
classical details; the doorways recall the porches of the Lombard 
churches, and are of great beauty in design, the south doorway 
being said to be by Bramante. Another example, remarkable for 
its elaborately carved front and porch, is the church of Santa Maria 
dei Miracoli at Brescia (1487-1490) by Ludovici Beretta, which 
both externally and internally is one of the richest specimens of 
the early Italian Renaissance. The church dedicated to Santa 
Maria dei Miracoli in Venice (1481-1489), by Pietro Lombardo, is 
another transitional example in which the Byzantine influence of 
St Mark's is recognizable in the semicircular pediments of its facade 
and of the exterior of the chancel, and Lombardic influence in its 
external decorations with pilaster strips and blind arcades. The 
interior is one of the gems of the Renaissance, on account of its 
splendid decoration with marble linings and fine cinque-cento carv- 
ing. Similar semicircular pediments are found in the facade of the 
church of San Zaccharia at Venice (1515), but are purely decorative 
because the roof behind is not semicircular like that of the Miracoli. 
The decoration of the main front, here all in marble, is of an entirely 
different design, and is subdivided into a series of storeys, the lower 
panelled, the first storey with arcades and the upper ones with 
pilasters. An earlier example (1461) in San Bernardino at Perugia 
is of a far higher standard, and its enrichment with bas-reliefs by 
the Florentine sculptor Agostino di Duccio (c. 1418-c. 1490) gives 
it the first place for its conception and execution. Among others, 
the church of Spirito Santo, Bologna, in terra cotta; the church of 
Santa Giustina, Padua (1532); the sacristy of San Satiro, Milan 
(1479), by Bramante; and the sacristy of the church of Santo 
Spirito, Florence (1489-1496), by Sangallo, are all interesting 
examples of the early Renaissance in Italy. 

In 1505, on the advice of Michelangelo, Bramante was instructed 
to prepare designs for a new church in Rome dedicated to St Peter 
to take the place of the early basilica, which, built in haste, began 
to show serious signs of failure. Already, fifty years earlier, Pope 
Nicholas V. had commenced a new building, the erection of 'which 
was stopped by his death in 1454. The scheme was revived by 
Julius II., and the foundation stone of the new structure was laid 
in 1506. On Bramante's death in 1514, Raphael, Peruzzi and 
Sangallo were successively appointed, and the last named prepared 
a new design, which, however, was not carried out, as he found 
it necessary first to strengthen the piers of the dome provided by 
Bramante and to remedy the defects of his successors. In 1546 
Michelangelo, then seventy-two years of age, was entrusted with 
the continuance of the work, and he made radical changes, chiefly 
in the design of the dome. Comparison of the plans of Bramante 
and Sangallo with that actually carried out by Michelangelo 
shows that he not only increased the size of the piers to carry his 
dome, but the outer walls of the north, south and west apses and 
omitted the aisles which surrounded the latter (fig. 51) He would 
seem to have availed himself of the foundation walls already built 
and ot Bramante s piers to carry the dome, which had been raised 
"£ i° t , he .,S? rnice ' but otherwise the architectural features of the 
whole building externally and internally were carried out from 
Michelangelo s own designs. Sangallo had suggested for the ex- 
terior a series of superimposed orders with three storeys- Michel- 



angelo elected to have one order only with an attic storey. The 
building gained thereby in dignity, but it lost in scale, for the huge 
pilasters of the Corinthian order (87 ft. high) look considerably 
smaller, in spite of the two storeys of windows between them. 
These windows also, which from their design are apparently about 
10 to 12 ft. high, actually measure 20 ft. in height. The same defect 
exists in the interior, where the Corinthian order, over 100 ft. in 
height to the top of the cornice (Plate III., fig. 69), calls for a similar 
increase in the dimensions of all the sculptured decorations; the 
figures in the spandrils being 20 ft. high, and the cherubs support- 
ing the holy water spouts 10 ft. Otherwise the scheme realizes the 
conception which Bramante proposed from the first, viz. to raise 
the dome of the Pantheon on the top of the basilica of Constantine ; 




Fig. 51. — Plan of St Peter's at Rome. 

the latter being represented by the magnificent barrel vault (75 ft. 
in span) of the nave, transepts and choir; the former by the great 
hemispherical dome, 140 ft. in diameter, which, including the drum, 
is 162 ft. from the top of the cornice above the pendentives to the 
soffit of the dome. The dome is built in two shells with connecting 
ribs on the same principle as Brunelleschi's dome in Florence, and 
was nearly completed before Michelangelo's death in 1563, and the 
lantern in 1590 from the model which he had made. In 1605 the 
east end of the old basilica was taken down, and three more bays 
were added, thus converting the Greek cross of Michelangelo's 
design into the Latin cross originally conceived by Bramante. The 
nave and the eastern vestibule were completed in 1620, and the great 
semicircular portico was added by Bernini in 1667. The immense 
height of the east facade, and its prolongation in front of Michel- 
angelo's chief feature, the dome, hides the design of a great portion 
of the latter, so that it can only be seen either from a great distance 



ITALIAN RENAISSANCE] 



ARCHITECTURE 



411 



(Plate III., fig. 68), or from behind the western apse, where the 
relative grouping with the great apses can be properly appreciated. 
A second well-known work by Michelangelo is the new sacristy 
of the church of San Lorenzo, Florence (1 523-1 529), designed to 
contain the monuments of Giuliano and Lorenzo de' Medici, the 
architectural design of which is poor. 

Antonio di Sangallo was the architect of the church of San Biagio 
at Montepulciano (1518), with a cruciform plan, and dome in the 
centre, and a campanile at the south-west angle somewhat similar 
to those of Wren in London. 

The church of Santa Maria - di - Carignano (1552) at Genoa, by 
Galeazzo Alessi, is finely situated but unsatisfactory in its design, 
the lower part being stunted in its proportions and its order to a 
different scale from that in the campanile towers and the dome. 
The most beautiful interior is that of the Annunziata in the same 
town, by Giacomo della Porta (1587) ; the arches of its nave arcade 
are carried on Corinthian columns of. marble, of fine proportion, 
and the nave is covered with a barrel vault with penetrations 
admitting the light from clerestory windows. The churches of San 
Giorgio Maggiore (1556-1579), San Francesco della Vigna ("1562), 
and II Redentore (1577), all in Venice, were designed by Palladio, 
the interior of the fatter being the finest; the facade of the first 
named is the best-proportioned, but whether its design is due to 
Palladio, or to Scamozzi, who built it in 1610, is not known. A far 
finer church in its picturesque grouping and the originality of its 
design is that of Santa Maria della Salute on the Grand Canal (1631), 
by Baldassare Longhena; the church is octagonal on plan, with 
aisles round, giving access to six recesses with altars and to an 
important eastern chapel with central dome. The central octagon is 
covered with a lofty dome with immense corbel buttresses of vigorous 
and fine design. The entrance portal of the west front is perhaps 
the best example of the period in Italy. Longhena also designed the 
Santa Maria degli Scalzi (1680), completed by Sardi in 1689, the 
latter being responsible for the heavy front of San Salvatore (1663), 
as also of the rich but somewhat debased church, in the Jesuit style, 
Santa Maria Zobenigo (1680-1683). 

Secular Architecture. — In the application of the leading features of 
classical architectural design to palaces and mansions, the Italians 
had a much easier field on which to exercise their originality, as the 
requirements were very different from those which obtained in the 
middle ages. Moreover, the classic style lent itself more readily to 
the horizontal lines given by string courses, cornices and ranges of 
windows, which naturally exist in dwelling-houses on account of the 
various storeys. As in ecclesiastical, so in secular architecture, the 
first introduction of the Revival takes place in Florence, which was 
then the principal art centre of Italy, and the earliest examples are 
in a sense transitional, in that they are based on the earlier medieval 
work. As in the Palazzo Vecchio (1298) in Florence, and the 
Ricciarelli palace at Volterra (c. 1320), the rusticated masonry which 
gives them so fine a character forms the chief characteristic of the 
Riccardi and Strozzi palaces, the only changes being the substitution 
of a classic cornice of considerable projection in the place of the machi- 
colations of the Palazzo Vecchio, and the employment of circular 
arches in the windows in the place of the pointed and curved arches. 

The earliest example, the Riccardi palace (1430), by Michelozzo 
(fig. 52), built for Cosimo de' Medici, is certainly the finest, owing 
partly to its size but more especially to the magnificent bossed and 
rusticated masonry of the ground storey and the bold projecting 
cornice, which crowns so admirably the whole structure. The lower 
two storeys of the main front of the Pitti palace were built by 
Brunelleschi in 1435, the return wings and court not being carried 
out till after 1550 from the designs of Ammanati; compared with 
the other Tuscan palaces the cornice is extremely poor and the whole 
front too monotonous. The beautiful court of the Palazzo Vecchio 
was reconstructed and decorated by Michelozzo in 1434. The 
Strozzi palace (1489), by Benedetto da Maiano and S. Pollajuolo, 
(Cronaca), comes next to the Riccardi as regards general design, but 
in comparison with it the windows are too small, and the want of a 
much bolder rustication, as provided in the latter, is much felt. 
Other examples of the same type are the Gondi (1481) and the 
Antinori palaces, by G. di Sangallo, and the Casa Larderel, all in 
Florence; the Spanochi (1470) and the Piccolomini (1460) palaces 
in Siena, and the Piccolomini palace (1490) in Pienza. In the 
Guadagni palace at Florence, by S. Pollajuolo, there is a third storey, 
consisting of an open gallery, which gives the depth of shadow 
otherwise afforded by the projecting cornice. In the Ruccellai 
palace (1460), by Alberti, the design is spoilt by the introduction 
of the classic pilasters at regular intervals on each storey, which 
suggest no structural object and have too little projection to give 
any effect of light and shade, so that it is only on account of the 
purity of their details that they are worth notice. The Pandolphini 
palace, the design of which is attributed to Raphael, carried out after 
his death by Sangallo, is a simple and unpretentious building of fine 
proportions : the Pall Mall facade of Sir Charles Barry's Travellers' 
Club in London is a reproduction of this palace. The Bartolini 
palace (1520), by Baccio d' Agnolo, is said to have been the first 
astylar example in which the Classic orders were employed only to 
decorate the entrance door and windows, but this had already been 
done in 1488 in the Scuola di San Marco in Venice. 

Throughout the greater part of the 15th century, the Venetian 



Gothic style still held its own in the palaces of Venice, so that it is 
only towards the close of the century we find the first actual results 
of the Classic Revival. The earlier palaces may be looked upon as 
transitional work, in which Gothic principles rule the design while the 
details are borrowed from classic sources. The intimate acquaintance 
with the proportions of the Classic orders and their ornamental 
detail shows that the designers of the earliest Renaissance palaces 
must have acquired their knowledge outside Venice. Among these 
designers we find the names of members of the Lombardi family 
(which, as the name suggests, come from Lombardy), who for three 
or four generations, either as architects or sculptors, would seem 
to have been the chief founders of the Renaissance style in Venice. 
One of these, Pietro Lombardo, has already been referred to as the 
designer of the church of the Miracoli, and to him is due the Vend- 
ramini-Calerghi palace on the Grand Canal (Plate IV., fig. 71), built 




From a photo by Alinari. 

Fig. 52.- 



-Riccardi Palace, Florence. 



in 1 48 1, which in some respects is the finest example in Venice. 
It should be observed that all these palaces on the Grand Canal 
have an architectural frontage only, the flanks being built in plain 
masonry or brick stuccoed over, and with very poor, if any, dressings 
to the windows. This is well exemplified in the Vendramini palace, 
where there are gardens on each side, showing the total want of 
correlation between the rich architectural front and the poverty of 
the flanks. 

In a still earlier example, the Dario palace, one of the flanks 
borders on a side canal, so that its brick construction, partly covered 
with stucco, contrasts strangely with the rich marbles encrusting 
the main front. In the Dario palace the transition from Gothic to 
Renaissance is more clearly seen, as the only changes made are the 
substitution of circular window-heads for the Ogee Venetian arch, 
the projecting cornice with modillions, and more or less pure classic 
details. In the Vendramini palace the employment of the orders, 
to break up or subdivide the wall surface, has become a recognized 
treatment, based on the theatre of Marcellus and the Colosseum at 
Rome. On the ground storey there are panelled pilasters only, but 
on the first and second storeys three-quarter detached columns of 
the Corinthian order are employed, and the entablature is doubled 
in height with a bold projecting cornice, so as to crown properly the 
whole building. 



412 



ARCHITECTURE 



[ITALIAN RENAISSANCE 



The semicircular-headed windows of the palace are filled with 
moulded tracery carried on columns in the centre of each, which must 
be looked upon as the classic version of the arcade of the Ducal 
palace. This feature is found in other early Renaissance work in 
Venice, as in the Scuola de San Rocco (1517), and the Cornaro 
Spinelli palace (1480). In the latter, probably also by Pietro 
Lombardo, there are pilasters only on the groins of the main front, 
and the window-heads are enclosed in square-headed frames. In the 
Scuola de San Marco (1488), by Lombardo, we find another type of 
window, single and lofty, with pilaster. strips each side carrying an 
entablature with pediment. The same window decoration is found 
on the south and west fronts of the court of the Ducal palace and 
the external south front, and also in the Camerlenghi palace (1525), 
by Bergamasco and in other examples of early 16th-century work. 
In the Scuola de San Rocco the columnar decoration assumes much 
greater importance, and, in imitation of the triumphal arches of 
Septimus Severus and Constantine in Rome, the column is completely 
detached, with a wall-respond behind. Among other examples to be 
noted are the Cornaro-della-Grande palace (1532), by Sansovino, 
which is very inferior to his other work in Venice; the Grimani 
palace (1554), by San Michele (who also designed the fortifications 
of the Lido) ; the Zecca or mint (1537), the small loggetta (1540) at 
the foot of the campanile of St Mark's and now destroyed, and the 
Procuratie Nuove (completed by Scamozzi in 1584), all by Sansovino; 
the Balbi palace (1582), by Vittoria; and the Ponte Rialto (1588), 
by Antonio da Ponte. Sansovino's greatest work in Venice was the 
library of St Marks, which was commenced in 1531 ; in this he has 
shown not only remarkable powers of design but great boldness in 
the projection of his columns, cornices and other architectural 
features. The upper frieze has been increased in height, so as to 
admit of the introduction of small windows to light an upper storey, 
and this gives much greater importance and dignity to the entabla- 
ture crowning the whole structure. Two of the most imposing 
palaces on the Grand Canal, but of later date, are the Pesaro (1679) 
and the Rezzonico (1680), both by Longhena, the architect of the 
Salute church. The former is too much overcharged with ornament, 
but it has one advantage, the classic superimposed orders of the main 
front being repeated on the flank overlooking the side canal, with 
pilasters substituted for the detached columns of the main front. 
The Rezzonico palace is much quieter in design, and finer in its 
proportions, but even there the cherubs in the spandrils are too 
pronounced in their relief. 

In Rome there are no important examples of the 15th century, 
with the exception of the so-called " Venetian palace," which stiU 
retains externally the features of the feudal castle, such as machico- 
lations, small windows and rusticated masonry. This was owing 
probably to the comparative poverty of the city, which had to 
recover from the disasters of the 14th century. The earliest example 
of the Renaissance is that of the Cancellaria palace (1495-1505), by 
Bramante, the architect of the church at Todi; this was followed 
by a second and less important example, the Giraud or Torlonia 
palace (1506). The former is an immense block, 300 ft. long and 
76 ft. high, in three storeys, with coursed masonry and slightly 
bevelled joints, the upper two storeys decorated with Corinthian 
pilasters of slight projection and crowned with a poor cornice, so 
that its general effect is very monotonous, and the design is only 
relieved by the purity of its details, such as those of the window 
and balcony on the return flank. In 1506 Bramante was instructed 
to carry out the court of the Vatican, of which the great hemicycle 
at one end, designed in imitation of similar features in the Roman 
thermae, is an extremely fine example; to what extent he was 
responsible for the court of the Loggie, decorated by Raphael, is 
not known. The Villa Farnesina (1506), best known for its fresco 
decorations by Raphael and his pupils; the Ossoli palace (1525); 
and the Massimi palace (1532-1536), with magnificent interiors, 
were all built by Baldassare Peruzzi. The finest example in Rome 
is the Farnese palace, commenced in 1530 from the designs of 
Antonio di Sangallo; the design is astylar, as the employment of the 
orders is confined to the window dressings, the angles of the front 
having rusticated quoins; the upper storey, with the magnificent 
cornice which crowns the whole building, was designed by Michel- 
angelo, and in the upper storey he introduced a feature borrowed 
from the Roman thermae, brackets supporting the three-quarter 
detached columns flanking the windows. The brilliance of the design 
is not confined to the exterior, and the entrance vestibule and the 
great central court are the finest examples in Rome. Here the upper 
storey added by Michelangelo is inferior to the two lower storeys 
by Sangallo. 

The museum in the Capitol at Rome, by Michelangelo (1546), is 
one of those examples in which the principles of design are violated 
by the suppression of the horizontal divisions of the storeys which 
it should have been an object to emphasize. By carrying immense 
Corinthian pilasters through the ground and first storeys, Michel- 
angelo, it is true, obtained the entablature of the order as the chief 
crowning feature, and so far the result is a success, but in other hands 
it led to the decadence of the style. Among other examples in Rome 
which should be mentioned are the Villa Madama by Giulio Romano 
(1524); the Nicolini palace (1526) by Giacomo Sansovino; the 
Villa Medici (1540) by Annibale Lippi; the Chigi palace (1562) by 
G. de la Porta; the Spada palace (1564) by Mazzoni; the Quirinal 



palace (1574) by Fontana (the architect who raised the obelisk in 
the Piazza di San Pietro) ; and the Borghese palace (1590) by 
Martino Lunghi. 

We now return to about the middle of the 16th century, to the 
period when the great architects Barozzi da Vignola and Andrea 
Palladio of Vicenza commenced their career, and by their works and 
publications exercised a great and important influence on European 
architecture. 

The villa of Pope Julius (1550), and the Costa palace, Rome, are 
good examples of Vignola's style, always very pure and of good 
proportions, but his principal work was that of the Caprarola 
palace (1555-1559), about 30 m. from Rome, which he built for the 
cardinal Alessandro Farnese. The plan is pentagonal with a central 
circular court, and it is raised on a lofty terrace; the palace is in 
two storeys with rusticated quoins to the angle wings, and the Doric 
and Ionic orders, superimposed, separating arcades on the lower 
storeys and windows on the upper. The arcade of the central court 
is of admirable proportions and detail, second only to that of the 
Farnese palace. 

Palladio in his earlier career measured and drew many of the 
remains of ancient Rome, and more particularly the thermae (the 
drawings of which are in the Burlington-Devonshire Collection), but 
he does not seem to have carried out any buildings there. His most 
important work, and the one which established his reputation, is 
that known as the basilica at Vicenza (1545-1549), which he enclosed 
with an arcaded loggia in two storeys of fine design and proportion, 
and extremely vigorous in its details. He built a large number of 
palaces in his native town, among which the Tiene (1550) and the 
Colleone Porto are the simplest and best, the latter being the model 
on which the front of Old Burlington House (London) was rebuilt 
in 1716. In the Valmarana, the Consiglio and the Casa del Diavolo 
he departed from his principles, in carrying the Corinthian pilasters 
through two floors, and by returning the cornice round the order he 
destroyed its value as a crowning feature. Among other works of 
his are the Chiericate (1560), Trissino (1582) and Barbarano (1570) 
palaces; the Olympic theatre (1580), which was completed after 
his death; and the Rotonda Capra near Vicenza, reproduced by 
Lord Burlington at Chiswick. 

Though he laid down no rules for the guidance of others, the works 
of San Michele are superior to those of Palladio, with the exception, 
perhaps, of the basilica at Vicenza and the library at Venice. In the 
Bevilacqua palace (1527), at Verona, there is far greater variety of 
design than in Palladio's work, and the Pompei palace (1530) and 
the two gateways at Verona (1533 and 1552) are all bold and simple 
designs. In the same town is an extremely beautiful example of the 
early Renaissance, the Loggia del Consiglio (1476) by Fra Giocondo; 
a similar example with open gallery on the ground storey exists at 
Padua, where there is also the Giustiniani palace (1524) by Falcon- 
etto, an interesting example of a master not much known. The 
town hall of Brescia (1492) was built from the designs of Tommaso 
Formentone, who employed for the carving of the medallions on the 
lower storey, and the pilasters with their capitals and the friezes, 
various artists of high merit, so that the building takes its rank as 
one of the finest in north Italy, but independently of their collabora- 
tion the design of the first floor is in design and execution equal to 
Greek work. The upper storey and its circular windows are said 
to have been added by Palladio, and they are so commonplace and 
out of scale that by contrast they increase the artistic value of 
Formentone's work. 

The so-called Palazzo de' Diamanti at Ferrara, built in 1493 for 
Sigismondo d' Este, is decorated externally with a peculiar kind of 
rustication, in which the square face of the stones is bevelled towards 
the centre in imitation of diamond facets : the quoins of the palace 
have panelled pilasters richly carved, and similar pilasters flank the 
entrance door; the windows, with simple architrave mouldings and 
cornices on ground storey and pediments on the first storey, constitute 
the only architectural features of a novel treatment. 

At Bologna there are two or three palaces of interest, — the Bevil- 
acqua by Nardi (1484), chiefly remarkable for its central court 
surrounded with arcades, there being two arches on the upper storey 
to one on the lower, which presents a pleasant contrast and gives 
scale to the latter; the Fava palace (1484), in which on one side of 
the court are elaborately carved corbels carrying arches supporting 
an upper wall; and the Albergati palace (1521), by Peruzzi, in 
which the architectural decoration is confined to the entrance door- 
way windows flanked with pilasters and cornices in pediments and 
the entablatures of the ground and upper storeys, all the features 
being in stone on a background of simple brick construction. The 
Casa Tacconi is similarly treated. Many of the streets in Bologna 
have arcades on which the upper part of the house is built, and there 
is an endless variety in the capitals of these arcades. 

If the palaces of Genoa are disappointing as regards their external 
design, this is in some measure compensated for by the magnificence 
of their entrance vestibules, which (with the staircases and the arcades 
in the courts beyond) are built in white marble, and have probably 
suggested the title of the " marble palaces of Genoa." Manyof these 
palaces are situated in narrow streets, so that no general view can be 
obtained of them, which may account for their exterior being erected 
in inferior materials with stucco facing. The ground storey of the 
palaces is almost always raised about 6 to 8 ft. above the street level, 



FRENCH RENAISSANCE] 



ARCHITECTURE 



4i3 



so that the first flight of steps leading up to the court forms a 
prominent feature in every palace; the ceilings of the entrance 
vestibule are also mostly decorated with arabesque work in stucco, 
or with painted devices, &c. The palaces in the town are lofty, 
and as a rule crowned with fine cornices, and there are no examples 
of pilasters being carried through the floors ; the palaces and villas 
in the vicinity of Genoa are of less height, and owe much of their 
magnificence to the terraces on which they are erected. They have 
no special qualities except in slight variations of the external wall 
surface decoration, consisting of the applied orders on the several 
storeys. Among the best examples are the Palazzo Cataldi, formerly 
Palazzo Carega (1560), in which there are no pilasters, but rusticated 
quoins at the angles and windows with moulded dressings and 
pediments. The entrance vestibules of the Durazzo-Pallavicini, 
Rcsso (1558) and Balbi (1610) palaces are in each case their finest 
features. The Pallavicini palace, and the Pallavicini, Spinola, 
Giustiniani and Durazzo villas, are all fairly well designed and in 
good proportions, but with no original treatment. Two of the palaces 
are flanked by open loggias with arcades, from which fine views are 
obtained, giving them a special character; that of the Durazzo 
palace being on the first floor, and of the Doria Tursi on the ground 
storey. The University (1623) and the Ducal palaces have very 
magnificent entrance vestibules, the former with lions on the lower 
ramp of the staircase. 

Many of the finest palaces at Genoa are by Galeazzo Alessi, but in 
none of them has he approached the design of the Marino or municipal 
palace at Milan, in which he produced a remarkable work; the 
• internal courtyard surrounded with arcades carried on coupled 
columns is an original combination which is not excelled in any 
other court in Italy, and the exterior fagades are very fine. 

The internal courtyard of the hospital at Milan (243 ft. by 220 ft.), 
with an arcade in two storeys, was designed by Bramante and begun 
in 1457; only one side was completed by him, but in 1621, in conse- 
quence of a large benefaction, the remainder was completed by 
Ricchini according to the original design; the proportions of the 
arcade are extremely pleasing, and it forms now one of the chief 
monuments of the town. Ricchini was the architect of the Litta 
palace, one of the largest in Milan. 

There still remains to be mentioned one of the early examples of 
the Renaissance, the triumphal arch which was erected in 1470 at 
Naples to commemorate the entry of Alphonso of Aragon into the 
town. It is built against the walls of the old castle in four storeys, 
and connected with bas-reliefs and statues. The largest palace in 
Italy, that of the Caserta at Naples, with a frontage of 766 ft., 
built in 1752 by Vanvitelli, is one of the most monotonous designs, 
rivalled in that respect only by the Escurial in Spain. (R. P. S.) 

Renaissance Architecture in France 

The classical revival of the 15 th century in Italy was too 
important a movement to have remained long without its 
influence extending to other countries. In France this was 
accelerated by the campaigns of Charles VIII., Louis XII. and 
Francis I., which led to the revelation of the artistic treasures 
in Italy; the result being the importation of great numbers of 
Italian craftsmen, who would seem to have been employed in the 
carving of decorative architectural accessories, such as the panels 
and capitals of pilasters, niches and canopies, corbels, friezes, &c, 
either in tombs, as for instance in those of Charles of Anjou at 
Le Mans (1472) and at Solesmes (1498), of Francis, duke of 
Brittany (1501), and of the children of Charles VIII. (1506) 
at Tours, and of Cardinal d'Amboise in Rouen cathedral, the 
figures in all these cases being carved by French sculptors. They 
were also employed in architectural buildings, where the design 
and execution were by French master-masons, and the Italians 
were called in to carve the details, as in the choir screens of 
Chartres, Albi and Limoges cathedrals, the portal of St. Michel 
at Dijon, the eastern chapels of St Pierre at Caen, and numerous 
other churches throughout France; or for mansions like the 
Hotel d'AUuye at Blois, the Hotel d'Allemand at Bourges, and 
the chateaux of Meillant (1503), Chateaudun and Nantouillet 
(1519). The great centre of the artistic regeneration was at 
first at Tours, so that in Touraine, and generally on the borders 
of the Loire and the Cher at Amboise, Blois, Gaillon, Chenon- 
ceaux, Azay-le-Rideau and Chambord, are found the principal 
examples; later, Francis I. transferred the court to Paris, and 
the chateau of Madrid, and the palaces of Fontainebleau, St 
Germain-en-Laye, and the Louvre, follow the change. In all 
these chateaux the Italian craftsman would seem to have been 
under the direction of the master-mason or architect, because the 
whole scheme of the design and its execution is French, and only 
the decoration Italian. In cases where the Italian was not called 



in, the Gothic flamboyant style flourishes in full vigour with no 
suggestion of foreign influence, as in the palais de justice at 
Rouen, the church of Brou (Am), 1505-1532, the Hotel de Cluny, 
Paris, and the rood-screen oi the church of the Madeleine at 
Troyes (1531). 

Between the last phase of Flrmboyant Gothic and the intro- 
duction of the pure Italian Revival there existed a transitional 
period, known generally as the " Francis I. style," which may be 
subdivided under three heads:— the Valois period, comprising 
the reigns of Charles VIII. and Louis XII. (1483-1515); the 
Francis I. period (1515-1547); and the Henry II. a^d Catherine 
de' Medici period (1 547-1 589). The first two are characterized 
by the lofty roofs, dormers and chimneys, by circular or square 
towers at the angles of the main building with decorative machi- 
colations and hourds, by buttresses set anglewise, which rui: up 
into the cornice, and square-headed windows with mullions and 
transoms. In the second period the machicolations are con- 
verted into corbels carrying semicircular arcaded niches in 
which shells are carved; the buttresses become pilasters with 
Renaissance capitals; and the Gothic detail, which in the first 
period is mixed up with the Renaissance, disappears altogether. 
In the third period Italian design begins to exert its influence 
in the regular interspacing of the pilasters or columns with due 
proportion of height to diameter, in the completion of the order 
with the regular entablature, and its employment generally in 
a more structural manner than in the earlier work. 

The two first periods are well represented in the chateau of Blois, 
where, in the east wing built by Louis XII., square-headed windows 
alternate with three central arches, the buttresses are set anglewise 
running into the cornice, and pillars and angle shafts are carved with 
chevrons, spiral fiutings, or cinque-cento arabesque; the cornices 
of the towers containing staircases project and are carried on arched 
niches supported on corbels (the new interpretation of the machicola- 
tions of the feudal castle) ; above the cornice is a balustrade with 
pierced flamboyant tracery, and the dormer windows retain their 
Gothic detail. In the north wing of Francis I. all these Gothic 
ornamental details disappear, and are replaced by the Renaissance. 
Panels and pilasters take the place of the buttresses — the panels 
sometimes enriched with cinque-cento arabesque; shells are carved 
in the arched niches of the cornice, and modillions and dentil courses 
are introduced; the balustrade is pierced with flowing Renaissance 
foliage interspersed with the salamanders and coronets; the same 
high roofs are maintained, but the dormer windows and chimneys, 
still Gothic in design, are entirely clothed with Renaissance detail. 

The finest feature of the facade of this north wing, facing the court, 
is the magnificent polygonal staircase tower in its centre (Plate VIII., 
fig.^ 84) ; four great piers rise from ground to cornice, between 
which the rising balustrade is fitted; the whole feature Gothic in 
design, but Renaissance in all its details. The splendid carving of 
the panels of the piers and the niches with their canopies was prob- 
ably done by Italian artists. The figures in these niches are said 
to be by Jean Goujon. The great dormers and chimneys have not 
the refinement in their design which characterizes the lower portion, 
and may be of later date. The north front of the chateau is raised 
on the foundation walls of the old castle, part of which is encased 
in it, and this may account for the slight irregularities in the widths 
of the bays. The design differs^ from that of the south front, the 
windows all being recessed behind three-centre arched openings; 
the open loggia at the top, which is admirable in effect, is a subsequent 
alteration. 

Before passing to the Louvre and Tuileries, representing the 
third period, we must refer to some other important early chateaux 
and buildings. Some of these, such as the chateaux of Madrid and 
Gaillon, are known chiefly from du Cerceau's work, as they were 
destroyed at the Revolution. Of the latter building, the entrance 
gateway is still in situ; there are some portions in the court of 
the Ecole des Beaux-Arts at Paris, consisting of a second entrance 
gateway, a portico and some large panels. The gateway shows a 
singular mixture of Gothic and Renaissance; the centre portion, 
with the gateway and great niche over, is debased classic, the side 
portions retaining the buttresses, mouldings, panels and other 
features belonging to the latest phase of Flamboyant Gothic. 

Of buildings still existing, the hotel de ville of Orleans (1497) 
is a good example of early transition work, in which Gothic and 
Renaissance work is intermingled, and it is interesting to compare 
it with the h6tel de ville at Beaugency, built by the same architect, 
Viart, some twenty-five years later. There is the same principle in 
design, much improved in the later example, but all the Gothic 
details have disappeared. 

In the chateau of Chenonceaux (1515-1524) we find a compromise 
between the two styles; Gothic corbels, piers and three-centre 
arches are employed, varied with debased classic mouldings, shells 
and capitals; here, as at Azay-le-Rideau (1520), the chateau was 



4H 



ARCHITECTURE 



[FRENCH RENAISSANCE 



not transformed like those at Langeais and Rochefoucauld, where 
what was externally a 14th-century castle developed internally into 
a 16th-century mansion; both Chenonceaux and Azay-le-Rideau 
were built as residences, and yet in both are displayed those features 
which belong to the fortified castle; at the angles of the main 
structure in both cases are circular towers, in the latter case crowned 
with machicolations and hourds, which, however, are purely decora- 
tive, pierced with windows, and broken at intervals with dormer 
windows, a feature which gives it the aspect of an attic storey. 
The lofty roofs and conical terminations to these angle towers, 
with dormer and chimney, give the same picturesque aspect to the 
grouping as that which was afforded in the fortified castle, where, 
however, they originated in the necessity for defence. The entrance 
portals of both chateaux are beautiful features, absolutely Gothic in 
design, and only transformed by cinque-cento detail. 

In the chateau of Chambord (1526) we find the same defensive 
features introduced, in the shape of great circular towers at the angles, 
but here with more reason, as the chateau was intended more for 
display than habitation. The chateau itself, about 200 ft. square, 
has circular towers at the angles, and in the centre a spiral staircase 
wfch double flight, leading to great halls on each side, which give 
access to the comparatively small rooms in the angles of the square 
and the towers beyond, and to the roof, which would seem to have 
been the chief attraction, as there is a fine view therefrom; and the 
elaborate octagonal lantern over the staircase, the dormer windows, 
chimneys and lanterns on the conical roofs of the towers, are all 
elaborately carved. There are three storeys to the building, sub- 
divided horizontally by string courses, and terminated with a fine 
cornice carrying a balustrade, and vertically by a series of pilasters 
of the Corinthian order. The varied outline of this building, with 
the alternation of blank panels and windows between the pilasters, 
relieves what migh t otherwise have been its monotony. The chateau 
is situated on the east side of a great court measuring about goo ft. 
by 370 ft., with a moat all round. To the right and left of the central 
block the walls are carved up three storeys, and an attic, with open 
arcades inside, leading to the angle towers of the enclosure. At a 
later period Louis XIV. continued the unfinished structure by a one- 
storey building round. The carving of the capitals, corbels and other 
decorative work was all done by Italian artists, under the direction 
of some architect whose name is not known. 

One of the gems of Francis I.'s work is the small hunting lodge 
originally built at Moret near Fontainebleau, to which at one time 
the king thought of adding, before he began his great palace there. 
This was taken down in 1826, and re-erected in the Cours-la-Reine 
at Paris. Though small, it is the purest example of the first Renais- 
sance. Other examples are the hotel de ville of Paray-le-Monial 
(1526); the Hotel dAnjou at Angers (1530), built by Pierre de 
Pince; the Hotel Bernuy at Toulouse (1530); the H6tel d'Ecoville 
at Caen (1532); the Manoir of Francis I. at Orleans; the Hotel 
Bourgtheroulde at Rouen (1520-1532) and other buildings opposite 
Rouen cathedral, and what remains of the chateau known as the 
Manoir d'Ango (1525) at Varengeville, near Dieppe. The chateau of 
St Germain-en-Laye (1539-1544), the upper half of which is built 
in brick, belongs also to the early period, as also the h6tel de ville at 
Paris, built in 1533 by Domenico da Cortona, an Italian, who after 
spending some thirty years in France would seem to have caught 
the spirit of the French Renaissance so well as to be able to produce 
one of the most remarkable examples of the Francis I. style. In 
the existing building the original design has been copied from the 
building burnt down by the Communists in 1871. 

From this we pass to the palace at Fontainebleau, begun by 
Francis I. in 1526, to which there have been so many subsequent 
additions and alterations that it is difficult to differentiate between 
them. The building owes its picturesque effect more to its irregular 
plan (as portions of an earlier structure were enclosed in it) than to 
any brilliant conceptions on the part of its architect. There is an 
endless variety of charming detail in the capitals, corbels and other 
decorative features, but the employment of pilaster strips purely 
as decorative features (without any such structural property as that 
in the Porte Doree at the Cour Ovale) suggests that the Italian 
architect Serlio, to whom sometimes the work is ascribed, certainly 
had nothing to do with it. 

On the other hand, there is every reason to believe that the 
designs made by Pierre Lescot for the Louvre, begun in 1546, were, 
as regards their style, largely based on the principles set forth in 
Serlio's work on architecture, published in 1540. The south-west 
angle of the court of the Louvre is the earliest example of the third 
period of the Renaissance, in which the orders are employed in 
correct proportions with columns or pedestals carrying entablatures 
with mouldings based on classic precedent. The portion built from 
Lescot's designs (Plate VIII., fig. 83) consists of the nine bays on 
the east and north sides, the latter not being completed till 1574, 
as the workmen would seem to have been transferred to the building 
of the Tuileries, begun in 1564. 

The Corinthian order is employed for the ground and first storeys 
and an attic storey above, in which the pilaster capitals run into the 
bedmcld of the upper cornice. Of the nine bays, the central and 
side bays are twice the width of the others, and project slightly with 
the cornices breaking round them ; this feature, and the crowning 
of the western bays with a segmental pediment, give a variety to 



the design, which otherwise might have become monotonous by its 
repetition of similar features. The balustrade also is replaced by 
the cheneau, a cresting in stone, which hereafter is found in nearly 
all French buildings. The sculptor, Jean Goujon, would seem to 
have worked in complete harmony with the architect, thus producing 
what will always be considered as one of the chef-d 'ceuvres of French 
architecture. 

The architect employed by Catherine de' Medici for the Tuileries 
was Philibert de l'Orme, who combined the taste of the architect 
with the scientific knowledge of the engineer. Only a portion of his 
design was carried out, and of that much disappeared in the 17th 
century, when his dormer windows were taken down and replaced 
by a second storey and an attic. Bullant and du Cerceau also added 
buildings on each side. 

The Tuileries were built about 500 yds. from the Louvre, and 
Catherine de' Medici conceived the idea of connecting the two. 
The work, which began with the " Petite Galerie," with the south 
wing, as far as the Pavilion Lesdiguieres, was started in 1566, being 
of one storey only. The mezzanine and upper storey were not 
completed till the beginning of the 17th century. In 1603 the 
remainder of the south front and the Pavillon-de-Flore were 
completed by Jacques Androuet du Cerceau. 

Of Philibert de l'Orme's work at Anet (1549), only the entrance 
gateway, the left-hand side of court, and the chapel remain, suffi- 
cient, however, to show that he had already at that early date 
mastered the principles of the Italian Revivalists. The chapel is in 
its way a remarkable design, but the hemispherical dome, pierced by 
elliptical winding arches inside, is not happy in its effect. The, 
frontispiece which he created opposite the entrance, now in the court 
of the Ecole des Beaux-Arts in Paris, shows great refinement in its 
details, but proportionally errs in many points. De l'Orme built 
also the bridge and gallery on the river Cher, forming an addition 
to the chateau of Chenonceaux. 

Amongst other work of this period are the additions made by 
Bullant to the chateau de Chantilly, where he traversed the principles 
of classic design by running Corinthian pilasters through two storeys 
and cutting through the cornice of his dormer windows. At ficouen 
(1550) he destroyed the scale of the earlier buildings of 1532 by 
raising in front of the left wing of the court four lofty Corinthian 
columns with entablature complete, which he copied from the temple 
of Castor in Rome. 

Among the early Renaissance work are the chateau of Ancy le 
Franc (Yonne), Italian in character, which may be by Serlio (1546) ; 
the H6tel d'Assezat at Toulouse (1555), in which there is a strong 
resemblance to the court of the Louvre; the houses at Orleans, 
known as those of Agnes Sorel, Jeanne d'Arc and Diane de Poitiers 
(1552); and there is other work at Caen, Rouen, Toulouse, Dijon, 
Chinon, Perigueux, Cahors, Rodez, Beauvais and Amiens, dating 
up to the close of the 16th century. In this list might also be in- 
cluded the fine town hall of La Rochelle, the H6tel Lamoignon in 
the rue des Francs-Bourgeois, Paris (1580), and the Hotel de Vogue 
at Dijon, which retained the Renaissance character, though built in 
the first year of the 17th century. 

In the reigns of Henry IV. and Louis XIII. the first work of 
importance in Paris is that of the Place Royale, now the Place des 
Vosges; in this brick was largely employed, and the conjunction 
of brick and stone gave a decorative effect which dispensed with 
the necessity of employing the Classic orders. At Fontainebleau, 
where Henry IV. made large additions, the same mixture of brick 
and stone is found in the Galerie des Cerfs, and in the great service 
court {cour des cuisines). The example set was followed largely 
through the country, and numerous mansions and private houses 
in brick and stone still exist. Henry IV. 's most important work at 
Fontainebleau is the Porte Dauphine, of which the lower part, 
with rusticated columns and courses of masonry, does not quite 
accord in scale or character with the superstructure, in which is put 
some of the best work of the century. 

Except perhaps for the monotony of the rusticated masonry 
which is spread all over the building, the palace of the Luxembourg, 
by Salomon de Brosse (1615), is an important work, in which he 
was probably instructed by Marie de' Medici to reproduce the general 
effect of the Pitti palace at Florence. The three storeys of the main 
block are well proportioned, but the absence of a boldly projecting 
cornice, such as is found in the Riccardi and Strozzi palaces, is a 
defect ; the same architect reconstructed the great hall of the palace 
of justice at Paris, burnt in 1871 but now rebuilt to the same design. 

In 1629 the building subsequently known as the Palais Royal was 
begun from the designs of Lemercier; but it has been so materially 
altered since that scarcely anything remains of his design, though the 
works carried out from his designs at the Louvre were of the greatest 

Eossible importance. The court of the latter, as begun by Pierre 
escot, was of small dimensions, corresponding with that of the 
palace of Philip Augustus, but Lemercier proposed to quadruple its 
dimensions. It is not certain whether he built the lower portion of 
the Pavilion d'Horloge, but he designed the upper part, with the 
caryatid figures sculptured by Jacques Sarrazin. On the north side 
of this pavilion he built a wing similar in length and design to that 
of Pierre Lescot, and continued the wing along the north side to the 
centre pavilion; this was continued by Levau, the architect of 
Louis XIV., round the other sides of the court. His design for the 



FRENCH RENAISSANCE] 



ARCHITECTURE 



4i5 



east front, however, did not recommend itself to the king or to his 
minister Colbert, and a competition was held, the first place being 
given to the design by a physician, Dr Perrauit. Prior to its being 
begun, however, Bernini was sent for, and he submitted other 
designs, fortunately not carried out, as they would have destroyed 
the court of the Louvre. In 1665 the works were begun on the 
design of Perrauit, a grandiose frontispiece which appealed to 
Louis X IV. , but in which no cognizance had been taken of the various 
rooms against which it was built; consequently no windows could 
be opened, and it forms now a useless peristyle. Moreover it was so 
much wider than the original building that on the north side it 
became necessary to add a new front. Fortunately the example set 
by Perrauit of coupling columns together has rarely been followed 
since in France, so that in the Garde-Meuble on the south side of 
the Place de la Concorde, by Gabriel, we return again to the original 
classic peristyle. The works undertaken at the Louvre progressed 
but slowly, in consequence of the greater interest taken by Louis XIV. 
in the palace he was building at Versailles, an extension of the 
hunting-box built by his father Louis XIII. , which he insisted should 
be maintained and incorporated as the central feature in the new 
building. But as it was comparatively small in dimensions, of simple 
design, and in brick and stone, it was quite unfit to become the central 
feature of the main front of the largest palace in Europe. To make 
it worse, the new wings built on either side were lofty and of more 
importance architecturally, and as they projected some 300 ft. in 
advance of the earlier building, they reduced it to still greater 
insignificance. But even then the architect, Jules Hardouin Mansart, 
might have redeemed his reputation by buildings of greater interest 
than those which now exist. The back elevation of the central block 
is 330 ft. wide, the returns 280 ft., and the length of the wings on 
each side 500 ft. ; in other words he had nearly 1900 ft. run of 
facade, and it is simply a repetition of the same bays from one end 
to the other, in three storeys all of the same height, the lower one 
with semicircular arched openings, the first floor decorated with 
pilasters on columns of the Ionic order, and an attic storey above 
with balustrade. The slight projection given to the central and side 
bays of each block, just sufficient to allow of columns in the first 
floor as decorative features instead of pilasters, is of no value in 
fronts of such great dimensions. The great galleries inside have 
the same monotonous design as in the facades, relieved only by the 
rich decoration in the first case and the splendid masonry in the 
latter. There is one saving clause in the main front, the chapel 
by R. de Cotte on the right-hand side being externally and 
internally a fine structure, and the best ecclesiastical example of 
the period. 

Among other buildings of the 17th century are those begun by 
Cardinal Mazarin in the rue de Richelieu, which now constitute the 
National library; the H6tel de Toulouse (1626), now the Bank of 
France; the Hotel de Sully (1630), by du Cerceau; the H6tel de 
Beauvais (1654), by le Pautre; the H6tel Lambert (also by le 
Pautre),-in the lie St Louis; the chateau at Maisons, near St 
Germain-en-Laye, by Francois Mansart (1656); the Institute of 
France (1662), by Levau; two triumphal arches, of St Denis (1672), 
by Blondel, and St Martin (1674) by Bullet; the H6tel des Invalides 
(1670), by Bruant; the Place des Victoires and the Place Vendome 
(1695-1699), by Jules Hardouin Mansart, in which a series of large 
nouses are grouped together in one design; the Trianon at Versailles 
(1676), and the chateau of Marly (1682), both by J. H. Mansart; 
and important monumental buildings in the principal provincial 
cities, such as Lyons, Bordeaux, Nantes and Tours. 

In the 1 8th century those which are worthy of note are the H6tel 
Soubise (1706), now' the "Archives Nationajes " ; the fountain in 
the rue de Crenelle, a fine composition; the Ecole Militaire (1752), 
by Gabriel; the Ecole de Medecine (1769), byGondouin; the mint 
(1772), by Antoine; the Place de la Concorde, with the Garde- 
Meuble, by Gabriel (1765); the H6tel de Salm, now the Legion of 
Honour; the Place Stanislas at Nancy (1738-1766), in which are 
grouped the town hall, archbishop's palace, theatre and other 
public buildings, with triumphal arch and avenues leading to the 
palace of the duke Stanislaus (with magnificent wrought-iron 
enclosures and gates by Jean Lamour, the greatest craftsman of the 
century); the theatre at Bordeaux by Louis; and the Odeon, Paris 

(1789). 

The ecclesiastical architecture of the French Renaissance comes 
at the end of our description owing to the far greater importance 
of the palaces, mansions and public monuments, and also because 
in the beginning of the 16th century France found herself in posses- 
sion of a much larger number of cathedrals and large churches than 
she could maintain. Some of these are still unfinished, so that her 
first efforts would seem to have been directed to the completion of 
those already begun rather than to the erection of new ones, St 
Eustache in Paris being nearly the only exception of importance 
prior to the 17th century. 

We have from time to time dwelt upon the important consideration 
which must not be lost sight of, viz. that nearly all the buildings 
erected in France up to the accession of Henry IV. were conceived 
and carried out in the spirit of the Flamboyant Gothic style, cinque- 
cento details mixed up with Gothic at first, then superseding them, 
and even when the influence of the Italian revivalists began to exert 
itself, still retaining much of her traditional methods of design. 



If this was the case in civil architecture, it was naturally more 
pronounced in the additions made to ecclesiastical structures, and 
the gradual development of the style may be more easily followed in 
the la'tter. These are, however, so numerous, and they are so uni- 
versally spread throughout France, that only a few of the most 
interesting examples can be here given; for instance, the porch of 
St Michel at Dijon; the upper part of the western towers of the 
cathedrals of Orleans and Tours; the three eastern chapels of St 
Jacques, Dieppe, built at the cost of Jean Ango, a celebrated 
merchant-prince of Dieppe, to whose chateau at Varengeville we 
have already referred; the eastern chapels of St Peter's, Caen, 
from the designs of Hector Sohier (1521), both internally and 
externally of great interest; the west end of the church at Vetheuil 
(Seine-et-Oise) ; the magnificent work of the west front and tower 
of the church at Gisors; the upper part of the west front of the 
cathedral at Angers ; the portals of the church at Auxonne (Fichot) ; 
the chdir at Tillieres; the lantern of the church of St Peter, 
Coutances (1541); the porch of the Dalbade at Toulouse; and the 
north front of the church of Ste Clotilde at Les Andelys, which dates 
from the age of Henry II. 

The church of St Eustache at Paris, begun in 1533, but not com- 
pleted till the end of the century, is a large cruciform Gothic structure 
with lofty double aisles on each side and carried round the choir, 
and rectangular chapels round the whole building, excepting the 
west end. Structurally also it possesses all the most characteristic 
features of the Gothic church, with nave arcades carried on com- 
pound piers, triforium and clerestory, vaulted throughout, and 
flying buttresses outside. Close examination shows that all the 
details are of the early cinque-cento work, panelled pilasters of 
varying proportions, but with Renaissance capitals, corbels, niches 
and canopies all grouped together in a Gothic manner, and quite 
opposed to the principles of the Italian revivalists; what is more 
remarkable is that though long before its completion these principles 
had already borne fruit in the Louvre and Tuileries, the original 
conception was adhered to, and the portals of the north and south 
transepts (the last features added, with the exception of the ugly 
west front of the 18th century) still retain the character of the early 
French Renaissance. 

In St £tienne-du-Mont, sometimes claimed as a second example, 
the church is Flamboyant Gothic throughout, the chief additions 
being the magnificent rood-screen of 1600, and the west portal, in 
which the banded columns of the Bourbon period form the chief 
features. 

Coming to churches of later date, Salomon de Brosse (e. 1565- 
1627), the architect of the Luxembourg palace, added in 1616 a fresh 
front to the church of St Gervais, finely proportioned and of pure 
Italian design, which contrasts favourably with the Jesuits' church 
of St Paul and St Louis (1627-1641), overladen with rococo orna- 
ment; then came the churches of the Sorbonne (1629), by Jacques 
Lemercier, and of the Val-de-Grace (1645), by Francois Mansart, 
the dome of the latter, though small, being a fine design ; the church 
of the Invalides, also by Mansart, the dome of which is the most 
graceful in France; the cathedral of Nancy (1703-1742), by Jules 
Hardouin Mansart and Germain Boffrand (1667-1754), the principal 
front of which is flanked by two towers with octagonal lanterns 
which group so well with the central portion (of the usual design, in 
two stages with pilasters and coupled columns, carrying a third 
stage with circular pediment) that it is unfortunate it should be 
almost the only example of its kind; and lastly the church of 
Ste Genevieve, better known as the Pantheon (1755). by Jacques 
Germain Soufflot (1713-1780), the dome of which is based largely 
on that of St Peter's in Rome. The main building with its great 
portico is a simple and fine piece of design, and unlike St Peter's 
the dome is well seen from every point of view; the decoration of 
its walls with paintings by Puvis de Chavannes and other French 
artists has now rendered the interior one of the most interesting in 
France. (R- P- S.) 

Renaissance Architecture in Spain 

In Spain, as in France, the revival of classic architecture 
was engrafted on the Flamboyant style of the country, influenced 
here and there by Moorish work, so that the earlier examples 
of Spanish Renaissance constitute a transitional style which 
lasted till the accession of Philip II. (1558), who introduced what 
was then considered to be the purer Italian style of Palladio and 
Vignola. This, however, did not seem to have had much at- 
traction for the Spaniards, owing to its coldness and formality, so 
that in the latter half of the 17 th century a reaction took place 
in favour of the most depraved and decadent architecture in 
existence. 

The magnificence of the earlier Renaissance work, which was 
introduced into Spain when she was at the zenith of her power, 
and (owing to the discovery of a new world) the possessor of 
enormous wealth,has scarcely yet been recognized,in consequence 
of the greater attraction of the Moorish architecture; there is 



4i6 



ARCHITECTURE 



[SPANISH RENAISSANCE 



no doubt that its exuberant richness in the 16th century de- 
rives its inspiration from the latter, and especially so in patios 
or courts found in every class of building, ecclesiastical as well 
as civil. There is still, however, another characteristic in the 
early Renaissance of Spain, which is not found in Italy or France, 
and which again owes its source to Moorish work, where the 
external walls and towers consist of simple plain masonry, and 
the rich decoration, generally in stucco brilliantly coloured and 
gilded, is confined to the courts and to the interiors of their 
magnificent halls. The Italian method of decorating the external 
front of the palaces with flat pilasters of the various orders placed 
at regular intervals, the windows and doors forming features of 
second-rate importance, was not followed by the architects of 
the Spanish Renaissance, who retained the simple plain masonry 
and reserved their decorations for the entrance doorways and 
windows, emphasizing therefore these features, and by contrast 
increasing their value and interest. 

Instead also of the huge cornicione which the Italians employed 
to give the shadows required to emphasize the crowning features 
of their palaces, the Spanish architects preferred to obtain a 
similar effect by an open arcaded upper storey, which, as Fer- 
gusson remarks, " forms one of the most pleasing architectural 
features that can be applied to palatial architecture, giving 
lightness combined with shadow exactly where wanted for effect 
and where they can be applied without any apparent interfer- 
ence with solidity." These galleries would seem to have been 
provided to serve as promenades to the occupants of the palace, 
and more especially for the ladies when it would have been unwise 
or imprudent for them to venture into the streets. There is one 
well-known example in France, in the chateau of Blois, which 
is so attractive a feature that it is singular it has not been more 
often adopted. 

Instead also of the monotonous balustrade, which is invariably 
found in Italy, the Spanish architects introduced richly carved 
crestings, with finials at regular intervals, a feature probably 
borrowed from Flamboyant Gothic and Moorish. 

The three periods into which the architectural phases of the 
Renaissance style in Spain are divided are: — (i) The Plateresque 
or Silversmiths' work, from the conquest of Granada to the reign 
of Philip II. (2) The purer Italian style, called by the Spanish 
the Greco-Roman, though it has no Greek elements in its design, 
being based on the worts of Palladio and Vignola. This style 
prevailed until the end of the 17th century. (3) The Rococo 
or Churrigueresque style, so called from the name of the architect, 
Jose Churriguera (d. 1725), the chief leader of the movement, 
which lasted for about 100 years. 

Ecclesiastical Architecture. — The cathedral of Granada, built from 
the designs of Diego de Siloe, is the earliest example of the Renais- 
sance in Spain, and in some respects the most remarkable, not only 
for its plan, in which there is an entirely new feature, but for the 
scheme adopted in the vaulting, which covers the whole church, 
and shows that its architect had studied the earlier Gothic churches, 
and was well acquainted with the principles of thrust and counter- 
thrust developed in them. The cathedral is 400 ft. long by 230 ft. 
wide, and therefore of the first class as far as size is concerned. 
The western portion consists of nave and double aisles on each side, 
the outer aisle being carried round the whole church and giving 
access to the chapels which enclose the building. The principal 
feature of the cathedral is at the east end, where the place of the 
ordinary apse is occupied by a great circular area, 70 ft. in diameter, 
crowned by a lofty dome, in the centre of which in a flood of light 
stands the high altar. The vista from the nave through the great 
arch (37 ft. 6 in. wide and 97 ft. high) is extremely fine, and it is 
strange that it should be the only example of its kind. The west 
front was completed at a later date ; the only feature of it belonging 
to the original church being the north-west tower, which, in its design, 
resembles the south-west tower of the church at Gisors in France. 
There are two other important Renaissance cathedrals at Jaen and 
Valladolid. The latter was built from a design of Juan de Badajoz 
in 1585 but never completed. On the south side of the cathedral is 
the chapel in which the Catholic kings lie buried, where there are 
two fine marble tombs enclosed by the reja or wrought-iron screen 
partly gilt, forged in 1522 by Maestre Bartholome. The sagrario or 
parish church, also on the south side, is a small version of the scheme 
of design employed in the cathedral. 

In Spain, as in France, magnificent portals have been added to 
cathedrals and churches, and these are amongst the finest works 
of the Renaissance period. The more remarkable of these are the 



portals of the cathedral of Malaga, a deeply recessed porch, enriched 
with slender shafts and niches between; of Santa Engracia at 
Saragossa ; and of Santo Domingo and the cathedral at Salamanca. 
Externally the Renaissance domes over the crossings of Spanish 
cathedrals are poor, but this is compensated for by the lofty steeples 
which form striking features. The western towers of the cathedral 
at Valladolid ; the tower of the Seo in Saragossa, which bears some 
resemblance to Wren's steeples in the setting back of the several 
storeys and the crowning with octagonal lanterns ; the tower of the 
cathedral Del Pilar at Saragossa, and that at Santiago, are all 
interesting examples of the Spanish Renaissance. 

One of the most beautiful features of the Spanish Renaissance is 
found in the magnificent rejas or wrought-iron grilles, richly gilt, 
which form the enclosures of the chapels. Besides the example at 
Granada, others are found at Seville, where is the masterpiece of 
Sancho Munoz (1528); at Palencia (1582); Cuenca (1557), where 
there are three fine examples; Toledo; Salamanca; and other 
cathedrals. The iron pulpit at Avila, the eagle lectern at Cuenca 
and the staircase railing at Burgos are all remarkable works in 
metal. 

Secular Architecture. — With the exception of the magnificent 
portals, the finest works of the Renaissance in Spain as in France 
are to be found in the secular buildings, but with this difference, 
that the best examples in France are those built in the country or in 
comparatively small provincial towns, whereas in Spain they are all 
in the midst of the larger towns, and further they are not confined 
to palaces and ch&teaux; monasteries and universities coming in 
for an equal share in the great architectural development. 

The characteristic style of the Spanish architecture of the Renais- 
sance period is due probably to the influence of the earlier Moorish 
work, where the value of the rich Alhambresque decorations in the 
entrance doorways and windows, and the patios or courts, is enhanced 
by contrast with the plain masonry of their walls and towers. This 
influence had already been felt in the Spanish flamboyant Gothic 
panelling and tracery; when translated into Renaissance, and 
probably, at first,, executed by Italian artists, it displayed a variety 
and beauty in its design scarcely inferior to some of the best work 
in Italy. And this development, taking place at a time when Spain 
was overflowing with wealth, resulted in that exuberant richness we 
find in the entrance doorways and windows, the external galleries 
of the upper storey, and the rich cresting surmounting the cornice. 

Comparison with the contemporary and even earlier work in 
Italy, where the principal thought of the architect would seem to 
have been to break the wall surface by an unmeaning series of flat 
pilasters, and then fill in the windows as features of secondary 
importance, will show that the Spanish architect recognized more 
fully the true principle of design, and although, in the profiles of 
their mouldings, and the execution of the sculpture decorating 
their pilasters and friezes, Spanish work in contrast with Italian 
looks somewhat coarse, in general picturesqueness it is far in advance 
of the palaces of Rome, Florence, and even Venice, and has not yet 
received the recognition which it deserves. 

The earliest palace built in the Renaissance style is that which 
adjoins the Alhambra at Granada, and was begun by the emperor 
Charles V. for his own residence in 1527, but never completed. 
The building is nearly an exact square of 205 ft., with a great circular 
court in the centre, nearly 100 ft. in diameter. This central court 
was enclosed by a colonnade with Doric columns, and an upper 
storey with columns of the Ionic order. From the unfinished con- 
dition of the palace and the absence of roofs, it is difficult to decide 
what the form of the latter might have been. But the design, begun 
by Pedro Machuca and continued by Alonso Berruguete (1480- 
1561), is so remarkable that it ought to be better known. Its 
proximity to the Alhambra, however, deprives it of the attention 
which otherwise it deserves for the purity of its details and for its 
good proportion. 

A second palace, the Alcazar at Toledo, was begun in 1540 by 
Charles II., but little else than the bare walls remain, as it was 
destroyed by fire in 1886, after having been twice rebuilt. In its 
design it belongs to the true Spanish type of the Renaissance, with 
the simple ashlar masonry of its walls and the accentuation of the 
principal entrance doorway and the windows. In this palace also 
the plan is square, about 1 10 ft., with a square courtyard (240 ft.). 

The third palace built, the Escorial, some 20 m. to the north-east 
of Madrid, is the most renowned — more, however, on account of its 
immense size than for its design. It was built for Philip II. and 
begun in 1563 from the designs of Juan Bautista de Toledo, being 
completed by his pupil, Juan deHerrera, in 1584. The principal front 
is 680 ft. in width, the depth of the palace 540 ft., with the king's 
residence in the rear. The plan is a fine conception, and consists 
of a large entrance court in the centre, with the church in the rear, 
having on the right the Colegio and on the left the monastery, with 
numerous courts in each case. The church is 320 ft. long by 220 ft. 
wide, the principal portion being the intersection of the nave and 
transept, which is covered by a dome. The coro is placed above 
the entrance vestibule, which is 100 ft. long and 27 ft. high, im- 
perfectly lighted, but by contrast emphasizing the dimensions and 
the splendour of the church beyond. Externally the grouping is 
fine; the lofty towers at the angles, the central composition of the 
' main front, and at the rear of the court the front of the church 



ENGLISH RENAISSANCE] 



ARCHITECTURE 



417 



with its corner towers and the great dome, all form an exceedingly 
picturesque group, and it is only when one begins to examine the 
work in detail that its poverty in design reveals itself. Instead of 
accentuating the windows of the principal storeys and giving them 
appropriate dressings, the fronts are pierced with innumerable 
windows, which give the appearance of a factory, and the angle 
towers, nine storeys high, look like ordinary " sky-scrapers," without 
any of the dignity and importance which the architectural design 
of a palace requires. The same applies to the great entrance courts 
five storeys high with an attic, all of the most commonplace design. 
Internally the church is fine, but it is dwarfed by the immense size 
of the Doric pilasters, 62 ft. high, all in plain stone masonry, the 
coldness of which is emphasized by the rich colouring of the vaulted 
ceilings and the elaboration of the pavement, all in coloured marbles. 
The palace is regarded by the Spaniards as the Versailles of Spain, 
and if it had been possible to have interchanged some of the features, 
to transfer to Versailles some of the towers, and to break up.the wall 
surface of the Escorial with the superimposed order of pilasters, 
which became monotonous by their repetition at Versailles, both 
palaces would have gained. 

The palace at Madrid is the last of the series, and although it was 
begun at a much later period, by Philip V. in 1737, from the designs 
of the Italian architect Sachetti, it is a fine and simple composition, 
consisting of a lofty ground storey with coursed masonry, carrying 
semi-detached columns of the Ionic order, rising through three 
storeys, the whole crowned by an entablature and a bold balustrade. 
The slightly projecting wings at each end of the main front and the 
central frontispiece give that variety and play of light and shade of 
which one regrets the absence in the Cancellaria palace at Rome. 

We must, however, retrace our steps to the beginning of the 
16th century, to take up the early buildings of the style; the palace 
of the Conde de Monterey at Salamanca, built in 1530 from the 
designs of Alonso de Covarrubias, is a fine example. The masonry 
of the ground and first floors is of the simplest character, the decora- 
tion being confined to the entrance doorways and to the windows 
of the important rooms. It is on the second floor that the design 
becomes enriched with an open arcade and entablature above, 
crowned with a rich cresting. In the wings at the angles, and in 
the central block, the buildings are carried up an additional storey, 
the plain masonry of which gives value to the open galleries between. 
On these wings and the central block are other galleries crowned 
with entablature and cresting. These features therefore form 
towers, which break the sky-line. There is still another treatment 
peculiar to the Spanish Renaissance, in which the example of the 
Moorish palaces would seem to have been followed, viz. the elaborate 
carving of the pilasters and their capitals, of the panelling and 
the horizontal friezes, which is extremely minute and finished in the 
lower storeys, but increases in scale and projection towards the 
upper storeys. This is very notable in the entrance gateway of the 
university of Salamanca (Plate V. , fig. 73) , where the carved arabesque 
in the panelling above the doors is of the finest description, equal to 
what might be found in cabinet work, whilst that of the upper 
portion immediately under the cornice is at least twice the scale of 
that below and is in bold relief. 

The principal buildings characteristic of the Spanish Renaissance, 
in chronological order, are: — the hospital of Santa Cruz at Toledo, 
built in 1 504-1 5 14, and the Hospicio de los Reyes at Santiago 
(1504), both from the designs of Enrique de Egas, the former with a 
magnificent portal rising through two storeys and a gallery with an 
open arcade above; the Irish college at Salamanca, built (1521) 
from the designs of Pedro de Ibarra, Alonso de Covarrubias, and 
Berruguete; the convent of San Marcos, Leon, by Juan de Badajoz 
(1 514—1545) — here, however, the whole facade is panelled out in 
imitation of late Gothic work, Renaissance pilasters and devices 
taking the place of the buttresses set angle-wise and flamboyant 
panelling; the Colegio de San Ildefonso at Alcala de Henares 
(formerly the seat of the university), built in 1557-1584 by Rodrigo 
Gil de Ontanon. 

Of municipal buildings the Lonja or exchange at Toledo (1551)., 
built in brick-work, is somewhat Florentine in style. 

The town hall of Seville (1 527-1 532), by Diego de Riaiio and 
Martin Garuza, may be taken as the most gorgeous example in Spain 
(Plate V., fig. 74). The front facing the square is very simple, 
compared with the facade in the street at the rear, and here again 
we find, in the ornamental carving of the windows and door mould- 
ings on the ground floor, a different scale from that adopted on the 
first floor, where the shafts are enriched with a superabundance 
of carved ornament in strong relief. There is still one other feature 
of great importance in Spain, the magnificent galleries of the patios 
or courts found in all the important buildings. It is from these 
galleries that access is obtained to the rooms on the first floor. 
They have sometimes arcades on the first floor, and columns with 
bracket -capitals on the upper storey. There is an infinite variety 
of design in these capitals, the brackets on each side of which lessen 
the bearing of the architrave. 

The earliest Renaissance example of these patiog (1525) is in the 
Irish college at Salamanca; it was carved by Berruguete, Alonso de 
Covarrubias being the architect. In the same town is the Casa de la 
Salinas, another example with fine sculpture. In the Casa Polentina 
(1550) at Avila, and the Casa de Miranda at Burgos, columns with 

II. 14 



bracket-capitals are employed on both storeys. Rich examples are 
found in the Casa de la Infanta and Casa Zaporta (1580), both at 
Saragossa. Of late examples the patio of the Lonja at Seville by 
Juan de Herrera resembles in its style the courtyard of the Farnese 
palace at Rome; and the same style obtains in the court of the 
Escorial, built at a time when the purer Italian style was introduced 
into Spain. These courts, though cold in design, compared with the 
earlier Renaissance type, are of fine proportion. Two other examples 
are found in the bishop's palace at Alcala de Henares, one of which 
has a magnificent staircase. (R. P. S.) 

Renaissance Architecture in England 
In England, as in France, the influence of the Classic Revival 
was first seen in connexion with tombs and church work, though 
not nearly to the same extent as in France, where throughout 
the country the work of the Italian sculptor is to be found not 
only in churches but in country mansions. On the other hand, 
two if not three of the Italian artists who came over to England 
were men of some reputation, such as Pietro Torrigiano, a 
Florentine sculptor who was invited over by Henry VIII. and 
entrusted with the tomb of Henry VII. in Westminster Abbey 
(1512-1518), and executed the tomb of John Young (in terra- 
cotta) in the Rolls chapel (1 5 16) . Another Italian was Giovanni 
da Maiano, who was also a Florentine, who modelled the busts 
of the emperors in the terra-cotta medallions over the entrance 
gates at Hampton Court, and probably the panel flanked by 
Corinthian pilasters, in which are modelled the arms of Cardinal 
Wolsey, also in terra-cotta. Benedetto da Rovezzano (1478- 
c. 1552), and Toto del Nunziata, Italian artists of note, were also 
employed in England, the first on the tomb of Cardinal Wolsey 
(now destroyed), and the second on the palace of Nonsuch, built 
by Henry VIII., which was pulled down in 1670. Other early 
Renaissance work is found at Christchurch Priory, in the Salisbury 
Chantry (1529), the design of which is Gothic and some of the 
details Italian, and in the tombs of the countess of Richmond in 
Westminster Abbey (15 19), of the earl of Arundel in Arundel 
church, Sussex, of Henry, Lord Marney, at Layer Marney (1525), 
of the duke of Richmond (1537) and the duchess of Norfolk 
(1572) in Framlingham church; and of Queen Anne of Cleves 
(1557) in Westminster Abbey, attributed to Haveus of Cleves. 
The sedilia (in terra-cotta) of Wymondham church, Norfolk, 
the choir screen at St Cross, and Bishop Gardiner's chantry, 
Winchester, and the vaulted roof of Bishop West's chapel at 
Ely, all show the direct influence of the Italian cinque-cento 
style. The most beautiful example in England of Italian wood- 
work is the organ screen in King's College chapel, Cambridge 
(1 534-1 539), which, except for the coats of arms, the roses, port- 
cullis and other English emblems, might be in some Italian church, 
so perfect is its design and execution. Of early domestic work, 
Sutton Place (1 523-1525), near Guildford, Surrey, is a good 
example of transition work. The design is Tudor, but the window 
mullions and panels inserted throughout the structure, which 
is built in brick, are all enriched with cinque-cento details in 
terra-cotta, and probably executed by Italian craftsmen. Similar 
enrichments in the same material are found decorating the 
entrance tower (1522-1525) at Layer Marney, Essex. 

Nearly all the examples above mentioned come within the 
first half of the 16th century. Passing into the second half and 
dealing with domestic architecture, we find the history of the 
introduction of classic work into England more complicated than 
in other countries, because in addition to the Italian, we have 
French, Flemish and German influences to reckon with, and it 
is sometimes difficult to decide from which source the features 
are borrowed. There were, however, two still more important 
considerations to be taken into account — firstly, the extremely 
conservative character of the English people, who were satisfied 
with the traditional work of the country, and the methods by 
which it was parried out, and secondly, the great progress in 
design which was made during the Elizabethan period, resulting 
in a phase which was peculiarly English and did not lend itself 
easily to classic embellishment. 

Already in the last phase of Gothic work, to which the title 
of Tudor is generally given, important changes were being made 
in the planning of the larger country mansions, and features 



4i8 



ARCHITECTURE 



[ENGLISH RENAISSANCE 



were introduced which seemed to give an impetus towards their 
further development. 

The most important of these features were the following: — the 
bow window, rectangular or polygonal, of which the earliest examples 
date from the reign of Edward IV. (1461-1483), such as Eltham 
Palace in Kent, Cowdray Castle in Sussex, and Thornbury Castle in 
Gloucestershire, and at a later period at Hampton Court ; octagonal 
towers or turrets flanking the entrance gateway at each end of the 
main front; the projecting forward of the side wings so as to get 
bfctter light to the rooms in them by having windows on both sides, 
sficb projections varying the otherwise monotonous effect of a uni- 
form facade without breaks ; the long gallery (generally on an upper 
floor), which was an important characteristic of the Elizabethan 
house; and last but not least, the adherence to the type of old 
Tudor window, with its moulded mullions and transoms but with 
square head. 

One of the first modifications was the introduction of semicircular 
bow windows, as in Kirby Hall, Northamptonshire, followed by a 
second example at Burton Agnes in Yorkshire (1602-1610), and a 
third at Lilford Hall in Northamptonshire (1635). They were 
carried up through three storeys at Kirby Hall, the upper storey 
in [the roof; three storeys at Burton Agnes with balcony and 
balustrade; and two storeys at Lilford Hall — these features being 
extremely simple but fine in effect, and the windows with moulded 
mullions and transoms lending themselves naturally to the curve. 

The projecting bays and bow windows seemed to have such an 
attraction for the builders of these country mansions that at Burton 
Agnes (with a rectangular plan of 120 ft. by 80 ft.) there are no fewer 
than thirteen of them, which break up the wall surface and give a 
picturesque group externally, whilst internally they add to the fine 
effect of the rooms. At Barlborough Hall, Derbyshire, with a 
frontage of 80 ft., there is a central rectangular bay forming the 
entrance porch and carried up above the roof, and two large octagonal 
bow windows which rise as towers with an extra storey. In all these 
mansions the only influence which the Revival seems to have 
exerted was in the introduction of an entablature, which sometimes 
takes the place of the Gothic string course, balustrades which crown 
the building, but with no projecting cornice, and gables with curved 
outlines and Renaissance panels or scrolls. The fact is that, with 
prominent features so widely differing from those which were 
represented on the perspective drawings attached to the earlier 
publications of the five orders, such as those of Serlio (1537) and 
Vredeman de Vries of Antwerp (1577), the only course left open to 
the master-mason was to decorate the principal entrance with 
columns and pilasters of the Classic orders, sometimes superposed 
one upon the other. 

To the further development of this singular introduction of the 
Classic orders we shall return; for the moment it will be better to 
follow a chronological sequence and take up the principal examples 
of the country mansion, some of which were from the first intended 
to be Classic buildings. Of the house built at Gorhambury in 
Hertfordshire (1563) for Sir Nicholas Bacon, the father of Lord 
Bacon, too little remains to render its design intelligible, except 
that it still retains in its lofty window the Tudor pointed arch ; but 
in Longleat in Wiltshire, built by Sir John Thynne (1567-1580), we 
have a typical example, the design of which departs from the English 
type, though it would seem to have been carried out according to 
the traditional custom of entrusting the whole work to a master- 
mason, and furnishing him with sketch designs of some kind suggest- 
ing the required arrangements of the plan, the principal features 
of the exterior elevation and the internal disposition. This custom 
was adhered to far into the 18th century at Oxford and Cambridge, 
where the alterations and additions to some of the colleges, such as 
the chapel of Clare College, Cambridge (1763), were carried out by 
master-masons or builders who were supplied with sketch designs 
and sometimes even the materials for the buildings they had to carry 
out, notwithstanding the existence of properly trained architects, 
who from the first half of the 17th century were usually entrusted 
with the preparation of the necessary designs for new structures of 
any considerable importance. 

The name of the designer of Longleat is not known; the master- 
mason was Robert Smithson, who in 1580 went to Wollaton in 
Nottinghamshire and constructed the mansion there. Longleat is so 
Italian in style that it must have been conceived by some one who 
had been in Italy, because it departs from the usual English type. 
The plan is rectangular, with a frontage of 220 ft. by 180 ft. deep, 
an entrance porch in the centre, with two projecting bays on each 
side carried up through the three storeys, and three similar bays on 
the flanks. The whole block is crowned with a parapet, the centre 

Cortion of which is pierced with a balustrade, but the main cornice 
ears no resemblance to the Italian feature, being only that of the 
entablature of the upper order. The projecting bays are decorated 
with pilasters of the Doric, Ionic and Corinthian orders, each with its 

E roper entablature. These classic features would seem to have 
een copied from a work by John Shute, painter and architect, who 
had been sent to Italy by the duke of Northumberland in 1551, 
and in 1563 brought out his Chief Groundes of Architecture, the first 
practical work published in English on architecture. Shute died in 
the same year, but two other editions appeared in 1579 and 1584, 



which shows that it must have had an extensive circulation and 
probably exercised the greatest influence on English architecture. 
A second book on the orders, already referred to as published in 
JS77 by J an Vredeman de Vries of Antwerp, was not of the same 
type, for instead of confining his work, like Shute and Serlio, to a 
simple representation of the Classic orders, he introduced, on the 
shafts of his columns and on the pedestals, designs of the most 
debased rococo type, with additional plates suggesting their applica- 
tion to various buildings. Robert Smithson, or his client Sir Fr. 
Willoughby, apparently obtained a copy of this book, and the result 
is seen (Plate VI., fig. 76) in the mansion built at Wollaton (1580- 
1588), in which we find the first examples of elaborately decorated 
pedestals; crestings on the angle towers, the design of which is 
known as strap-work; and medallions with busts in them, enclosed 
with twisted curves similar to those which flowers and leaves take 
when thrown into the fire. The plan and the scheme of the design of 
Wollaton. is, however, so far superior to the usual type, that it may 
fairly be ascribed to John Thorpe, an architect or surveyor, of whose 
drawings there is a large collection in the Soane Museum, represent- 
ing many of the more important mansions of the Elizabethan era; 
some of his own design, others either plans measured from existing 
buildings upon which he was called in to report or copies from other 
sources, and some reproduced from published works such as Vrede- 
man de Vries's pattern book and Androuet du Cerceau's Des plus 
excellents bastiments de France (1576). 

To John Thorpe is also attributed the design of Kirby Hall 
(1570-1572) in Northamptonshire, in which the plan of the feudal 
castle with great central court is still retained. This court is 
symmetrically designed, and was evidently considered to be the 
principal feature, the decoration being far richer than that of the 
exterior of the building. 

Amongst other important mansions are Moreton Old Hall (1550- 
1559. partly rebuilt in 1602; see House, Plate III., fig. II) in 
Cheshire, a fine house in half-timber; Kuole House, Kent (1570), 
possibly also designed by John Thorpe; Charlecote Hall (1572) 
near Stratford-on-A von ; Burleigh House, Northamptonshire (1575), 
the most remarkable feature in which is the great tower in the court- 
yard, decorated with the Doric, Ionic and Corinthian orders super- 
posed, the design apparently suggested by a similar feature in the 
chateau of Anet, France (published in du Cerceau) ; Apethorpe 
Hall, Northamptonshire (1580); Montacute House, Somersetshire 
(1580-1600); Castle Ashby, Northamptonshire (1583-1589); 
Brereton Hall, Cheshire (1575-1586), in brick and stone; Westwood 
Park, Worcestershire (1590); Wakehurst Place, Sussex (1590); 
Hardwick Hall, Derbyshire (1590-1597); Longford Castle, Wiltshire 
(1591-1612); Cobham Hall, Kent (1594); Dorton House, Bucking- 
hamshire (1596); Speke Hall, Lancashire (1598), partly in half- 
timber work; Holland House, Kensington (1606; wings and arcades, 
1624); Bolsover Castle, Derbyshire (1607-1613); Charlton House, 
Kent (1607); Bramshill, Hampshire (1607-1612), an interesting 
example of Jacobean architecture; Hatfield, Hertfordshire (1608- 
161 1), with an extremely fine courtyard (north side" in brick and 
stone, 1621); Audley End, Essex (1610-1616), a great portion of 
which was afterwards pulled down; Ham House, Surrey (1610), 
chiefly in brick; Pinkie House, at Musselburgh in Midlothian 
(1613); Aston Hall near Birmingham (1618-1635); Blickling Hall, 
Norfolk (1619); Heriot's hospital, Edinburgh (1628-1659); and 
Lanhydroc, Cornwall (1636-1641), which brings us down to the period 
of the pure Italian Revival introduced by Inigo Jones. 

We have already referred to the reproduction of the Classic 
orders, superposed as an enrichment of the principal entrance 
doorways. In addition to Burton Agnes and Burleigh House, 
there are endless examples in mansions and country houses, but the 
most remarkable are those at Oxford : in the old Schools, where coupled 
columns flank the entrance gateway with the five orders superposed, 
and in Merton and Wadham Colleges, with four orders (the Tuscan 
being omitted), in neither case taking any cognizance of the levels 
of windows or string courses of the earlier building to which they 
,were applied, or serving any structural purpose. The orders were 
all taken from one of the pattern books, and in the Schools and in 
Merton College the rococo ornament and strap-work found in Vrede- 
man de Vries's work were copied with more or less fidelity to the 
original. There are, however, two or three buildings ^Northampton- 
shire which are free from rococo work, and in their design form a 
pleasant contrast, as much to the elaboration of the buildings just 
described as to the cold formality of the works of the later Italian 
style. Lyveden new buildings (1577), the Triangular Lodge at 
Rushton, and the Market House at Rothwell, are all examples in 
which the orders from Serlio or John Shute are faithfully repre- 
sented, and are of a refined character; in the first named the en- 
tablatures only of the orders are introduced. In Rushton Hall 
(1595) the cresting of the bow windows shows the evil influence of 
Vredeman de Vries's pattern-book and of numerous designs by him 
and other Belgian artists, which were printed at the Plantin press. 
Two other publications of a similar rococo type were brought out in 
Germany, one by Cammermayer (1564) and the other by Dietterlin 
(1594), both at Nuremberg; neither of them would seem to have 
been much known in England, but indirectly through German 
craftsmen they may have influenced some of the work of the Jacobean 
period, and more particularly the chimney pieces and the ceilings 



ENGLISH RENAISSANCE] 



ARCHITECTURE 



419 



of the gallery and other important rooms in which strap-work is 
found. Among the finer examples of ceilings of early date are those 
of Knole, Kent; Haddon Hall, Derbyshire; Sizergh Hall, Westmor- 
land; South Wraxall Manor House, Wiltshire; the Red Lodge, 
Bristol; Chastleton House; and Canons Ashby — in the last three 
with pendants. Two of the best-designed ceilings of modest dimen- 
sions are those of the Reindeer Inn at Banbury and the Star Inn at 
Great Yarmouth. The principal decorative feature of the reception 
rooms was the chimney-piece, rising from floor to ceiling, in early 
examples being very simple — as those at Broughton House and 
Lacock Abbey — but at a later date overlaid with rococo strap-work 
ornament and misshapen figures, as at South Wraxall and Castle 
Ashby. One of the most beautiful chimney-pieces is in the ball- 
room at Knole, probably of Flemish design, but at Cobham Hall, 
Hardwick, Hatfield and Bolsover Castle are fine examples in which 
different-coloured marbles are employed, there being a remarkable 
series at the last-named place. 

The long gallery has already been incidentally mentioned. Its 
origin has never been clearly explained; it was generally situated 
in an upper storey, and may have been for exercise, like the eaves 
galleries in Spain. The dimensions were sometimes remarkable ; 
one at Ampthill (no longer existing) was 245 ft. long; and a second 
at Audley End, 220 ft. long and 34 ft. wide. Of moderate length, 
the best known are those of Haddon Hall, with rich wainscotting 
carried up to the ceiling, Hardwick, Knole, Longleat, Blickling Hall 
and Sutton Place, Surrey. 

In early work the staircases were occasionally in stone with 
circular or rectangular newels, but the more general type was that 
known as the open well staircase, with balustrade and newels in 
timber. Of these the more remarkable examples are those at Hat- 
field; Benthall Hall, Shropshire; Sydenham House, Devonshire; 
Charterhouse, London; Ockwells Manor House, Berkshire; 
Blickling, Norfolk; and the Old Star Inn at Lewes, Sussex. 

One of the important features in the old halls was the screen 
separating the hall from the passage, over the latter being a gallery ; 
the front of the screen facing the hall was considered to be its chief 
decoration, and was accordingly enriched with columns of the Classic 
orders, and balustrade or cresting over. The screens of Charter- 
house (London), Trinity College (Cambridge), Wadham College 
(Oxford), and the Middle Temple Hall (London), are remarkable for 
their design and execution. The great hammer-beam roof (1562- 
1572) in the last named is the finest example of the Renaissance in 
existence (see Roofs, Plate I., fig. 25). 

With the exception of chantry or other chapels added to existing 
buildings, there was only one church built in the period we are now 
describing, St John's at Leeds. This church is divided down the 
centre by an arcade of pointed arches, virtually constituting a double 
nave, and the rood-screen is carried through both. The window 
tracery and the arcade show how the master-mason adhered to the 
traditional Gothic style, but the rood-screen, notwithstanding its 
rococo decoration, is a fine Jacobean work, eclipsed only by the 
magnificent example at Croscombe, which, with the pulpit and other 
church accessories, dating from 1616, constitutes the most complete 
example of that period. 

The pure Italian style, as it is sometimes called, was introduced 
into France probably by Serlio, and the result of its first influence 

is shown in the Louvre, begun in 1546. It entered 
Jones. Spain about 20 years later, under the rule of Philip II., 

and Germany about the same time, creating about 
100 years later a reaction in Spain in favour of a less cold and 
formal style, and scarcely taking any root in Germany. In 
England its first appearance does not take place till 1610, when 
Inigo Jones, after his second visit to Rome, designed an immense 
palace, measuring 11 50 ft. by 900 ft., of which the only portion 
built was the Banqueting House in Whitehall (Plate VI., fig. 75); 
a fine design, in which the emphasizing of the central portion by 
columns in place of pilasters is an original treatment not found in 
Italy, but of excellent effect. Unfortunately many subsequent 
designs of Inigo Jones were either not carried out or have 
since been destroyed; but nothing approached this admirable 
work in Whitehall. 

Among his buildings still remaining are St Paul's, Covent Garden 
(1631), a simple and massive structure which requires perhaps an 
Italian sun to make it cheerful ; York Stairs Water-gate (1626) ; the 
front of Wilton House, near Salisbury (1633); the Queen's House, 
Greenwich (1617), a very poor design; Coleshill, Berkshire; Raynham 
Park, Norfolk, with weakly-designed gables and an entrance doorway 
with curved broken pediment, which can scarcely be regarded as 
pure Italian; and Ashburnham House, Westminster (the staircase 
of which is extremely fine), carried out after his death by his pupil 
John Webb, who, at Thorpe Hall, near Peterborough (1656), shows 
that he possessed some of his master's qualities in his employment of 
simple and bold details. 

Sir Christopher Wren, who follows, was by far the greatest 



architect of the Italian school, though curiously enough he had 
never been in Italy. His first work was the library of Pembroke 
College, Cambridge (1663-1664), followed by the wrea. 

Sheldonian theatre at Oxford, in the construction of 
the roof of which, with a span of 68 ft., he showed his great 
scientific knowledge. In 1665 he went to Paris, where he stopped 
six months studying the architectural buildings there and in its 
vicinity, and where he came across Bernini, whose designs for 
destroying the old Louvre (fortunately not carried out) were 
being started. On his return Wren occupied himself with 
designs for the rebuilding of the old St Paul's, but these were 
rendered useless by the great fire of the 22nd of September 1666, 
which opened out his future career. His plan for the reconstruc- 
tion of the city was not followed, owing to the opposition of the 
owners of the sites, but he began plans for the rebuilding of the 
churches and of St Paul's cathedral. In his treatment of the 
former, where he was obliged to limit himself to the old sites, 
often very irregular, and in most cases to the old foundations, 
he adopted, perhaps quite unconsciously, one of the principles 
of ancient Roman architecture, and made the central feature 
the key of his plan, fitting the aisles, vestries, porches, &c, into 
what remained of the site; this central feature varied according 
to its extent and proportions, and sometimes from a desire to 
work out a new problem. The central dome was a favourite 
conception, the finest example of which is that of St Stephen's, 
Walbrook (1676); other domed churches are St Mary-at-Hill, 
St Mildred's, Bread Street, St Mary Abchurch (1681), where the 
dome virtually covers the whole area of the church, and St 
Swithin's, Cannon Street, an octagonal example. In St Anne 
and St Agnes, Aldersgate, the crossing is covered with an inter- 
secting barrel vault; and in this small church, about 52 ft. 
square with four supporting columns, he manages to get nave, 
transept and choir with aisles in the angles. In those churches 
where there was sufficient length, the ordinary arrangement of 
nave and aisle is adopted, with an elliptical barrel vault over 
the nave, sometimes intersected and lighted from clerestory 
windows, the finest example of these being St Bride's, Fleet 
Street; other examples are St Mary-le-Bow (Cheapside), Christ- 
church (Newgate) and St Andrew's (Holborn). In St James's, 
Piccadilly, of which the site was a new one, the plan of nave and 
aisles with galleries over, and a fine internal design with barrel- 
vaulted ceiling, was adopted; the exterior is very simple, 
which suggests that Wren attached much more importance to 
the interior. It should be pointed out that in all these cases, 
the vaults, to which we have referred, were in lath and plaster, 
and consequently covered over with slate roofs, and as a rule 
the exteriors (which are rarely visible) were deemed to be of 
less importance. This is, however, made up for by the position 
selected for the towers, and in their varied design those of St 
Mary-le-Bow, St Bride's (Fleet Street) and St Magnus (London 
Bridge) are perhaps the finest of a most remarkable series. 

The foundation stone of St Paul's cathedral was laid in 1675, and 
the lantern was finished in 17 10. The silhouette of the dome (Plate 
II., fig. 66), which is, of course, its principal feature, is far superior to 
those of St Peter's at Rome, or the Invalides or Pantheon at Paris, 
and the problem of its construction with the central lantern was 
solved much more satisfactorily than in any other example. Wren 
realized that the attempt to render a dome beautiful internally as 
well as externally could only be obtained by having three shells in 
its construction; the inner one for inside effect, the outer one to 
give greater prominence externally, and the third, of conical form, 
to support the lantern. 

In plan, Wren's design (fig. 53) was in accordance with the tradi- 
tional arrangement of an English cathedral, with nave, north and 
south transepts and choir, in all cases with side aisles, and a small 
apse to the choir. The great dome over the crossing is, like the 
octagon at Ely, of the same width as nave and aisles together. It 
resembles the plan of that cathedral also in the four great arches 
opening into nave, transepts and choir, with smaller arches between. 
Instead of the great barrel vault of St Peter's, Rome, Wren intro- 
duced a series of cupolas over the main arms of the cathedral, which 
enabled him to light the same with clerestory windows; these are 
not visible on the exterior, as they are masked by the upper storey 
which Wren carried round the whole structure, in order, probably, 
to give it greater height and importance; by its weight, however, 
it serves to resist the thrust of the vaults transmitted by buttresses 
across the aisles. The grouping of the two lanterns on the west front 



420 



ARCHITECTURE 



[ENGLISH RENAISSANCE 



with the central dome is extremely fine; the west portico is not 
satisfactory, but the semicircular porticoes of the north and south 
transepts are very beautiful features. Greater importance is given 
to the cathedral by raising it on a podium about 12 ft. above the 
level of the pavement outside, which enables the crypt under the 
whole cathedral to be lighted by side windows. 

The principal examples of the churches which followed are those 
of St George's, Bloomsbury; St Mary Woolnoth; Christ Church, 
Spitalfields, by Nicholas Hawksmoor; and St Mary- le- Strand 
( 1 7 1 4) , and St Martin's-in-the-Fields ( 1 72 1 ) , by James Gibbs. Gibbs's 
interiors are second only to those of Wren, while Hawksmoor's are 
very' weak ; in both cases, however, the exteriors are finely designed. 
Amongst subsequent works are St John's, Westminster, and St 
Philips, Birmingham (1710), by Thomas Archer; St George's, 
Hanover Square (1713-1714), by John James; All Saints' church, 
Oxford, by Dean Aldrich; St Giles-in-the-Fields (1731), by Henry 
Flitcroft; and St Leonard's, Shoreditch (1736), by George Dance. 




Scale of Feet 
100 



Fig. 53. — Plan of St Paul's Cathedral, London. 

Sir Christopher Wren's chief monumental work was Greenwich 
hospital, in the arrangement of which he had to include the Queen's 
House, and a block already begun on the west side. His solution 
was of the most brilliant kind, and seen from the river the grouping 
of the several blocks with the colonnade and cupolas of the two 
central ones is admirable. 

Wren's next great work was the alterations and additions to 
Hampton Court palace, begun in 1689, the east front facing the park 
(Plate VI., fig. 77), the south front facing the river, the fountain 
court and the colonnade opposite the great hall. Chelsea hospital 
(1682-1692), the south front (now destroyed) to Christ's hospital 
(1692), and Winchester school (1684-1687), are all examples in 
brick with stone quoins, cornices, door and window dressings, which 
show how Wren managed with simple materials to give a monu- 
mental effect. The library which he built in Trinity College, 
Cambridge (1678), with arcades on two storeys divided by three- 
quarter detached columns of the Doric and Ionic orders, is based 
on the same principle of design as those in the court of the Farnese 



palace at Rome by Sangallo, a part of the palace which is not likely 
to have been known by him. 

The results of the Italian Revival in domestic architecture were 
not altogether satisfactory, for although it is sometimes claimed 
that the style was adapted by its architects to the traditional require- 
ments and customs of the English people, the contrary will be found 
if they are compared with the work of the 16th century. The chief 
aim seems to have been generally to produce a great displa'y of 
Classic features, which, even supposing they followed more closely 
the ancient models, were quite superfluous and generally interfered 
with the lighting of the chief rooms, which were sacrificed to them. 
In fact there are many cases in which one cannot help feeling how 
much better the effect would be if the great porticoes rising through 
two storeys were removed. This is specially the case in Sir John 
Vanbrugh's mansion, Seaton Delaval, in Northumberland (1720); 
his other works, Blenheim (1714) and Castle Howard (1702), are 
vulgarized also by the employment of the large orders. The same 
defect exists in Stoneleigh Abbey, Leamington, where the orders 
carried up through two and three storeys respectively destroy the 
scale of the whole structure. 

Among other mansions, the principal examples are Houghton in 
Norfolk (1723), a fine work, the villa at Mereworth in imitation of 
the Villa Capra near Vicenza, and the front of old Burlington House 
(1718), copied from the Porto palace at Vicenza, by Colin Campbell; 
Holkham in Norfolk and Devonshire House, London, by William 
Kent; Ditchley in Oxfordshire, and Milton House near Peter- 
borough, by Gibbs; Chesterfield House, London, by Isaac Ware; 
Went worth House in Yorkshire (1740), and Woburn Abbey in 
Bedfordshire (1747), by Henry Flitcroft; Spencer House, London 
(1762), by John Vardy; Prior Park and various works in Bath by 
John Wood; the Mansion House, London, by George Dance; 
Wardour in Wiltshire, Kedleston Hall in Derbyshire, and Worksop 
in Nottinghamshire (1763), by James Paine; Gopsall Hall, Ely 
House, Dover Street, London (1772), and Heveringham Hall in 
Suffolk, by Sir Robert Taylor, to whose munificence we owe the 
Taylor Buildings at Oxford; Harewood House in Yorkshire (1760), 
Lytham Hall in Lancashire, and (part of) Wentworth House in 
Yorkshire, by John Carr; and Luton Hoo (1767), now largely 
reconstructed, and Sion House (1761), the best-known mansions 
by Robert Adam, who with his brothers built the Adelphi and many 
houses in London. Adam designed a type of decoration in stucco 
for ceilings and mantelpieces, the dies of which are still in existence 
and are utilized extensively in modern houses. His labours were not 
confined to buildings, but extended to their decoration, furniture and 
fittings. 

The works of Sir William Chambers were of a most varied nature, 
but his fame is chiefly based on Somerset House in the Strand, 
London (1776), with its facade facing the river, a magnificent work 
second only to Inigo Jones's Whitehall, but infinitely more exten- 
sive and difficult to design. He was also the author of a work on 
The Decorative Part of Civil Architecture, which is still the standard 
work on the subject in England. His pupil, James Gandon, won the 
first gold medal given by the Royal Academy in 1769, arid his 
principal work was the Custom House in Dublin (1781). Newgate 
prison (1770), a remarkable building now destroyed, was the chief 
work carried out by George Dance, jun. 

Other buildings not yet mentioned are the Alcove and Banqueting 
Hall (Orangery) of Kensington Palace, by Wren; the Radcliffe 
library, Oxford, by Gibbs, an extremely fine work both externally 
and internally; Queen's College, Oxford, by Hawksmoor; the 
county hall, Northampton, by Sir Roger Norwich; the town hall, 
Abingdon (1677), designer unknown; the Ashmolean museum, 
Oxford (1677), by T. Wood; Clare College, Cambridge, and St 
Catherine's Hall, Cambridge (1640-1679), by Thomas and Robert 
Grumboll, master-masons; the custom house, King's Lynn (1681), 
by Henry Bell; Nottingham Castle, designed by the duke of New- 
castle in 1674 and carried out by March, his clerk of works— the 
central portion is finely proportioned, and it is only in the pilasters 
at the quoins that one recognizes the amateur; two houses in Caven- 
dish Square, London (1717), on the north side, by John James; 
Lord Burlington's villa (1740) at Chiswick, by William Kent, which 
with its internal decorations is still perfect ; the celebrated Palladian 
Bridge at Wilton, by_ R. Morris; and last but not least, in conse- 
quence of its great influence on modern architecture, Sparrowe's 
house at Ipswich (1567-1662), the timber oriel windows of which 
are now so often reproduced. (R. P. S.) 

Renaissance Architecture in Germany 
The classical revival does not seem to have taken root in 
Germany much before the middle of the 16th century, some forty 
to fifty years later than in France, from which country it is said to 
have been introduced, and in some of the early work there is a. 
great similarity to French examples, but without the refinement 
and variety of detail which one finds in the chateaux of the 
Loire and in many of the French towns. In the rood-screen of 
the cathedral at Hildesheim (1546), the court of the town hall 
at Gorlitz (1534), the portal of the Petershof at Halberstadt 



GERMAN RENAISSANCE] 



ARCHITECTURE 



421 



(1552), and the entrance gateway of the castle at Brieg (1553), 
pne is able to recognize certain ornamental details and a similar 
superposition of pilasters in several storeys to that which is 
found in various towns in Normandy and on the Loire. In both 
countries the new style was engrafted on the last phase of the 
Gothic period, so forming at first a transitional style, which 
lasted about fifty years. Thus the lofty roofs which prevailed 
in the 15th century are developed further, but with this great 
divergence in the two countries. In France there are rarely 
gable ends, in Germany they are not only the chief character- 
istic feature of the main front, but are introduced in the side 
elevations in the shape of immense dormers with two or three 
storeys and rising the full height of the roof, as in the castle at 
Hamelschenburg near Hameln. Throughout Germany, therefore, 
the gable end and the dormer gable became the chief features on 
which they lavished all their ornamental designs, the main walls 
of the building being as a rule either in plain masonry, rubble 
masonry with stucco facing, or brick and stone. Other promi- 
nent features are the octagonal and circular oriel windows rising 
through two or three storeys at the corners of their buildings — 
rectangular bow windows in two or three storeys, which were 
allowed apparently to encroach on the pavement, and octagonal 
turrets or towers instead of circular as in France. In the 
vicinity of the Harz mountains, where timber was plentiful, 
a large proportion of the factories, houses and even public 
buildings, are erected in half-timber work with elaborate carving 
of the door and window jambs, projecting corbels, &c. At 
Hildesheim, Wernigerode, Goslar, &c, these structures are 
sometimes of immense size and richly decorated. Among 
early examples in stone, the porch added to the town hall of 
Cologne (1571), the projecting wings of the town halls at Halber- 
stadt and Lemgo (1565), and the town halls at Posen (1550), 
Altenburg (1562-1567) and Rothenburg (1572-1590), are all 
picturesque examples more or less refined in design. In the last- 
named example the purer Italian style has exercised its influence 
in the principal doorway and In the arcaded gallery on the east 
front. This same influence shows itself in the courtyard of the 
town hall at Nuremberg, where the arcades of the two upper 
storeys might be taken for those of the courts of the palaces at 
Rome. 

Amongst other 16th-century work there are two entrance gates 
at Danzig, the Hohe Tor (1588), a fine massive structure, and the 
Langgasse Tor (1600), more or less pure Italian in style. At 
Augsburg, the arsenal (1603-1607), by the architect Elias Holl (1573- 
1646), is of a bold and original design, and the town hall has magnifi- 
cent ceilings and wainscotting round the walls of the principal halls. 
This brings us to the castle of Heidelberg (Plate VII., figs. 78, 
79 and 80), which is looked upon by the Germans as the chef d'ceuvre 
of the Renaissance in Germany. As seen from the great court it 
forms an interesting study, there being the work of three periods: 
in the centre the picturesque group of the older building (c. 1525), 
on the right the Otto-Heinrichs-Bau (1 556-1 559), and on the left 
the Friedrichs-Bau (1602-1607). Of the two the latter is the finer. 
The architect of the Otto-Heinrichs-Bau would seem to have been 
undecided whether to give greater prominence and projection to his 
pilasters and cornices or to his windows with their dressings and 
pediments, so he has compromised the matter by making them 
both about the same, and the effect is most monotonous. In the 
Friedrichs-Bau, which is a remarkable work, the pilasters are of 
great projection, with bold cornices and simple windows well set 
back, while the tracery of the ground-floor windows is a pleasant 
relief from the constant repetition of pilaster window dressings. 
The gables also of the Friedrichs-Bau break the horizontal sky-line 
agreeably. A more minute examination of the decorative details, 
however, betrays the advent of a peculiar rococo style of a most 
debased type, which throughout the 17th century spread through 
Germany, and the repetition of the same details suggests that it was 
copied from some of the pattern books which were published towards 
the end of the 16th century, comprising heterogeneous designs for 
title pages, door heads, frontispieces, and even extending to new 
versions of the orders, which apparently appealed to the German 
mason and saved him the trouble of invention. These books, com- 
piled by de Vries and Dietterlin, emanated from the Low Countries, 
and their influence extended to England during the Elizabethan 
period. At all events in Germany it would seem to have arrested 
the purer Italian work, which we have already noticed, and hence- 
forth in the gable ends one finds the most extraordinary accumula- 
tion of distorted forms which, though sometimes picturesque, 
disfigure the German work of the 17th century. An exception 
might perhaps be made in favour of the Peller'sche Haus in Nurem- 



berg (1625), one of the best houses of modest dimensions in Germany. 
The facade in the Aegidien-Platz is a fine composition ; inside is a 
very picturesque court and staircase, and the painted ceiling and the 
wainscotting of one of the rooms in woods of different colours, 
though not very pure in style, are of excellent design and execution. 

Some of the most characteristic work of this type exists at Hameln, 
where the fagades of the Rattenfangerhaus (1602), the Hochzeitshaus 
(1610), and many other buildings, are covered with the most extra- 
ordinary devices, leaving scarcely a foot of plain masonry as a relief. 
The south front of the town hall of Bremen (1612) is in the same 
style (Plate IV., fig. 70), relieved, however, by the fine large windows 
of the great hall and the arcade in front, in which there is some 
picturesque detail. Later in the century the degradation increases 
until it reaches its climax in the Zwinger palace at Dresden (1711), 
the most terrible rococo work ever conceived, if we except some of 
the Churrigueresque work in Spain. 

Among the most pleasing features in Germany are the fountains 
which abound in every town; of these there are good examples at 
Tubingen, Prague, Hildesheim, Ulm, Nuremberg, already famed 
for its Gothic fountains, Mainz and Rothenburg. In the latter town, 
built on an eminence, they are of great importance for the supply of 
the town, and some of them are extremely picturesque and of good 
design. 

Up to the present we have said nothing about the ecclesiastical 
buildings in Germany, for the reason that the period between the 
Reformation and the conclusion of the Thirty Years' War was not 
favourable to church building. The only example worth mentioning 
is the church of St Michael at Munich (1 583-1597), and that more for 
its plan than for its architecture. It has a wide nave covered with 
a barrel vault, and a series of chapels forming semicircular recesses 
on each side, the walls between acting as buttresses to the great 
vault. The transept is not deep enough to have any architectural 
value, but if at the east end there had been only an apse it would 
have been a better termination than the long choir. The Liebfrauen- 
kirche at Dresden (1726-1745) has a good plan, but internally is 
arranged like a theatre with pit, tiers of boxes, and a gallery, all in 
the worst possible taste, and externally the dome is far too high 
and destroys the scale of the lower part of the church. An elliptical 
dome is never a pleasing object, and in the church of St Charles 
Borromeo, at Vienna, there are no other features to redeem its 
ugliness. The Marienkirche at Wolfenbiittel (1608-1622) has a fine 
Italian portal; its side elevation is spoilt by the series of gable 
dormers, which are of no possible use, as the church (of the Hallen- 
kirchen type) is well lighted through the aisle windows. The portal 
of the Schlosskapelle (1555) at Dresden is a fine work in the Italian 
style; and lastly the church at Biickeburg, in a late debased style, 
is redeemed only by the fact that it is. built in fine masonry and 
that the joints run through all the rococo details. (R. P. S.) 

Renaissance Architecture in Belgium and Holland 

The Gothic development in the 15th century in Belgium, 
as evidenced in her magnificent town halls and other public 
buildings, not only supplied her requirements in the century 
following, but hindered the introduction of the Classic Revival, 
so that it is not till the second half of the 16th century that we 
find in the town hall of Antwerp a building which is perhaps more 
Italian in design than any work in Germany. There are, how- 
ever, a few instances of earlier Renaissance, such as the Salm Inn 
(1534) at Malines; the magnificent chimneypiece, by Conrad 
van Noremberger of Namur, in the council chamber of the 
palais de justice at Bruges (1529); and the palais de justice 
of Liege (1533), formerly the bishop's palace, in the court of 
which are features suggesting a Spanish influence. The influence 
of the cinque-cento style of Italy may be noticed in the tomb 
of the count de Borgnival (1533) in the cathedral of Breda, 
and in the choir stalls of the church at Enkhuisen on the borders 
of the Zuyder Zee, both in Holland, and in the choir stalls of the 
cathedral of Ypres in Belgium; the carving of these bears so 
close a resemblance to cinque-cento work in design and execution 
that one might conclude they were the work of Italian artists, 
but their authors are known to have been Flemish, who must, 
however, have studied in Italy. Again, in the stained-glass 
windows of the church of St Jacques at Liege, the details are all 
cinque-cento, with circular arches on columns, festoons of leaves 
and other ornament, all apparently derived from Italian sources, 
but necessarily executed by Flemish painters, as stained-glass 
windows of that type are not often found in Italian churches. 

Of public buildings in Belgium, the most noted example is that 
of the town hall at Antwerp, designed by Cornelius deVriendt (1564). 
It has a frontage of over 300 ft. facing the Grande Place, and is an 
imposing structure in foui storeys, arcaded on the lower storey and 
the classic orders above, with mullioned windows between on the 



422 



ARCHITECTURE 



[NETHERLANDS RENAISSANCE 



three other storeys, the uppermost storey being an open loggia, 
which gives that depth of shadow obtained in Italy by a projecting 
cornice. It is almost the only building in Belgium without the usual 
gable, the centre block being carried up above the eaves and 
terminated with an entablature supporting at each end a huge 
obelisk, and in the centre what looks like the miniature representa- 
tion of a church. The only other classic building is the Renaissance 
portion of the town hall at Ghent, which is very inferior to the older 
Gothic portion. 

What is wanting in the town halls, however, is amply replaced 
by the magnificence of the houses built for the various gilds, as for 
instance those of the Fishmongers at Malines (1580), of the Brewers, 
the Archers, the Tanners and the Cordeliers (rope-makers) at Ant- 
werp, and, in the Grande Place at Brussels, the gilds of the Butchers, 
the Archers, the Skippers (the gable end of which represents the 
stern of a vessel with four cannons protruding), the Carpenters and 
others. Besides these, and especially in Antwerp, are to be found 
a very large series of warehouses, which in the richness of their 
decoration and their monumental appearance vie with the gilds 
in the evolution of a distinct style of Renaissance architecture — a 
type from which the architect of the present day might derive more 
inspiration than from the modest brick houses of Queen Anne's time. 

In domestic architecture, the best-preserved example of the 16th 
and 17th centuries is the Musee Plantin at Antwerp, the earliest 
portion of which dates from 1535. This was bought by Ch. Plantin, 
who was employed by Philip of Spain to print all the breviaries and 
missals for Spain and the Netherlands; the fortune thus acquired 
enabled him and his successors to purchase from time to time 
adjoining properties which they rebuilt in the style of the earlier 
buildings. After 1637 the buildings followed the style of the period, 
but up to that date they were all erected in brick with stone courses 
and window dressings round a central court. Internally the whole 
of the ancient fittings are retained, including those of the old shop, 
the show-rooms, reception rooms and the residential portion of the 
house, with the wainscotting and Spanish leather on the walls 
above, panelled ceilings, chimney-pieces, stained glass, &c, the most 
complete representation of the domestic style of Belgium. 

Of ecclesiastical architecture in the Renaissance style there are 
scarcely any examples worth noting. The tow^l of the church of St 
Charles Borromeo at Antwerp (1595-1610) is a fine composition 
similar in many respects to Wren's steeples, and the nave of St 
Anne's church at Bruges is of simple design and good proportion. 
The Belgian churches are noted for their immense pulpits, sometimes 
in marble and of a somewhat degraded style. The finest features in 
them are the magnificent rood-screens, in which the tradition of the 
Gothic examples already quoted seems to have been handed down. 
In the cathedral at Tournai is a fine specimen by Cornelius de 
Vriendt of Antwerp (1572), and there is a second at Nieuport, both 
similar in design to the example from Bois-le-Duc now in the Victoria 
and Albert Museum; and in the church of St Leonard at Leau is a 
tabernacle in stone, over 50 ft. high, in seven stages, with numerous 
figures by Cornelius de Vriendt (1550). 

In Holland, nearly all the principal buildings of the Renaissance 
date from the time of her greatest prosperity when the Dutch threw 
off their allegiance to the Spanish throne (1565). With the exception 
of the palace at Amsterdam (1648-1655), an immense structure 
in stone with no architectural pretensions, there are no buildings in 
Holland in which the influence of the purer style of the Italian 
revival can be traced. Internally the great hall of the palace and 
the staircase in the Louis XIV. style are fine examples of that period. 

The earliest Renaissance town hall is that of the Hague (1564), 
situated at the angle of two streets, which is an extremely picturesque 
building, in fact one of the few in which the architect has known 
how to group the principal features of his design. The Renaissance 
addition made to the old town hall of Haarlem is a characteristic 
example of the Dutch style. The walls are in red brick, the decora- 
tive portions, consisting of superimposed pilasters with mullioned 
and transomed windows, cornices and gable end, all being in stone. 
Inside this portion of the town hall, which is now a gallery and 
museum, is an ancient hall (not often shown to visitors) in which all 
the decorations and fittings date from the 17th century. There is a 
second example of an ancient hall in the Stadthuis at Kampen, one 
of the dead cities of the Zuyder Zee, which served originally as a 
court of justice, and retains all its fittings of the 16th century, 
including a magnificent chimneypiece in stone, some 25 ft. high and 
dated 1543. 

The town hall at Bolsward in Friesland is another typical specimen 
of Dutch architecture, in which the red brick, alternating with stone 
courses running through the semi-detached columns which decorate 
the main front, has given variety to the usual treatment of such 
features. The external double flight of steps with elaborate balus- 
trade, and the twisted columns which flank the principal doorway, 
are extremely picturesque, if not quite in accordance with the 
principles of Palladio or Vignola. 

A similar flight of steps with balustrade forms the approach to 
the entrance doorway (on the first floor) of the town hall at Leiden, 
where the rich decoration of the centre block and its lofty gable is 
emphasized by contrast with the plain design of the chief front. 

In the three chief cities in Holland, the Hague, Amsterdam and 
Rotterdam, there are few buildings remaining of 17th-century work, 



so that they must be sought in the south at Dordrecht and Delft, 
or in the north at Leiden, Haarlem, Alkmaar, Hoorn, Enkhuisen, or, 
crossing the Zuyder Zee into Friesland, in Leeuwarden, Bolsward, 
Kampen and Zwolle, the dead cities. In all these towns ancient 
buildings have been preserved, there being no resaon to pull them 
down. Of the entrance gateways at Hoorn there is an example 
left, of which the lower portion might be taken for a Roman 
triumphal arch, so closely does it adhere to the design of those 
monuments, extending even to a long Latin inscription in the frieze. 
The tower (1531-1652), built to protect the entrance to the harbour, 
has no gateway. There are some old buildings in Kampen, in 
one of which the entrance gateway is a simple and fine composition 
in brick and stone, the chief characteristics of the gateways here 
being the enormously high roofs of the circular towers flanking them. 
A finer and more picturesque grouping of roofs exists in the entrance 
gateway (Amsterdam Gate) at Haarlem, which is perhaps, however, 
eclipsed by those of the Waaghuis at Amsterdam with its seven 
conical roofs. 

The Waaghuisen, or weighing-houses for cheeses, are, next to the 
town halls, the most important buildings in Holland, and in fact 
vie with them in richness of design. The example at Alkmaar 
possesses not only an imposing front with gable in three storeys, 
but a lofty tower with belfry. At Deventer the main building is late 
Gothic (1528), in brick and stone, with an external double flight of 
steps and balustrades added in 1643. 

The Fleesch Halle (meat-market) at Haarlem, also in brick and 
etone, is of a very rococo style, but notwithstanding all its vagaries 
presents a most picturesque appearance. 

The domestic architecture of Holland and the shop fronts retain 
more of their original dispositions than will be found in any other 
country. At Hoorn, Enkhuisen and other towns, there has virtually 
been no change during the last 200 years. In the more flourishing 
towns aS Amsterdam and Rotterdam, the increasing prosperity of 
the inhabitants led them in the latter portion of the 17th and in the 
1 8th centuries to adapt features borrowed from the French work 
of Louis XIV. and Louis XV., without, however, their refinement, 
luxuriance or variety, so that although substantial structures they 
are extremely monotonous in general effect. (R. P. S.) 

Mahommedan Architecture 

Before proceeding with " modern architecture," to which 
the styles now discussed have gradually led us, we have still 
another important architectural style to describe, in Mahomme- 
dan architecture. The term " Mahommedan " has been selected 
in preference to " Saracenic," because it includes a much wider 
field, and enables us to bring in many developments which could 
not well come under the latter title. It was the Mahommedan 
religion which prescribed the plan and the features of the mosques, 
and it was the restriction of that faith which led to the principal 
characteristics of the style. The term " Saracenic " could hardly 
be applied to the architecture of Spain, Persia or Turkey. 

The earliest mosques at Mecca and Medina, which have long since 
passed away, were probably of the simplest kind; there were no 
directions on the subject in the Koran, and, as Fergusson remarks, 
had the religion been confined to its native land, it is probable that 
no mosques worthy of the name would have ever been erected. In 
the first half-century of their conquest in Egypt and Syria the 
Mahommedans contented themselves with desecrated churches and 
other buildings, and it was only when they came among the temple- 
building nations that they seemed to have felt the necessity of 
providing some visible monument of their religion. The first require- 
ment was a structure of some kind, which should indicate to the 
faithful the direction of Mecca, towards which, at stated times, 
they were to turn and pray. The earliest mosque, built by Omar 
at Jerusalem, no longer exists, but in the mosque of 'Amr at Cairo 
(fig. 54), founded in 643 and probably restored or added to at various 
times, we find the characteristic features which form the base of the 
plans of all subsequent mosques. These features consist of (a) a 
wall built at right angles to a line drawn towards Mecca, in which, 
sunk in the wall, was a niche indicating the direction towards which 
the faithful should turn; (ft) a covered space for shelter from the 
sun or inclement weather, which was known as the prayer chamber; 
(c) in front of the prayer chamber, a large open court, in which 
there was a fountain for ablution; and (d) a covered approach on 
either side_ of these courts and from the entrance. The materials 
employed in the earlier mosque were all taken from ancient struc- 
tures, Egyptian, Roman and Byeantine, but so arranged as to 
constitute the elements of a new style. The columns employed 
were not always of sufficient size, and therefore in order to obtain 
a greater height, above the capitals were square dies, carrying 
ranges of arches, all running in the direction of Mecca; to resist 
the thrust, wood ties were built in under the arches, so that the 
structure was of the lightest appearance. The same principle was 
observed in the mosque of Kairawan, in Tunisia (675), and in the 
mosque of Cordova (786-985), copied from it. Similar wooden ties 
are found in the mosque of El Aksa and the Dome of the Rock at 



MAHOMMEDAN] 



ARCHITECTURE 



423 



Jerusalem (built 691), so that they became one of the characteristics 
of the style. For constructional reasons, however, this method of 
building was not always adhered to, and in the mosque of Tulun 
(fig- 55 J > n Cairo (879), the first mosque in Egypt, built of original 
materials, we find an important departure. The arcades, instead of 
running at right angles to the Mecca wall, are built parallel with it, 
on account of the great thrust of the arches, all built in brick (fig. 56). 
The wood ties would have been quite insufficient to resist the thrust, 
and in the case of this mosque were probably used to carry lanterns. 
The mosque of Tulun is the earliest example in which the pointed 
arch appears throughout, and it forms the leading and most char- 
acteristic constructional feature of the style in its subsequent 
developments in every country, except in Barbary and Spain, 
where the circular-headed horse-shoe arch seems to be preferred. 
As it is also the earliest mosque in which the decoration applied is 
that which was by inference laid down in the Koran, some allusion 
to the restrictions therein contained, and the consequent result, 
may not be out of place. The representation of nature in any form 
was absolutely forbidden, and this applied generally to foliage of all 
kinds, and plants, the representation of birds or animals, and above 




riil 



1 * • 

* * p 



FlaTT 7? 77 . . 
w ». n *. » * n 

+ ii a i: 1 * |j H a ii ii H 

:'• !: '" ii 1 I :': ii : i ':'■ :: 

».-» * * * I * n t *»'n 

i:Siia.i:ni'c :; ti : ui:ai!ri : vii '■■ '■' 

» .« « ; a <j » )i vyf. « *. 

i| H II 
jLJUL 



*, ji » w * 



i_JL 



: <i » 
'» ii 
* *. 
ii 







!• S 



Open Court 






* 1 



Fig. 54. — Plan of Mosque of 'Amr. Old Cairo. 




1. Kibla. 

2. Mimbar. 

3. Tomb of 'Amr. 

4. Dakka. 



5. Fountain for Ablution. 

6. Rooms built later. 

7. Minaret. 

8. Latrines. 



all of the human figure. The only exceptions to the rule would seem 
to be those found in the very conventional representations of lions 
carved over the gateways of Cairo and Jerusalem and in the courts 
of the Alhambra. It was this restriction which produced the ex- 
tremely beautiful conventional patterns which are carried round the 
arches of the mosque of Tulun, and are found in the friezes, string- 
courses and the capitals of the shafts, and when these patterns 
form the background of the text of the Koran in high relief, in the 
splendid Arabic characters, it would be difficult to find a more 
beautiful decorative scheme in the absence of natural forms. As the 
mosque of Tulun was built by a Coptic architect, and its decoration 
is evidently the result of many years of previous developments, 
it is probably to the Copts that its evolution was due. The second 
type of decoration is that which is given by geometrical forms, 
and either in pavements or wall decorations in marble, or in the 
framing of woodwork in ceilings, or in doorways, the most elaborate 
and beautiful combinations were produced. The third type of 
decoration is one which in a sense is found in the origin of most 
styles, but which, restricted as the Mahommedans were to con- 
ventional representations, received a development of far greater 
importance, and in one of its forms — that known as stalactite 
vaulting — constitutes the one feature in the style which is not found 
in any other, and which, from the western coast of Spain to the east 
of India, at once differentiates it from any other style. 

A complete account, with illustrations of the origin of the stalactite 
will be found in the Journal of the Royal Institute of British A rchitects 
(1898). The earliest example is found in the tomb of Zobeide, the 
favourite wife of Harun al-Rashid, at Bagdad, built at the end of 



the 8th century. This tomb, octagonal in plan, and of modest 
dimensions, was vaulted over by a series of niches in nine stages or 
levels rising one above the other, and brought forward on the inside, 
so that the ninth course completed the covering of the tomb. It 
was built in this way to save centreing, each niche when completed 
being self-supporting. There is a second tomb at Bagdad, of later 
date — the tomb of Ezekiel, — constructed in the same way, except 
that in each stage the niches are built not one over the other but 
astride between the two, and this is the way in which in subsequent 
developments it always appears to have been built. Its application 
to the pendentives of the portals of the mosque at Tabriz and 
Sultaniya was the next development; and when some two centuries 
later it is found in Europe, in the palaces of the Ziza at Palermo, 
dating from about the beginning of the nth century, it has lost its 
brick constructive origin, and, being cut in slabs of stone, has 
become simply a decorative feature. Its earliest example in Egypt 
is in the tomb of ash-Shafi'I at Cairo, built by Saladin about 1240. 
Here and in all subsequent examples throughout Egypt and Syria 
it is always carved in stone. In the Alhambra another material was 
employed, the elaborate vaults being built with a series of small 




From Coste's Architecture Arabe en Caire. 

Fig. 55. — Plan of Mosque of Tulun, Cairo. 

moulds in stucco. In the ceilings of the mosques at Cairo it was 
frequently carved in wood, and consequently lost all trace of its 
origin. 

Two other decorative features, but having a constructive origin, 
are (1) the alternating of courses of stone of different colour, probably 
derived from Byzantine work, where bands ot brick were employed; 
and (2) the elaborate forms given to the voussoirs of the arches of 
the Mecca niche. 

Having now described the principles which ruled the plans of the 
mosques and formed the motifs of their architectural design, it 
remains to take the principal examples in the various countries 
where the style was developed. 

Although the tendency of modern research points to Persia as the 
country in which the first development of the art took place, and we 
have already referred to two tombs at Bagdad, in which the earliest 
examples of a stalactite vault are found, so far as remains are 
concerned nothing can be traced earlier than the work of Ghazan 
Khan (1294), whose mosque at Tabriz, half in ruins, is the earliest 
example. 

It is to Egypt therefore we turn first. There still exist- — and 
sometimes in good preservation — mosques and other buildings in 
Cairo of every period showing the development of the Mahommedan 
style, from the 9th to the 17th century. Owing to the magnificent 
material at their command — for unfortunately more of it was taken 
from the ancient Egyptian monuments than from the quarries — a 
much purer style was evolved than in Persia; and owing to the 
absence of rain those ephemeral structures built in brick and covered 
with stucco, which in other countries would long have passed away, 
retained the crispness of their flowing ornament, which is still as 
sharp and well defined as when executed. We have already referred 



424 



ARCHITECTURE 



[MAHOMMEDAN 



to two of the earlier mosques, those of 'Amr in Old Cairo and of 
Tulun. The next in date, and built also in brick, is the mosque El 
Hakim (c. 1003). The mosque of El Azhar (" the Splendid ") was 
founded about 970, but entirely rebuilt in 1270 and enlarged in 1470. 
It is the university, and its Liwan or prayer chamber is the largest 
in Cairo, there being 380 columns carrying its roof. 

The mosque of al-Zahir (founded 1264) is now occupied as barracks. 
In one of its entrance porches the arches are decorated with the 
well-known zigzag or chevron ornament, and a second porch with 
cushion voussoirs, features found elsewhere only in Sicily, so that the 
mosque was probably built by masons brought from thence. Then 
follows a series of mosques: Kalaun (1287); al-Nasir (1299-1303); 



and 69 ft. wide, a greater span than any Gothic cathedral, and only 
exceeded in dimensions by the great hall of the palace at Ctesiphon 
built by the Sassanian dynasty. The mosque covers a large area, 
and would seem to have been occupied by four religious sects, 
whose rooms, situated on the outer side, are lighted by windows in 
eight or ten storeys, giving the appearance of a factory. Its entrance 
portal, 60 ft. to 70 ft. high, is the finest in Egypt, and is only exceeded 
in dimensions by those of the Persian and Indian mosques. The 
vestibule is covered by a dome with stalactite pendentives, and is 
perhaps the most complete and perfect example in Cairo. Beyond 
the prayer chamber is the tomb of the founder, which is covered by 
a dome. This, according to Poole, was not originally a feature in 




Fig. 56.— Court of the Mosque of Tulun, Cairo. (From Coste.) 



Merdani (1338); all based on the same plan as those described 
with a large courtyard surrounded by porticoes. The mosque of 
al-Nasir has a portal with clustered piers and pointed and moulded 
orders. This is said to have been brought over as a trophy from 
Acre, but it is more probable that Syrian masons were imported to 
carry on the style introduced by the Crusaders. 

The mosque of Sultan Hasan (1357-1360) marks an important 
change in the scheme of its plan, which served afterwards as a 




Fig. 57.— Plan of the Mosque of the Sultan Hasan. 

future model (fig. 57). _ It consists of a central court, 117 ft. by 105 ft. 
open to the sky, and instead of the covered porticoes on each side 
there are immense recesses covered over with pointed vaults. The 
prayer chamber is 90 ft. deep, 90 ft. high to the apex of the vault 



Saracenic mosques. A dome, he says, has nothing to do with prayer 
and therefore nothing with a mosque. It is simply the roof of a 
tomb, and only exists when there is at least a tomb to be covered. 
The greater number of the mosques in and outside Cairo are 
mausoleums, which accounts for the large number of domes found 
there. 

Of the tombs of the caliphs, outside Cairo, the most important is 
the tomb of ash-Shafi'i, reputed to have been built by Saladin but 
now quite changed by restoration. The tomb of Barkuk, in which 
the courtyard plan of Sultan Hasan is retained, has porticoes round 
it, which are of much more solid construction than those in earlier 
examples, and carry small domes. The two great domes on the east 
side and the minarets on the west are among the finest in Cairo. 
The tomb-mosque of Kait Bey (c. 1 470), though comparatively 
small, is the finest in design and most elegant of its type in Egypt. 
Here the central court is covered by a cupola lantern (fig. 58), and 
the ceiling over the prayer chamber and other recesses is framed 
in timber and elaborately painted and gilded. The tomb is at the 
south-east corner, and is covered with a dome in stone, beautifully 
carved with conventional designs. In some of the mosques by the 
side of the portal is a fountain enclosed with bronze grilles, and above 
it a small room sometimes used as a school with open arcades on 
two sides. This feature in the mosque of Kait Bey, with the portal 
on its right, the lofty minaret beyond, and the great dome at the 
farther end, makes it the most picturesque in aspect of any Cairene 
mosque. (For plan see Mosque, fig. 3.) 

It was in Egypt that the minaret received its highest development. 
The earliest example is that of the mosque of Tulun, which is of 
unusual shape, and has winding round it an inclined plane or staircase 
of easy ascent which can be made on horseback. The original design 
of this scheme was probably derived from the mosque of Samara, a 
town 60 m. north of Bagdad, where the minaret built c. 850 has a 
spiral ascent round it, recalling that of the Assyrian ziggurat as at 
Khorsabad. The general design of the Cairo minarets would seem 
to have been universally adhered to from the 12th century onwards, 
but the upper storeys are all varied in detail, there being virtually no 
two alike. As a rule the lower portion of the minaret forms part of 
the main wall of the mosque, and was carried up square a few feel 



ARCHITECTURE 



Plate VII. 





Photo, L. L. Paris. 

.Fig. 78.— HEIDELBERG CASTLE, FRIEDRICHSBAU. 



Photo, L.L.Paris. ' 

Fig. 79.-HEIDELBERG CASTLE, OTTO-HEINRICHSBAU. 




Photo L. L. Paris. 



Fig. 80— HEIDELBERG CASTLE, OTTO-HEINRICHSBAU. 



Plate VIII. 



ARCHITECTURE 




Photo, Neurdein. 

Fig. 83.— THE LOUVRE— PA VILLON HENRI II. 
{Portion of Lescot's work on left.) 



Photo, Neurdein. 

Fig. 84.— GRAND STAIRWAY, CHATEAU OF BLOIS. 



MAHOMMEDAN] 



ARCHITECTURE 



4^5 



above the cresting. It then became octagonal on plan, the sides 
decorated with niches or geometrical ornaments in bold relief. 
This, the first independent storey, was crowned by a stalactite 
cornice carrying the balcony (fig. 59), from which the muezzin (call- 
to-prayer) was chanted. In the early and fine examples the balus- 
trade round it consisted of vertical posts with panels between, 
pierced with geometric ornaments, and all in stone. The second 
storey, also octagonal, was set back sufficiently to allow a passage 
round, and this was crowned by a similar stalactite cornice and 
balustrade. A third storey, sometimes circular on plan, completed 
the tower, which was crowned with a bulbous terminal. In one of 
the mosques, that of El Azhar, the first storey is square on plan, 
and the second storey has twin towers with lofty bulbous finials. 
The elaboration of the carved ornament on the various storeys of 
the minarets is of considerable beauty. Among the most remarkable, 
other than those already referred to, are the minarets of the mosque 
of al-Bordeni, of Kalaun, al-Nazir, Mu'ayyad (built on the semi- 
circular bastion wall of the Zuwela Gate), Sultan Barkuk (1348), 
and numerous other mosques or tombs outside Cairo. 

The earlier domes were quite plain, hemispherical, with buttresses 




Fig. 58. — Interior of Kait Bey Mosque. (From Coste.) 



round the base, similar to those of St Sophia at Constantinople. 
In the later domes it was found that by raising the upper portion 
so as to take the form in section of a pointed arch, they could be 
built in horizontal courses of masonry up to about two-thirds of 
their height, the upper portion forming a lid without any thrust. 
It is probably owing to this method of construction that they still 
exist in such large numbers. The outer surfaces are decorated in 
various ways with geometrical designs, star patterns, chevrons, 
diapers, &c. Domes built in brick were covered with stucco and 
divided up into godroons. 

We have already referred to the lofty portal of the mosque of 
Sultan Hasan ; portals of smaller dimensions form the principal 
entrance to all the mosques and private houses. The recessed portion 
rises to twice or three times the height of the door, and its pointed 
or cusped head is always filled by a rich stalactite vault. 

The descriptions of the disposition of plan, and the principles 
which have governed the plans of the Cairene mosques, apply 
equally to those in Syria, so that it now only remains necessary to 
quote the chief examples. Of these the earliest is the Dome of the 
Rock, incorrectly called the mosque of Omar, which was built by 
Abdalmalik in 691, partly with materials taken from the buildings 
destroyed by Chosroes. At first it consisted of a central area en- 
closing the sacred rock, covered with a dome and with aisles round 
carried on columns and piers, and like the smaller Dome of the Chain 
open all round, but the climate of Syria is very different from that 



in Egypt, and consequently at a later period (813-833) the sultan 
Mamun built the walls which now enclose the whole structure. 
Many restorations have taken place since, and the dome with its 
rich internal decoration is attributed to Saladin (1189). The 
magnificent Persian tiles which encase the walls, the marble casing 
of some of the piers, and the stained glass, form part of the works of 
Suleiman (1520-1560). 

The great mosque of Damascus occupied the site of an ancient 
church dedicated to St John the Baptist, which for a time was 
divided between the Christians and the Mahommedans. But in 705 
the caliph al-Walid took possession of the whole church, which he 
rebuilt, retaining, however, the whole of the south wall, portions of 
which belonged to a Roman temple. This, which by chance happened 
to face south, became the Mecca wall, the niche being sunk in one of 
the doorways of the original temple. Its plan, therefore, is a variation 
of those we have already described. It consists of a transept with 
dome over the centre, three aisles of equal width, running both east 
and west, and a great court on the north side surrounded by arcades. 
The great transept is virtually the prayer chamber. The new build- 
ing was erected by Byzantine masons sent from Constantinople, 
and decorated with marbles and mosaic by Greek artists. The 
mosque was almost entirely destroyed by fire in 1893, but has since 
been rebuilt. 

The mosque of Et Aksa in the sacred enclosure in Jerusalem, and 
south of the Dome of the Rock, was commenced by Abdalmalik 




Fig. 59. — Exterior of Kait Bey Mosque, Cairo. (From Coste.) 

(691), who used up materials taken from the church of St Mary, 
built by Justinian on Mount Sion, which had been destroyed by 
Chosroes. There have been so many restorations and rebuildings 
since, owing to destructive earthquakes and other causes, that it is 
difficult to give the precise dates of the various portions. The 
columns of the nave and aisles are extremely stunted in proportion, 
and their capitals are of a very debased type, copied by inferior 
artists from Byzantine models. They carry immense wood beams 
cased, and above them a range of pointed arches, among the earliest 
examples used throughout a mosque, and probably dating from the 
rebuilding (774-785). The Crusaders made various additions in 
the rear, but the great entrance porch is said to have been added 
by Saladin, after 1187, and was built probably by Christian masons 
who were allowed to remain in the country. 

The numerous minarets at Jerusalem and Damascus in general 
design follow those of Egypt, but instead of the incised work are 
generally encased with marble in geometric patterns. 

The great mosque at Mecca, from which it was thought at one time 
the plan of the Egyptian and other mosques was taken, is necessarily 
different from all others, because the Ka'ba or Holy Stone, towards 
which all the niches in all other mosques turn, stood in its centre. 
The arcades which surround the court were nearly all rebuilt in the 
i'7th century, as the whole mosque was washed away by a torrent 
in 1626. 

The mosque of Kairawan in Tunisia was built in 675. It occupies 
an area of 427 ft. deep and 225 ft. wide, with a prayer chamber at the 
Mecca end of 17 aisles and II bays deep, more than twice, therefore, 
that of 'Amr in Old Cairo. The columns to the prayer chamber, 



426 



ARCHITECTURE 



[MAHOMMEDAN 



all taken from ancient buildings, are 22 ft. high in the central aisle 
and 15 ft. in all the others. They carry horse-shoe arches, which, 
as in the mosque of 'Amr, are all tied together by wood beams inserted 
at the springing of the arches. 

The mosque of Cordova was built by Abdarrahman (Abd-ar- 
Rahman) in 786-789 in imitation of the mosque of Kairawan. 
There were eleven aisles of twenty-one bays, the centre one slightly 
wider than the other. The materials»were taken from earlier build- 
ings, and, as the columns and caps were not considered high enough, 
above the horse-shoe arches are built a second row of arches which 
carry the barrel vaults. To this mosque Hakim added twelve more 
bays in depth at the Mecca end (962) , and in 985 Mansur added eigh t 
more aisles of thirty-three bays on the east side. Part of the open 
court on the north side dates from Abdarrahman's foundation (690) 
and part from Mansur. 

In the mosque of Cordova we find the earliest example of the 
cusped arch, in the additions made by Hakim in 961 ; in order to 
obtain a greater height above the columns, it became necessary to 
employ the expedient of raising arch above arch in order to obtain 
the height they required for the ceilings ; and as these arches formed 
purely decorative features, which might otherwise have become 
monotonous, variety was given by introducing the cusped form of 

arch and interlacing them one 
within the other. It is probably 
this elaborate design which sug- 
gested the plaster decorations of 
the screens above the arches in 
the court of the Alhambra. 
Though commenced in 1245, the 
existing palace of the Alhambra 
was built in the first half of the 
14th century, at a time when the 
style was fully developed. There 
are two great courts at right 
angles to one another, the most 
important of which was the Court 
of the Lions, so called from the 
fountain in the centre, with 
twelve conventional representa- 
tions of that animal carrying the 
basins. This court is surrounded 
by an arcade with stilted arches 
carried on slender marble columns 
with extremely rich decoration 
above, partly in stucco painted 
and gilt. The hall of the Aben- 
cerrages (35 ft. square) has a 
polygonal dome covered with 
arabesque (fig. 60). Two other 
halls are roofed with lofty stalac- 
tite vaults of great intricacy, 
richly gilded and of remarkable 
effect (fig. 61), but the employ- 
ment of stucco instead of stone, 
as in Egypt, has led to an abuse in 
the wealth of enrichment, which 
is only partly redeemed by the 
plain masonry of the towers and 
walls enclosing the palace. The 
Giralda at Seville is the only 
example of a tower, but it does 
not seem to have served the 
purpose of a minaret. 

With the exception of the 
tombs of Zobeide and Ezekiel 
near Bagdad, and a hospital at 
Erzerum of the 12th century, 
built by the Seljukian dynasty, 
the Mahommedan style in Persia dates from the 13th century, 
i.e. if Ghazan Khan built the mosque at Tabriz in 1294. 
The plan is that of a Byzantine church with a central dome, 
aisles and sanctuary. The portal consists of a lofty niche vaulted 
with semi-domes and stalactite pendentives, similar in many respects 
to the well-known example of Sultan Hasan in Cairo, built sixty 
years later. It is built in brick and covered internally and externally 
with glazed bricks of various colours, wrought into most intricate 
patterns with interlacing ornament and with Cufic inscriptions. 
The dazzling and perfect beauty in point of colour is not to be 
surpassed, but from the architectural point of view it possesses the 
fatal sin of not showing its construction. The bricks and tiles 
are only a veneer, and though in certain features (such as the 
portal and the dome) the construction is at least suggested, the 
tendency is to trust to decoration alone to produce architectural 
effects. (But see Tabriz.) 

The great mosque at Isfahan (1585) is a good illustration of the 
danger attending a too free use of surface decoration. Strip the 
walls of their tiles, and nothing is left except square box-like forms 
with pointed arched openings of different form. The interior, how- 
ever, owing to the variety of its features, and the varied play of light 
and shade given in the hemispherical vaults of its transepts and 




Fig. 60. — Capital and Spring- 
ing of Arch, from the Hall of 
Abencerrages, Alhambra. 



niches and the vaulted aisles, constitutes one of the most beautiful 
monuments of Mahommedan art. 

Apart from the great development of Mahommedan architecture 
in India (see Indian Architecture), there remains now to be 
described only one other phase of the style, that found in 
Constantinople. 

Prior to the conquest of Constantinople in 1445, two mosques 
were built by the Turks at Brusa in Asia Minor. The plan of Ulu 
Jami, the great mosque, follows the original courtyard type. Yeshil 
.Tami, the Green mosque (1430), built on the site of a Byzantine 
church, is cruciform on plan. In both of them the Persian influence 
is shown, in the magnificent towers with which they are covered, the 
marble casing and the stalactite vaults. 

After the conquest of Constantinople, the supreme beauty of St 
Sophia, and the adaptability of its plan to the requirements of the 
Mahommedan faith, caused it to be accepted as the model on which 
all the new mosques were based. The first two erected were the 
Bayezid (1497-1515) and the Selim mosques (1520-1526). In the 
former the dome and its pendentives are carried on octagonal piers, 
and the dome, 108 ft. in diameter, is greater than in any subsequent 
example. The finest mosque, and the example in which we find the 
complete development of the Turkish style, is that erected by 




Fig. 61. — Pendentive, from the Court of the Lions, Alhambra. 

Suleiman the Magnificent in 1550-1555. This mosque, designed by 
Sinan, an Armenian architect, is still quite perfect. The plan follows 
very closely its model, St Sophia, and consists of a central dome, 
86 ft. in diameter and 156 ft. high, carried on pendentives, resting 
on great arches which are slightly pointed, with great apses on the 
east and west sides, and three smaller apses in each, the arches of 
which are all circular. The principal change in design is that found 
in the north and south walls, under the arches carrying the dome; 
in St Sophia they were subdivided into two storeys with galleries 
overlooking the church, but in the Suleimanic mosque the galleries 
are set back in the outer aisles, and the screen walls consist of a wide 
central and two side pointed arches, and voussoirs alternately of 
black and white marble. The tympana above this is pierced with 
eighteen windows filled with geometric tracery. Stalactite work is 
employed in the pendentive of the smaller apses and in the capitals 
of the columns carrying the pointed arches. The columns are of 
porphyry, the shafts, 28 ft. high, being taken from the Hippodrome 
and probably brought originally from Egypt. The walls are cased 
with marble up to the springing of the dome, but the magnificent 
mosaics of St Sophia are here replaced by vulgar colouring and 
plaster decoration of a rococo style, due probably to recent restora- 
tions. ■ The mosque is preceded by a forecourt, surrounded by an 
arcade on all sides and containing a fountain, and in the garden in 
the rear is the tomb of the founder and his wife. 

The Shah-Zadeh mosque, known as the prince's mosque, was also 
built by Sultan Suleiman, from the designs of Sinan, the same 



MODERN] 



ARCHITECTURE 



427 



Armenian architect who built ttie Suleimanic mosque. Here, 
instead of confining the great apses to the east and west sides, they 
are introduced on the north and south sides in place of the screen, 
and produce a monotonous and poor effect. The same design is 
found in the Ahmedin mosque, built 1608, and with the same result. 
Externally, however, they are both fine, owing to the variety of 
domes, semi-domes and other curved forms of roof. 

The minarets of the Turkish mosques are very inferior to those of 
Cairo. They are of great height, generally semicircular, with 
narrow balconies round the upper part, and crowned with ex- 
tinguisher roofs. To a certain extent, however, they contrast very 
well with the domes and semi-domes of St Sophia and those of the 
mosques built by the Turks. 

In the mosque of Osman, built 1748-1757, we find the first trace 
of Western influence in its rococo design, but here, as in the mosque 
of Mehemet Ali in Cairo, built in 1837, the scheme is so good that, 
notwithstanding the great falling off in design, and, in the latter 
mosque, the construction, the effect of the interior is very fine. 

Amongst other architectural features, the fountains in the court- 
yards of the mosques and those which decorate the public squares 
are extremely pleasing in design. The latter are square on plan 
with polygonal angles, elaborate niches with stalactite heads, with 
overhanging eaves on each side; the ornament is very varied and 
the colour sometimes very attractive. The roofs have sometimes 
most picturesque outlines. (R. P. S.) 

Modern Architecture 
The beginning of the 19th century may be considered to mark 
the beginning of the modern era in architecture. The 19th 
century is the period par excellence of architectural " revivals." 
The great Renaissance movement in Italy already described was 
something more than a mere revival. It was a new spirit 



rather Roman than Greek); the impetus to it was probably _ 
given by the "Elgin marbles"; Stuart and Revett's great 
work on the Antiquities of Athens had been issued a good while 
previously, the three first volumes being dated respectively 
1762, 1787 and 1794; but the appearance of the fourth volume 
in 1816 was no doubt influenced by the transportation to London 
of the Elgin marbles, and the sensation created by them. One 
of the first architectural results was the erection, at an immense 
cost in comparison with its size, of the church of St Pancras 
in London (1819-1822), designed by Inwood, who published a 
fine and still valuable monograph on the Erechtheum, and 
showed his enthusiasm for Greek architecture by copying the 
Erechtheum order and doorways for his facade, and erecting 
over it a tower composed of the Temple of the Winds with an 
octagonal imitation of the monument of Lysicrates imposed 
above it. This use of Greek monuments was architecturally 
absurd, though at the time it was no doubt the offspring of a 
genuine enthusiasm. 

A better use was made of the study of Greek architecture 
by William Wilkins (1778-1839), who was in his way a great 
architect, and whose University College (1827-1828), as de- 
signed by him, was a noble and dignified building, of which he 
only carried out the central block with the cupola and portico. 
The wings were somewhat altered from his design but not 
materially spoiled, but the university authorities permitted the 
vandalism of erecting a low building as a partial return of the 
quadrangle on the fourth side, for the purposes of a mechanical 




Bank of Ireland, Dublin. 



affecting the whole of art and literature and life, not an archi- 
tectural movement only; and as far as architecture is concerned 
it was not a mere imitative revival. The great Italian architects 
of the Renaissance, as well as Wren, Vanbrugh and Hawksmoor 
in England, however they drew their inspiration from antique 
models, were for the most part original architects; they put the 
ancient materials to new uses of their own. The tendency of 
the 19th-century revivals, on the other hand, except in France, 
was distinctly imitative in a sense in which the architecture of 
the great Renaissance period was not. Correctness of imitation, 
in the English Gothic revival especially, was an avowed object; 
and conformity to precedent became, in fact, except with one or 
two individual architects, almost the admitted test of excellence. 
The earliest classical London building of note in the 19th 
century is Soane'e Bank of England, which as a matter of date 
Classical belongs in fact to the end of the 18th century; but its 
revival la architect lived well into the 19th century, and the bank 
British ma y b e classed with this section of the subject. Soane 
ttct ^ tm had to make something architectural out of the walls 
of a very extended building of only one storey, in which 
external windows were not admissible; and he did so by applying 
a classical columnar order to the walls and introducing sham 
window architraves. The latter are indefensible, and weaken the 
expression of the building; the columnar order was the received 
method at the time of making a building (as was supposed) 
" architectural," and the building has grace and dignity, and could 
hardly be taken for anything except a bank, although a more 
robust and massive treatment would have been more expressive 
of the function of the building, as a kind of fortress for the storage 
of money. It was only some years later that the Greek revival 
took some hold of English architects (the Bank of England is 



laboratory, which ruined the appearance of the building. 1 
Wilkins's other well-known work is the National Gallery (1832- 
1 838) , which he was not allowed to carry out exactly as he wished, 
and in which the cupola and the "pepperpots" are exceedingly 
poor and weak. But his details, especially the profiles of his 
mouldings, are admirably refined, and show the influence of a 
close study of Greek work. Among other prominent English archi- 
tects of the classic revival in England are Sir Robert Smirke and 
Decimus Burton (1800-1881). To Burton we owe the Constitu- 
tion Hill arch and the Hyde Park screen. The latter is a very 
graceful erection of its kind; the arch has never been completed 
by the quadriga group which the architect intended as its crown- 
ing feature, though for many years it was allowed to be disfigured 
by the colossal equestrian statue of Wellington, completely out 
of scale and crushing the structure. Smirke is kept in memory 
by his fine facade of the British Museum, which has been much 
criticized for its "useless" colonnades and the wasted space 
under them. The criticism is hardly just; for classic colonnades 
have at least some affinity with the purposes of a museum of 
antique art, and it conveys the impression of being a frontis- 
piece to a building containing something of permanent value and 
importance. The early classic revival set its mark also, in a 
very fine and unmistakable manner, on the capital of the sister 
island. Dublin is almost a museum of fine classic buildings of 
the period, among which the most remarkable is the present 
Bank of Ireland (fig. 85), originally begun as the Parliament 
House. _ The beginning of the building belongs to the 18th 
1 Wilkins made two designs for the whole building; one leaving 
the quadrangle entirely open on the fourth side, towards the street: 
the other showing a low open colonnaded screen connecting the ends 
of the two wings. He never for a moment contemplated closing in 
the quadrangle by buildings on the fourth side. 



428 



ARCHITECTURE 



[MODERN 



century, but it was not completed in its present form till 1805, 
and was the work of five successive architects, only one of them, 
James Gandon (1743-1823), a man of the first importance; but 
it was Gandon who in 1790 did most to give the building its 
effective outline on plan, by introducing one of the curved 
quadrant walls, the building being subsequently finished in 
accordance with this suggestion. It is a remarkable combination 
of symmetry and picturesqueness, and as a one-storey classic 
building is far superior to Soane's Bank of England, with which 
a comparison is naturally suggested. Gandon's custom house, 
with its fine central cupola, is another notable example. Edin- 
burgh too can show examples of the classic revival, and bears 
the title of " modern Athens " as much from her architectural 
experiments as from her intellectual claims; she illustrates 
the application of Greek architecture to modern buildings in 
two really fine examples, the Royal Institution by W. H. Playfair 
(1789-1857), and the high school by Thomas Hamilton (1784- 
1858). It was a pity that she added to these the collection of 
curiosities on the Calton Hill. 




Fig. 86. — Liverpool Branch of the Bank of England. (Cockerell.) 

But before we quit the classic revival in England, there are 
two architects to be named who came a little later in the day, 
living in fact into the time of the Gothic revival, who were superior 
to any of the earlier classic practitioners : Harvey Lonsdale Elmes 
and C. R. Cockerell. Elmes, who died very young, seems to 
have been as completely a born architectural genius as Wren, 
and his great work, St. George's Hall at Liverpool, has done 
more than any other building in the world to glorify the memory 
of the classic revival. Granting all that may be said as to the 
unsuitability of Greek architecture to the English climate, one 
can hardly complain of any movement in architecture which 
gave the opportunity for the production of so grand an architec- 
tural monument. It is true that it is badly planned and lighted, 
and the exterior and interior do not agree with each other 
(the exterior is Greek, and the great hall is Roman); but if 
from our present point of view it is a mistake, it is certainly one 
of the finest mistakes ever made in architecture. Cockerell, who 
completed the interior of the building after Elmes's death, was 
an architect permeated with the principles and feeling of Greek 
architecture, who brought to his work a refinement of taste and 
perception in regard to detail which has rarely been equalled 
and never surpassed. Perhaps the very best example of his 
scholarly taste in the application of classic architecture to 
modern uses is to be found in his facade to the branch Bank of 
England at Liverpool (fig. 86). 




From a photo by W. A. Mansell & Co. 

Fig. 87.— Royal Theatre, Berlin. (Schinkel.) 

In Germany, and especially at Berlin and Munich, the Greek 
revival took hold of architecture in the early part of the century 
in a more decisive but also in a more academical 
spirit than in England. The movement is connected re fJ^j*i_ 
more especially with the name of one eminent architect, Germany. 
Karl Friedrich Schinkel, who must have been a man 
of genius to have so impressed his taste on his generation as he 
did in Berlin, where he was regarded as the great and central 




From a photograph by W. A. Mansell & Co. 

Fig. 88. — Nikolai Kirche, Potsdam. 



(Schinkel.) 



power in the architecture of his day; yet his buildings are 
marked by learning and academical correctness rather than 
original genius. Elmes's St George's Hall, already referred to 
as one great English work of the classic revival, is by no means 
a mere piece of academical architecture; it exhibits in some 
of its details a great deal of originality, and in its general design 
a remarkably fine feeling for architectural grouping. In par- 
ticular, the solid masses and the heavy square columns at the 



MODERN] 



ARCHITECTURE 



Plate IX. 



, 



_, ^__, . ,,. * — '. r v," -^— ^™ 



. i §'» i ! 



rnfnf»;w. 






^--mraoi 



.-.- ' ■-■ ' • 



'■ft»Jl s J*MMilJjllL***::- 



Photo, Beer. 



Fig. 115.— PARLIAMENT BUILDINGS, BUDAPEST. (STEINDL.) 



i3 

'3 




Fig. 116— PARLIAMENT BUILDINGS, VIENNA. (HANSEN.) 




PHcto, Linde. 
II. 4*8. 



Fig. 117— PARLIAMENT BUILDINGS, BERLIN. (WALLOT.) 



Plate X. 



ARCHITECTURE 



[MODERN 




Photo, F.G.O 



Fig. ii8.— HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT, LONDON. (BARRY.) 




Photo, Emery Walker. 



Fig. 119— SCOTLAND YARD, LONDON. (SHAW.) 



MODERN) 



ARCHITECTURE 



429 



ends of his building, which seem like Greek architecture treated 
with Egyptian feeling, give support to, while they form a most 
effective contrast with, the richer and more delicate Corinthian 
order of the central portion. The only work of Schinkel's which 
shows something of the same feeling for contrast in architectural 
composition is one of his smaller buildings, the Konigswache or 
Royal Guard-house, in which a Doric colonnaded portico is 
effectively flanked and supported by two great masses of plain 
wall. But in general Schinkel does not seem to have known 
what to do with the angles of his buildings, or to have realized 
the value of mass as a support to his colonnades. This is 
strikingly exemplified in his museum at Berlin, where the tall 
narrow piers at the angles have a very weak effect, and are quite 
inadequate as a support to the long open colonnade. His 
Royal theatre also (fig. 87), though the central portico is fine, 
is monotonous and weak in its two-storeyed repetition of the 
small order in the wings, and it has also the fault (which it shares, 
no doubt, with a great many theatres, large and small) that its 
exterior design 
gives no hintof the 
theatre form ; it 
might just as well 
be a museum. His 
Nikolai Kirche 

(183 0-18 3 7) at 
Potsdam (fig. 88), 
which has con- 
siderable celeb- 
rity, though not 
so merelyacadem- 
ical in character, 
and in fact pos- 
sessed of a certain 
originality, has a 
fault of another 
kind, in its entire 
lack of architec- 
tural unity; the 
dome does not 
seem to belong to 
or to have any 

Connexion With From *■ Photograph by Ferd. Finsterlin. 

the substructure, FlG - 89.— Propylaea at 

while the portico is quite out of scale with the great block of 
building in its rear, and looks like a subsequent addition. The 
fault of the Schinkel school of architecture is an almost total 
want of what may be called architectural life; it is an artificial 
production of the studio. The same kind of cold classicism pre- 
vailed at Munich, where Leo von Klenze (1784-1864), though a 
lesser man than Schinkel, played somewhat the same part as the 
latter played at Berlin. His Propylaea (fig. 89), in which Greek 
and Egyptian influences are combined, is a characteristic example 
of his cold and scholastic style. His well-known Ruhmeshalle, 
with its boldly projecting colonnaded wings and the colossal statue 
of Bavaria in front of it, is in its way a fine architectural con- 
ception — perhaps finer and more consistent in its kind than any 
one work of Schinkel, though he evidently did not exercise so 
wide an influence on the German art of his day. A third eminent 
name in the German classic revival is that of Gottfried Semper 
(1803-1879), somewhat later in date (Schinkel was born in 1781), 
but more or less of the same school. Semper practised successively 
at Dresden and at Zurich, but finally settled in Vienna, where, 
however, he did not live to see the execution of his two most 
important designs, the museum and the Hofburg theatre, which 
were carried out by Baron Karl von Hasenauer (1833-1894) 
from his designs, or approximately so. Semper's theatre at 
Dresden, however, shows that he could recognize the practical 
basis of architecture, as the expression of plan, in a way that 
Schinkel could not; for in that building he frankly adopted the 
curve of the auditorium as the motif for his exterior design, 
thus producing a building which is obviously a theatre, and 
could not be taken for anything else, and putting some of 



that life into it which is so much wanting in Schinkel's rigid 
classicalities. 

In spite of the Romanizing influence of the First Empire, 
the classic revival did not leave by any means so academical 
a stamp on French as on German architecture of the 
early period of the century. French architects in the 



French 
classicism. 



main have always had too much original genius to 
be entirely taken captive by a general movement of this kind. 
There is the weak classicism of Bernard Poyet's facade to the 
chamber of deputies, a very poor affair; and there are two 
important buildings in the guise of Roman peripteral temples, 
devoted respectively to business and to religion — the Bourse, 
by Alexandre Theodore Brongniart (1739-1813), and the Made- 
leine, begun under Napoleon, as a " Temple de la Gloire," 
by Pierre Vignon (1763-1828), and completed as a church in 
1841 by Jean Jacques Huve (1783-1852). Both of these are 
very well carried out externally, and enable us to judge of what 
would be the effect of a Roman temple of the kind. It must 

be admitted that 
the plain oblong 
mass of theBourse 
has really been 
very much im- 
proved by the 
recent addition of 
the two wings, 
carried out by 
Cavel, though 
there was a great 
deal of opposition 
at first to medd- 
ling with so cele- 
brated a building. 
U n f o r t u nately, 
the exterior of the 
Bourse is a mere 
piece of architec- 
tural scenery, 
quite unconnected 
with the internal 
object and ar- 
rangement of the 
Munich. (Von Klenze.) building. The 

Madeleine is a really fine exterior in its way; if a modern church 
was to put on the guise of a pagan temple, the task could hardly 
have been better carried out; and the interior might have been 
as fine if properly treated, but it has little artistic relation with 
the noble exterior, and is spoiled by poor architectural treatment 
and bad ornament. The church of St Vincent de Paul, by Jacques 
Ignace Hittorff (179 2-1 867), an architect who was one of the most 
learned students of Greek architecture of his day, is another im- 
portant example of the French classical church of the period 
(Plate XII., fig. 125). In this the interior is more consistent 
with the exterior than is the case in the Madeleine; and by adding 
a tower at each angle of the facade, above the colonnaded portico, 
the architect gave it more the expression of a church, which the 
Madeleine wants. In the Arc de l'Etoile, by Jean Francois T, 
Chalgrin (1739-1811), we have a really great, even sublime work, 
which, though suggested by the Roman triumphal arches, is no 
mere copy, but bears the impress of the French genius in its 
details as well as in Francois Rude's grand sculptures on the 
east face, while its great scale places it above everything else of 
the kind in the world. It is only after ascending the interior 
and seeing the vaults carrying the roof that one fully realizes 
what a stupendous piece of work this is. Under Napoleon there 
was at least no jerry-building. 1 

1 A remarkable instance of this is shown by the railway viaduct 
at Passy, a large and monumental piece of work in itself, which is 
built along the centre of the roadway of Napoleon's bridge. It was- 
at first proposed to have a steel railway viaduct parallel with the 
old bridge, but it was found that the latter, both in respect of solidity 
and spacious dimensions, would fully bear the erection of the railway 
viaduct along its centre. 




43o 



ARCHITECTURE 



[MODERN 



Barry's 
" common' 
sense " 
style, In 
England. 



Returning to the consideration of architecture in England, we 
come, at about the close of the classic revival, to the name of 
the man who was undoubtedly the most remarkable 
English architect since Wren, Sir Charles Barry. To 
class him, as some would do, with the classic revival, 
would be a misapprehension. Barry was no revivalist ; 
he never attempted to recreate Greek architecture on 
English soil. He adopted for most of his works what has been 
called,for want of a better name, the Italian style, which may really 
rather be called the common-sense style of a civilized society. 
The two first works which brought him into notice, the Travellers' 
and Reform clubs in London, were no doubt based on special 
Italian models, the Pandolfini and Farnese palaces; but a 
consideration of his whole career shows that he was in fact 




Fig. 90.— Halifax Town Hall. (Barry.) 

anything but a copyist. The comparison of him with Wren is 
justified by the fact that he was, like Wren, a born architect, 
in the sense that he grasped every problem presented to him 
from the true architect's point of view; with both of them 
architecture was not the dressing up of an exterior, but the 
fashioning of a building as a conception based on plan and 
section as well as on the desire to secure a certain external 
appearance; and, like Wren, he never failed to grasp the true 
requirements of a site and to adapt his architectural conception 
to it; a power perfectly different from that of merely producing 
agreeable elevations in this or that adopted style. Though very 
careful of his detail, he did not rely on detail, but on the general 
conception of an architectural scheme. This power was never 
so remarkably shown as in his grand scheme, unhappily never 
carried out, for the concentration of all the British government 
offices in one great architectural ensemble, which was to extend, 



on the west of Parliament Street and Whitehall, from Great 
George Street nearly to Charing Cross, the whole of the buildings 
to be carried out as one design, distributed into quadrangles, 
each of which was to be connected with one department of the 
administration, while all would have internal communication. 
Had this great idea been carried out we might at the present 
day have found some of the detail of the building unsatisfying to 
our taste, as we often find the detail in some of Wren's buildings, 
but we should have had a grand architectural achievement which 
would have made London pre-eminent among the capitals of the 
world. Nothing so great had been proposed in England since 
Inigo Jones's plan for Whitehall Palace, which also survives only 
in drawings, except the one noble bit of classic architecture 
known as the Banqueting House (Plate VI., fig. 75). It was one 
of the greatest misfortunes to London as a capital city that the 
government of the day could not rise to the height of Barry's 
ambitious scheme, in which there was nothing financially 
insuperable, since it was all designed to be carried out by portions 
at a time, as funds could be spared; but each government office 
built would in that way have been one step towards the completion 
of a great central idea; whereas the nation now spends the same 
money in erecting detached government buildings which have no 
architectural connexion with each other. 

Barry's two clubs before mentioned are almost ideals of club 
architecture — the architecture of a civilized society; his Bridge- 
water House is a building on a larger scale of the same type. 
That he had architectural ideas less staid and sober than these 
is shown, however, by the remarkable tower and spire of the 
Halifax Town Hall (fig. 90), his last work, which he did not 
live to see carried out, in which he contrived with remarkable 
success to give the Gothic spirit and multiplicity of effect to a 
tower which is nevertheless classic in detail. This tower is one 
of the most original and striking things in modern English 
architecture and shows how Barry's architectural ideas were 
developing up to the close of his life. 

Barry's great building, the Houses of Parliament (Plate X., 
fig. 118), with which his name will always be more especially 
associated, comes accidentally, though not by natural development 
nor by his own choice, under the head of the Gothic revival. The 
style of Tudor Gothic was dictated to the competitors, apparently 
from a mistaken idea that the building ought to " harmonize " 
with the architecture of Henry VII. 's chapel adjacent to the site. 
Had Barry been left to himself, there is no doubt that the Houses of 
Parliament, with the same main characteristics of plan and grouping, 
would have been of a classic type of detail, and would possibly have 
been a still finer building than it is; and since the choice of the 
Gothic style in this case was not a direct .consequence of the Gothic 
revival movement, it may be considered separately from that. The 
architectural greatness of the building consists, in the first place, 
in the grand yet simple scheme of Barry's plan, with the octagon 
hall in the centre, as the meeting-point for the public, the two 
chambers to north and south, and the access to the committee- 
rooms and other departments subordinate to the chambers. The 
plan (fig. 91) in itself is a stroke of genius, and has been more or less 
imitated in buildings for similar purposes all over the world ; the 
most important example, the Parliament House of Budapest (Plate 
IX., fig. 115 a n d tig- 92), being almost a literal copy of Barry's plan. 
Thus, as in all great architecture, the plan is the basis of the whole 
scheme, and upon it is built up a most picturesque and expressive 
grouping, arising directly out of the plan. The two towers are most 
happily contrasted, as expressive of their differing purposes; the 
Victoria Tower is the symbol of the State entrance, a piece of archi- 
tectural display solely for the sake of a grand effect; the Clock 
Tower is a utilitarian structure, a lofty stalk to carry a great clock 
high in the air; the two are differentiated accordingly, and the 
placing of them at opposite ends of the structure has the fortunate 
effect of indicating, from a distance, the extent of the plan. The 
graceful spire in the centre offers an effective contrast to the masses 
of the two towers, while forming the outward architectural expression 
of the octagon hall, which is, as it were, the keystone of the plan. 

The detail is another consideration. Barry, having had a style 
forced upon him (most unwisely), which he had not studied much 
and with which he was not much in sympathy, associated Pugin 
with him to design a good deal of the detail; exactly how much is 
not certainly known; probably Pugin was responsible for all the 
interior detail and fittings; the exterior detail may have been 
only suggested or sketched by him. On this ground absurd attempts 
have been made, by people who do not seem to understand what 
architecture in the true sense means, to claim for Pugin what they 
call the " artistic merit " of the Houses of Parliament. The artistic 
merit consists in the whole plan, conception and grouping, which 



MODERN] 



ARCHITECTURE 



43 i 



«) ij 4J CJ rt 

en < t-< to !> « 

r^ r~oo c» qo oo oo oo oo oo 



o 

« !D^^ IB 
*i- *V. *« X "^ 

D do o a> 

m i« «j . rt 

- a a° « a 
oo en > ffl to 




432 



ARCHITECTURE 



[MODERN 



are entirely Barry's, and which represent something beyond Pugin's 
grasp ; the detail is in fact the weak element in the building. That 
Pugin's Gothic detail is better than Barry's would have been is very 
likely the case; but had Barry been left unfettered to work out 
the detail in his own school, the result would probably have been 
still better. Even as it is, however, the Houses of Parliament is one 
of the finest buildings in the world, ancient or modern, and it is to be 
regretted that Englishmen generally seem to be so little aware of this. 

We may now turn to consider the Gothic Revival movement 
itself, of which Pugin was one of the most important pioneers. 
New ideas, however, as to the importance of Gothic architecture 
had been in the air before he came on the scene, and 
Revival ° Q u i te early in the century John Britton's Architectural 
England. Antiquities of Great Britain and Cathedral Antiquities, 
with their beautiful steel engravings by Le Keux, had 
done much to call attention to the neglected beauty of English 
medieval churches; and Thomas Rickman's remarkable and (for 
its day) masterly analysis of the variations of style in Gothic archi- 
tecture, which first appeared in 1817, and went through edition 
after edition in succeeding years, gave the first intelligent direction 
to the study of the subject. Pugin supplied to the movement 



building. The result has been gently but effectively satirized by 
Browning in " Bishop Blougram's Apology ": — 

" It's different preaching in Basilicas 
To doing duty in some masterpiece 
Like this of brother Pugin's, bless his heart. 
I doubt if they're half-baked, those chalk rosettes, 
Ciphers and stucco-twiddlings everywhere ; 
It's just like breathing in a limekiln, eh?" 

It is too true; and there is something pathetic in Pugin's 
career, in this passionate and sincere pursuit after a revival 
of the medieval spirit in life and in architecture — a pursuit which 
towards the close of his life he himself evidently more than half 
suspected to have been a fallacy. 

The full tide of the Gothic revival is connected more especially 
with the name of Sir Gilbert Scott. He was hardly a pure 
enthusiast like Pugin; he was a shrewd man of the world, the 
commencement of whose professional career coincided with the 
rising tide of ecclesiological reform, and he had the ability to 
make the best of the opportunity. He appears to have had, 
even as a child, an inborn interest in church architecture and in 




Fig. 92. — Plan of the Parliament House, Budapest. (Steindl.) 



not analysis, but passion. He had the merit of having perceived, 
when quite a youth, that one thing wanted was better craftsman- 
ship, and that craftsmanship in the medieval period was some- 
thing very different from what it was in the' early Victorian 
period; he set up an atelier of craftsmen, and was the real pioneer 
of what may be called the Arts and Crafts movement in England. 
An enthusiast by nature, he flung his whole soul into the task 
of reviving, as he believed, the glory of English medieval archi- 
tecture; nothing else in architecture was worth thinking of; 
Classic and Renaissance were only worth sarcasm. The result in 
his works was a curious inconsistency. Pugin was not in the 
true sense a great architect; his mind was not practical enough 
to grasp an architectural problem as a whole, plan and building 
combined; in fact, he was no master of plan, and does not seem 
to have troubled himself much about it. But he had a re- 
markable perception of interior effect; whenever you go into 
one of his churches you recognize the desire to realize the greatest 
effect of height, the most soaring effect of lines, possible within 
the actual vertical measurements. But in his passion for this 
soaring expression he seems to have entirely lost sight of the 
essential quality of solidity and genuineness of material in 
the medieval architecture which he was trying to emulate or 
to outvie. So long as he could get his effect of height, his 
poetic interior, he was content to have thin walls and plaster 
vaults and ornaments; or, in other words, he spent upon height 
■what should first have been spent upon solid and monumental 



Gothic detail (witness the description, in his Memoirs, of his 
astonishment and interest, at the age of eleven, at the first sight 
of capitals of the Early English type), and he acquired by un- 
remitting study a knowledge of English Gothic architecture in 
its every detail which few architects have ever equalled. His 
numerous churches were, intentionally and confessedly, as close 
reproductions as possible of medieval architecture, generally 
that of the Early Decorated period; and if it were desirable that 
modern church architecture should consist in the reproduction 
of medieval churches, the task could not have been carried out 
with more learning and exactitude than it was by him. It was 
this minute and accurate knowledge of medieval church archi- 
tecture which made him such a power when the idea of restoring 
English cathedrals became popular. He had an acquired instinct 
in tracing out the existence of details which had been overlaid 
by modern repairs or plasterwork; in going over a cathedral 
to decide on a scheme of restoration he seemed to know it as an 
anatomist knows the suggestions of a fossil skeleton; and in the 
course of his restorations he unearthed many points in the 
architectural history of the buildings which but for him would 
never have been elucidated. We now recognize that much of this 
" restoration " was a mistake, which destroyed the real interest 
of the cathedrals; and it is unhappily a mistake which cannot 
be undone. But the violent reproaches which have been heaped 
upon Scott's memory on this account are rather unjust. It 
is forgotten that he was doing what at the time every one 



MODERN] 



ARCHITECTURE 



433 



considered to be the right thing; cathedral bodies vied with 
each other in restoration, and were enthusiastic in the cause; 
there were' few if any dissenting voices; and in regard to the 
interiors of the cathedrals which were in modern use as places 
of worship, much that he did really required to be done to put 
them into decent condition. His churches have ceased to be 
interesting now, as is usually the case with copied architecture; 
but when they were built they were exactly what every one 
wanted and was asking'for. And he produced at all events one 
original work which is a great deal better than it is now the 
fashion to think — the Albert Memorial. It is injured by the 
statue, for which the commission went to the wrong sculptor; 
but Scott's idea of producing, as he phrased it, " a shrine on a 
great scale," was really a fine one, and finely carried out. The 
most important objection to it is one which popular criticism 
does not recognize, viz. that the vault is tied by concealed iron 
ties, and would hardly be safe without them. But apart from 
that it is a fine conception, and Scott was right in regarding it 
as his best work. 

G. E. Street, who was a pupil of Scott, was a greater enthusiast 
for medieval architecture (which, with him, as with Pugin, 
included medieval religion) than even Scott, and an architect 
of greater force and individuality. He was especially devoted 
to the early Transitional type of Gothic, and in all his buildings 
there is apparent the feeling for the solidity and monumental 
character, and the reticence in the use of ornament, which is 
characteristic of the Transitional period. His churches are 
noteworthy for their monumental character; and he had a 
remarkable faculty for giving an appearance of scale and dignity 
to the interiors of comparatively small churches. Hence his 
modern-medieval churches retain their interest more than Scott's, 
but in respect of secular architecture his taste was hopelessly 
medievalized, and his great building, the law courts in London, 
can only be regarded as a costly failure; it is not even beautiful 
except in regard to some good detail; it is badly planned; 
and the one fine interior feature, the great vaulted hall,is rendered 
useless by not being on the same floor with the courts, so that 
instead of being a salle des pas perdus it is a desert. Street's 
career is a warning how real architectural talent and vigour 
may be stultified by a sentimental adherence to a past phase of 
architecture. No modern architect had more fully penetrated 
the spirit of Gothic architecture, and his nave of Bristol cathedral 
is as good as genuine medieval work, and might pass for such 
when time-worn ; but that is rather archaeology than architecture. 

The competition for the law courts was one of the great 
architectural events of the middle of the century, and made 
or raised the reputation even of some of the unsuccessful com- 
petitors. Edward Barry (the son of Sir Charles) gained the 
first place for " plan," which the advisers of the government 
had foolishly separated from " design" (as if the plan of a building 
could be considered apart from the architectural conception!), 
giving first marks for plan, and second for design. E. Barry 
therefore had really gained the competition, " design," which 
was awarded to Street, counting second; but Street managed 
to push him out, and it is a nemesis on him for this by no means 
loyal proceeding that the building he contrived to get entirely 
into his own hands has served to injure rather than benefit 
his reputation. William Burges (1827-1881), an ardent devotee 
of French early Gothic, produced a design in that style, which, 
though quite unsuitable practically, is a greater evidence of 
architectural power than is furnished by any of his executed 
buildings. J. P. Seddon (1828-1906), an old adherent of Rossetti 
and the pre-Raphaelite brotherhood, an architect of genius 
who never got his opportunity, produced a design which was 
wildly picturesque in appearance but in reality more practical 
than might be thought at first sight, and his proposal for a great 
Record tower for housing official records was a really fine and 
original idea. 

Among the ecclesiastical buildings of the Gothic revival 
those of William Butterfield (1814-1900), much less numerous 
than those of Scott and Street, have a special interest as the 
work of a revival architect who was something more than a 



mere archaeologist. All Saints, Margaret Street (1859), is the 
production of an architectural artist using medieval materials 
to carry out a conception of his own, and hence, like Babbacombe 
church and others by the same hand, it has an interest for the 
present day which Scott's churches have not. His Keble College 
chapel rather failed from an exaggeration of the use of poly- 
chromatic materials, which in some of his other churches he had 
used with moderation and with good effect. J. L. Pearson was 
another distinguished architect of the later period of the Gothic 
revival who was able to put something of his own into modern 
Gothic churches. No one was more learned in medieval archi- 
tecture than he was; and as of Street's nave of Bristol, so we 
may say of Pearson's nave of Truro, that it is as good as medieval 
Gothic; indeed Truro nave is finer in character than some of 
the ancient cathedral naves, and represents pure Gothic at its 
best. But in the exteriors of his churches, as at Truro and in 
the churches of Kilburn and Red Lion Square, Pearson evolved 
a Gothic of his own which is Pearsonesque and not merely 
archaeological. James Brooks (18 25-1901) also deserves an 
honoured place in the chronicle of the Gothic revival for being 
the first to show how large town churches might be erected in 
brick (fig. 93), in which largeness of scale and a certain grandeur 




Fig. 93. — Exterior of modern English Church. (James Brooks.) 



of effect could be obtained without extravagant cost, and in 
which it was practically demonstrated that architecture in the 
true Gothic spirit could be produced without depending on 
ornament. 

Alfred Waterhouse began his remarkable career as an adherent 
of the Gothic revival, and merits separate mention inasmuch 
as he was the only one of the Gothic revivalists who from the 
first set himself to adapt Gothic to secular uses and to make 
out of it a modern Gothic manner of his own. His first success 
was made with the Manchester law courts, a design more 
purely Gothic than his later works, and an admirably planned 
building (the only good point in the national law courts plan, 
the access to the public galleries, is taken from it); his special 
style was more developed in the Manchester town hall, a building 
typical both of the defects and merits of his secular Gothic 
style. This style of his received the compliment, for a good 
many years, of an immense amount of imitation; in fact, 
during that earlier period of his work it may be said to have 
influenced every secular building that was erected in the medieval 
style all over England. His Gothic detail was, however, not very 
refined, and he has been subject to the same kind of retrospective 
injustice which has fallen on Scott, critics in both instances 
forgetting that what they do not like now was what every one 
liked then, and could not have enough of. Waterhouse was a 
master of plan, and a man of immense business and administra- 
tive ability, without which he could not have carried out the 



434 



ARCHITECTURE 



[MODERN 



France. 



number of great building schemes which fell into his hands, and 
he had much more of the qualities of a great architect than are 
to be found in the works of some of his latter-day critics. His 
later works, one or two of which will be referred to, do not 
come under the head of the Gothic revival. 
, In France, the Gothic revival, which so strongly affected the 
whole school of English architecture for thirty or forty years, 
took little hold. Its most remarkable monument is 
the church of Ste Clotilde at Paris, built about the 
middle of the century from the designs of Ballu. In size it equals 
a second-class cathedral, and is a fine monument, though it does 
not show that complete knowledge of medieval Gothic which we 
find in the churches of Scott, Street, Pearson and G. F. Bodley. 
But as with the Classic, so with the Gothic revival — the leading 
French architects of the period had too much personal architec- 
tural feeling to be carried along in the wake of a " movement." 
Two very important Paris churches, built just after the middle 
of the century, illustrate well this independence of spirit. The 
one is the domed church of St Augustin in the Boulevard 
Malesherbes (Plate XII., fig. 122), designed by Victor Baltard 
(1805-1874). It may be called a Classic church treated in a quasi- 
Byzantine manner. A remarkable point about it is that, standing 
between the divergence of two streets at an acute, angle, the outer 
walls of the nave follow the line of the two streets, the church 
thus expanding towards the centre; internally the colonnades 
are parallel, the chapels outside of them increasing in depth 
from the entrance of the nave towards the centre — a very clever 
device for reconciling exterior and interior effect. The other 
church referred to, built about the same time, is La Trinite 
(Plate XII., fig. 123) by Theodore Ballu (1817-1885)— a church 
which is Renaissance in detail and yet distinctly Gothic in its 
general effect and in the multiplicity of its detail, somewhat 
recalling in this sense Barry's Halifax tower before referred to. 
The sense in which there has really been a general movement 
in church architecture in France has been in the direction of a 
kind of modernized Byzantine, of which one of the earliest and 
best examples is the church of St Pierre de Montrouge, by 
Joseph Auguste E. Vaudremer (Plate XII., fig. 124). A later and 
more important example is the cathedra] of Marseilles, by Leon 
Vaudoyer (1803-1872) and Henry Esperandieu (1820-1874), a 
mingling of Romanesque and Byzantine, and in many respects a 
fine building (Plate XIII., fig. 126). This modern feeling in favour 
of a Byzantine type of church architecture culminated in the 
great church of the Sacre Cceur on Montmartre, at Paris, begun 
in the early 'eighties from the designs of Paul Abadie (1812-1884). 
This grand building stands on a most effective site, and is of a 
monumental solidity seldom met with in modern architecture; it 
is more pure and consistent in style than many of the smaller 
churches of the same school of architecture. These latter are 
not for the most part very attractive; they represent in general 
a kind of Frenchified Byzantine detail which exhibits neither 
Byzantine spirit nor French grace and finish; and on the whole 
it may be said that church architecture is the field in which the 
French architects of the 19th century were least successful. 

As regards secular buildings, on the other hand, the Paris of 
the middle portion of the 19th century can show some of the 
most unquestionable architectural successes of the period. The 
modern portions of the Palais de Justice by Louis Joseph Due 
(180 2-1879) — not Viollet-le-Duc,asis often mistakenly asserted in 
guide-books — and of the Ecole des Beaux-Arts, by Jacques Felix 
Duban (1 797-1870) , are among the best examples of the application 
of classic forms qf architecture to modern buildings; and the 
Bibliotheque Ste Genevieve (Plate XIII., fig. 128), by Henri 
Labrouste (1801-1875), was in its day (about 1850) a new creation 
in applied classic architecture; a building in which the exterior 
design was entirely subservient to and expressive of the require- 
ments of a library, a large portion of the wall being left unpierced 
for the storage of books, windows being only inserted where they 
did not interfere with this object; and the manner in which 
these walls are treated so as to produce a decorative architectural 
effect without having recourse to sham colonnades and sham 
window openings, was entirely new at the time in modern work. 



It is instructive to compare this design with that of the Bank 
of England, as examples of the right and the wrong way of 
treating buildings in which much blank wall space was required. 
The new buildings of the Louvre (Plate XIV., fig. 129), built 
under Napoleon III. from the designs of Louis Tullius Joachim 
Visconti (1791-1853), are not to be passed over, though they have 
too much of the showy and flaunting character which belonged 
to both the society and the art of the Second Empire; a fault 
which also destroys some of the value of the Grand Opera house, 
a remarkable work by a remarkable architect (Jean Louis Charles 
Gamier), and typical, more than any other structure, of the 
epoch in which it was built. Some of its effect it owes to the 
admirable painting and sculpture with which it is decorated, 
but the grand staircase is a fine architectural conception (see 
Garnier). 

In England and in the United States, the last quarter of the 
19th century was a period of unusual interest and activity in 
architectural development. While other nations have Recent 
been content to carry on their architecture, for the English 
most part, on the old scholastic lines which had been archi- 
prevalent since the Renaissance, in the two countries re ' 

named there has been manifest a spirit of unrest, of critical 
inquiry into the basis and objects of architecture; an aspiration 
to make new and original creations in or applications of the art, 
without example in any other period in the modern history of 
architecture. In England, the " note " — heard with increasing 
shrillness of crescendo towards the very last year of the centuiy — 
was the cry for originality, for throwing off the trammels of the 
past, for rendering architecture more truly a direct expression 
of the conditions of practical requirement and of structure. 
This was no doubt to some extent the effect of a reaction. During 
the greater part of the century architectural strength, as has been 
already shown, had been spent in revivals of past styles. Churches 
indeed, up to the close of the century, continued to be built, 
for the most part, in revived Gothic; but this was owing to 
special clerical influence, which saw in Gothic a style specially 
consecrated to church architecture, and would be satisfied, as 
a rule, with nothing else. Efforts have been made by architects 
to modify the medieval church plan into something more prac- 
tically suited to modern congregational worship, by a system 
of reducing the side aisles to mere narrow passages for access to 
the seats, thus retaining the architectural effect of the arcade, 
while keeping it out of the way of the seated congregation; and 
there have been occasional reversions to the ancient Christian 
basilica type of plan, or sometimes, as in the church in Davies 
Street, London, attempts to treat a church in a manner entirely 
independent of architectural precedent; but in the main, 
Gothic has continued to rule for churches. Apart from this 
special class of building, however, revived Gothic began to droop 
during the 'seventies. All had been copied that could be copied, 
and the result, to the architectural mind, was not satisfaction 
but satiety. Gothic began to be regarded as " played out." 
The immediate result, however, was not an organized attempt 
to think for ourselves, and make our own style, but a recourse 
to another class of precedent, represented in the type of early 
18th-century building which became known as " Queen tt 
Anne," and which, like Gothic before it, was now to Anne." 
be recommended as " essentially English," as in fact 
it is. It can hardly, however, be called an architectural style; 
it would have no right to figure in any work illustrating the great 
architectural styles of the world. It was, in fact, the last dying 
phase of the English Renaissance; the architecture of the classic 
order reduced to a threadbare condition, treated very simply 
and in plain materials, in many cases shorn of its columnar 
features, and reflecting faithfully enough the prim rationalistic 
taste in literature and art of the England of the 18th century. 
Though not to be dignified as a style, it was, however, a recogniz- 
able and consistent manner in building; it made extensive use 
of brick, a material inexpensive and at the same time very well 
suited to the English climate and atmosphere; and it was 
generally carried out in very solid proportions, and with very 
good workmanship. To a generation tired of imitating a great 



MODERN] 



ARCHITECTURE 



Plate XL 




Photo, Valentwe<3* Sons, LHtnaee. 

Fig. 120.— NATURAL HISTORY MUSEUM, SOUTH KENSINGTON. (WATERHOUSE.) 



H 




Fig. 121— LAW COURTS, BRUSSELS. (POELAERT.) 



Plate XII. 



ARCHITECTURE 



[MODERN 




Flioto, Neurdein. 



Fig. 122.— CHURCH OF ST AUGUSTIN, PARIS. 
(BALTARD.) 



Photo, Neurdein. 

Fig. 123— CHURCH OF LA TRINITE, 
PARIS. (BALLU.) 




Plwto, A . Levy. 

Fig. 124.— CHURCH OF ST PIERRE DE 
MONTROUGE, PARIS. (VAUDREMER.) 



Photo, Neurdein, 

Fig. 125— CHURCH OF ST VINCENT DE PAUL, PARIS. 
(HITTORFF.) 



MODERN] 



ARCHITECTURE 



435 



style at second hand, this unpretending and simple model was 
a welcome relief, and led to the erection of a considerable num- 
ber of modern buildings, dwelling-houses especially, the obvious 




Fig. 94. — Chelsea Town Hall. (J. M. Brydon.) 

aim of which was to look as like 18th-century buildings as 
possible. A typical example is the large London house by Norman 
Shaw, at the corner of Queen's Gate and Imperial Institute 
Road. The Chelsea town hall (fig. 94), by J. M. 
Brydon (1840-1901), is a good example of a public 
building in the revived Queen Anne style. 

A change of front from copying a great style like 
the medieval to copying what is at best a bastard 
one, if a style at all, might not seem to promise very 
much for the emancipation of modern architecture; 
yet there turned out to be one element of progress in 
it, resting on the fact that the comparatively simple 
detail of the 18th-century buildings formed a kind of 
vernacular of building workmanship, which could be 
comprehended and carried out by good artisans as a 
recognized tradition. Now to reduce architecture to 
good sound building and good workmanship seemed 
to promise at any rate a better basis to work upon than 
the mere imitation of classic or medieval detail; it 
might conceivably furnish a new starting-point. This 
was the element of life in the Queen Anne revival, and 
it had, as we shall see, an influence beyond the circle 
of the special revivers of the style. But almost con- 
currently with, or following hard upon, the " Queen 
Anne " movement arose the idea of a modern archi- 
tecture, founded on a free and unfettered treatment of 
the materials of our earlier Renaissance architecture, 
as illustrated in buildings of the Stuart period. This 
new ideal was styled " free classic," and it 
gave the prevailing tone to English archi- 
tecture for the last fifteen years of the 
century, though it had its commencement in certain 
characteristic buildings a good many years earlier 
than that. In 1873, for instance, there arose a com- 
paratively small front in Leadenhall Street, under the 
name of " New Zealand Chambers " (fig. 95), designed 
by Norman Shaw, which excited more attention, and 
had more influence on contemporary architecture than 
many a building of far greater size and importance. 
This represented the playful and picturesque possibilities 
of " free classic." Its more restrained and refined 
achievements were early exemplified in G. F. Bodley's 
design for the front of the London School Board offices 
on the Thames Embankment, 1 a comparatively small 
building which also exercised a considerable influ- 
ence. There were no details here, however, but what 
could be found in Stuart (or, as it is more often 
called, Jacobean) architecture, but the building, and 
the prominence of its architect's name, helped to draw 
attention to the possibilities of the style, and it has been 

1 The western half of the present front ; the design was duplicated 
afterwards, on the extension of the building, but Bodley originated it. 



discovered that free classic is susceptible of a great deal of original 
treatment based on Renaissance elements. As an example 
we may cite a street front built some twenty years later by 
another academician-architect, viz. the offices of the Chartered 
Accountants in the City, by J. Belcher. More dignified and more 
monumental than New Zealand Chambers, more original than 
the School Board offices, this front contains some details and a 
general treatment which may be said to be absolutely new; 
it affords another example of a piece of street architecture which 
attracted a great deal of attention, and has had an effect quite 
disproportionate to its size and importance as a building; and 
it gives a general measure of the progress of the " free classic " 
idea. During the last decade of the century " free classic " 
was almost the recognized style in English architecture, and has 
been illustrated in many town halls and other large and important 
buildings, among which the Imperial Institute is a prominent 
example (fig. 96). 

Concurrently with this tendency towards a free classic style 
there has arisen another movement which has had a considerable 
influence on English architecture, viz. an increased 
perception of the importance of decorative arts — ■ arts> 
sculpture, painting, mosaic, etc. — in alliance with 
architecture, and of the architect and the decorative artist 



"Free 
classic 




Fig. 95. — New Zealand Chambers. (R. Norman Shaw, R.A.) 

working together and in harmony. This is no more than what 
has long been understood and acted on in France, but it has been 
a new light to modern English architecture, in which, until a 
comparatively recent period, decorative painting was hardly 



436 



ARCHITECTURE 



[MODERN 



thought of, and decorative sculpture, where it was introduced, 
was too often, or indeed generally, the mere work of some trading 
firm of masons. But of late years sculpture has taken a far 
more prominent place in connexion with architecture; it has 
become a habit with the best architects to rely largely on the 
introduction of appropriate and symbolic sculpture to add to 
the interest of their buildings, and to associate with them eminent 
sculptors, who, instead of regarding their work only in the light of 
isolated statues or groups for the exhibition room and the art 
gallery, are willing to give their best efforts to produce high-class 
sculpture for the decoration of an architectural design which 
forms the framework to it. 

Notice should be taken, however, of another movement in 




Fig. 96. — Staircase, Imperial Institute. (Collcutt.) 

English architecture during the closing years of the 19th century. 

Reference has already been made to one idea which 
™anship~ P rom P ted the culture of the " Queen Anne " type of 
Ideal. architecture: that it presented a simple vernacular of 

construction and detail, in which solid workmanship 
was a more prominent element than elaboration of what is 
known as architectural style. To a small group of clever and 
enthusiastic architects of the younger generation it appeared 
that this idea of reducing architecture to the common-sense 
of construction might be carried still further; that as all the 
revivals of styles since the Renaissance had failed to give per- 
manent satisfaction and had tended to reduce architecture 
to a learned imitation of the work of former epochs, the real 
chance for giving life to architecture as a modern art was to 
throw aside all the conventionally accepted insignia of architec- 
tural style — columns, pilasters, cornices, buttresses, etc. — and 
to begin over again with mere workmanship— wall-building and 
carpentry — and trust that in process of time a new decorative 
detail would be evolved, indebted to no precedent. The building 
artisans, in fact, were collectively to take the place of the architect 
and the form of the building to be evolved by a natural process 
of growth. This was a favourite idea also with William Morris, 
who insisted that medieval art — the only art which he recognized 
as of any value (Greek, Roman and Renaissance being alike 
contemptible in his eyes) — was essentially an art of the people, 



and that in fact it was the modern architects who stood in the 
way of our having a genuine architecture of the 19th century. 
Considering how much of merely formal, conventional and soul- 
less architecture has been produced in our time under the guidance 
of the professional architect, it is impossible to deny that there 
is an element of truth in this reasoning; at all events, that there 
have been a good many modern architects who have done more 
harm than good to architecture. But when we come to follow 
out this reasoning to its logical results, it is obvious that there 
are serious flaws in it. Morris's idea that medieval architecture 
alone was worthy the name, we may, of course, dismiss at once; 
it was the prejudice of a man of genius whose sympathies, both in 
matters social and artistic, were narrow. Nor can we regard the 
medieval cathedrals as artisan's architecture. The name of 
" architect " may have been unknown, but that the personage 
was present in some guise, the very individuality and variety 
of our English cathedrals attest. Peterborough front was no 
mere mason's conception. And when we come to consider 
modern conditions of building, it is perfectly obvious that with 
the complicated practical requirements of modern building, 
in regard to planning, heating, ventilation, etc., the planning 
of the whole in a complete set of drawings, before the building 
is begun, is an absolute necessity. We are no longer in medieval 
times; modern conditions require the modern architect. The 
real cause of failure, as far as modern architecture is a failure, 
lies partly in the fact that it is practised too much as a profession 
or business, too little as an art; partly in the deadening effect 
of public indifference to art in Britain. If the public really 
desired great and impressive works of architecture they would 
have them; but neither the British public nor its mouthpiece 
the government, care anything about it. Their highest ambition 
is to get convenient and economical buildings. And as to the 
theory of the new school, that we should throw overboard all 
precedent in architectural detail, that is intellectually impossible. 
We are not made so that we can invent everything de novo, 
or escape the effect on our minds of what has preceded us; the 
attempt can only lead to baldness or eccentricity. Every great 
style of architecture of the past has, in fact, been evolved from 
the detail of preceding styles; and some of the ablest and most 
earnest architects of the present day are, indeed, urging the 
desirability of clinging to traditional forms in regard to detail, 
as a means of maintaining the continuity of the art. This does 
not by any means imply the absence of original architecture; 
there is scope for endless origination in the plan and the general 
design of a building. The .Houses of Parliament is a prominent 
example. The detail is a reproduction of Tudor detail, but the 
plan and the general conception are absolutely original, and 
resemble those of no other pre-existing building in the world. 

It is necessary to take account of all these movements of 
opinion and principle in English architecture to appreciate 
properly its position and prospects at the time with 
which we are here dealing. Turning now from England states. 
to the United States, which, as already observed, is 
the only other important country in which there has been 
a general new movement in architecture, we find, singular to 
say, that the course of development has in America been almost 
the reverse of what has taken place in England. The rapidity 
of architectural development in America, it may be observed, 
since about 1875, has been something astonishing; there is no 
parallel to it anywhere else. Before then the currently accepted 
architecture of the American Republic was little more than 
a bad repetition of the English Gothic and Classic types of 
revived architecture. At the present day no nation, except 
perhaps France, takes so keen an interest in architecture and 
produces so many noteworthy buildings; and it may be observed 
that in the United States the public and the official authorities 
seem really to have some enthusiasm on the subject, and to 
desire fine buildings. But the stirring of the dry bones began 
in America where it ended in England. The first symptoms of 
an original spirit operating in American architecture showed 
themselves in domestic architecture, in town and country houses, 
the latter especially; and the form which the movement took 



MODERN] 



ARCHITECTURE 



437 



was a desire to escape conventional architectural detail and to 
return to the simplest form of mere building; rock-faced masonry, 
sometimes of materials picked up on the site; chimneys which 
were plain shafts of masonry or brickwork; woodwork simply 
hewn and squared; but the whole arranged with a view to 
picturesque effect (figs. 97 and 98). This form of American 




rvnrrrTT' 

^^aS^^seiS _ _:-—_—_. — =: — - -- ■ -^ -. --—-_ „j 

Fig. 97. — American Type of Country-House Architecture. 

house became an incident in the course of modern architecture; 
it even had a recognizable influence on English architects. 
About the same time an impetus of a more special nature was 
given to American architecture by a man of genius, H. H. 
Richardson, who, falling back on Romanesque and Byzantine 
types of architecture as a somewhat unworked field, evolved 




Fig. 



-American Seaside Villa. (Bruce Price.) 



from them a type of architectural treatment so distinctly his 
own (though its origines were of course quite traceable) that he 
came very near the credit of having personally invented a style; 
at all events he invented a manner, which was so largely admired 
and imitated that for some ten or fifteen years American archi- 
tecture showed a distinct tendency to become "Richardsonesque" 




Fig. 99. — Crane Public Library, Quincy, Mass. (H. H. Richardson.) 

(see also Plate XVI., fig. 137). As with all architectural fashions, 
however, people got tired of this, and the influence of another 
very able American architect, Richard M. Hunt, coupled perhaps 
with the proverbial philo-Gallic tendencies of the modern 
American, led to the American architects, during the last decade 
of the 19th century, throwing themselves almost entirely into 
the arms, as it were, of France; seeking their education as 



far as possible in Paris, and adopting the theory and practice 
of the Ecole des Beaux-Arts so completely that it is often 
impossible to distinguish their designs, and even their methods 
of drawing, from those of French architects brought up in the 
strictest regime of the "Ecole." By this French movement' 
the Americans have, on the one hand, shared the advantages 
and the influence of what is undoubtedly the most complete 
school of architectural training in the world; but, on the other 
hand, they have foregone the opportunity which might have 
been afforded them of developing a school or style of their own, 
influenced by the circumstances of their own requirements, 
climate and materials. Figs. 133 and 134, Plate XV., show 
examples of recent American architecture of the European 
classic type. Thus, in the two countries which in this period 
have shown the most activity and restlessness in their architec- 
tural aspirations, and given the most original thought to the 
subject, England has constantly tended towards throwing off 
the yoke of precedent and escaping from the limits of a scholastic 
style; while America, commencing her era of architectural 
emancipation with an attempt at first principles and simple 
but picturesque building, has ended by a pretty general adoption 
of the highly-developed scholastic system of another country. 
The contrast is certainly a curious one. Only one original 
contribution to the art has been made by America in recent days 
— one arising directly out of practical conditions, viz. the " high 
buildings " in cities; a form of architecture which may be said to 
have originated in the fact that New York is built on a peninsula, 
and extension of the city is only possible vertically and not hori- 
zontally. The tower-like buildings (see Plate XV., fig. 131, and 
Steel Construction, Plate II., figs. 3 and 4), served internally 
by lifts, to which this condition of things has given rise, form 
a really new contribution to architecture, and have been handled 
by some of the American architects in a very effective manner; 
though, unfortunately, the rage for rapid building in the cities 
of the United States has led to the adoption of the false archi- 
tectural system of running up such structures in the form of 
a steel framing, cased with a mere skin of masonry or terra-cotta, 
for appearance' sake, which in reality depends for its stability 
on the steel framing. It must be admitted, however, to be a 
new contribution to architecture, and renders New York, as 
seen from the harbour, a " towered city " in a sense not realized 
by the poet. 

Some sketch of the state of recent architectural thought or 
endeavour in England seemed essential to the subject, since 
it is there that what may be called the philosophy of 
architecture has been most debated, and that thought „2f 
has had the most obvious and most direct effect on 
architectural style and movement. That this has been the case 
has no doubt been largely due to the influence of Ruskin, who, 
though his architectural judgment was on many points faulty 
and absurd in the extreme, had at any rate the effect of set- 
ting people thinking — not without result. In other countries 
architecture continued to pursue, up to the close of the century, 
the scholastic ideal impressed upon it by the Renaissance, 
without exciting doubt or controversy unless in a very occasional 
and partial manner, and without any changes save those minor 
ones arising from changing habits of execution and use of material. 
In Germany there appears to be a certain tendency to a greater 
freedom in the use of the materials of classic architecture, a 
certain relaxation of the bonds of scholasticism; but it has hardly 
assumed such proportions as to be ranked as a new movement 
in architecture. 

The last years of the 19th century witnessed the progress to 
an advanced stage of the most remarkable piece of English 
church architecture of the period, the Roman Catholic 
cathedral at Westminster, by J. H. Bentley (1839- ^hunhes. 
1902), a building which is not a Gothic revival, but 
goes back to earlier (Byzantine) precedents; not, however, 
without a considerable element of novelty and originality in 
the design, especially in some of the exterior detail. The interior 
was intended for decoration in applied marble and mosaic, yet 
even as a shell of brickwork, with its solid domes and the 



438 



ARCHITECTURE 



[MODERN 



immense masses of the piers, it is one of the most impressive 
and monumental interiors of modern date. 

In ordinary church architecture, though there is still a good 
deal of mere imitation medieval work carried out, England 
has not been without examples of a new and original application 
of Gothic materials. The interior of the church of St Clare, 
Liverpool, by Mr Leonard Stokes (fig. ioo), is a good example 
of the modified treatment of the three-aisled medieval plan 
already referred to, the side aisles being reduced to passages; 
and also of the tendency in recent years to simplify the treatment 
of Gothic, in contrast to the florid and over-carved churches 
of the Gothic revival. The churches of James Brooks, as already 




Fig. ioo. — Interior, St Clare's, Liverpool. (Leonard Stokes.) 

noted, have shown many examples of a solid plain treatment 
of Gothic, yet with a great deal of character; and J. D. Sedding 
(1838-1801) built some showing great originality, among which 
the interior of his church of the Holy Redeemer, Clerkenwell, 
affords also an interesting example of the modern free treat- 
ment of forms derived from classic architecture. 

The event of most importance in English church architecture 
at the beginning of the 20th century was the commencement 
of a modern cathedral at Liverpool. In the early 'eighties the 
proposal for a cathedral had led to an important competition 
between three sets of invited architects, Sir William Emerson, 
Messrs Bodley and Garner and James Brooks. Nothing, 
however, resulted, except the production of three very fine sets 
of drawings. Subsequently the subject was taken up again with 
more energy, and a sketch competition invited for a cathedral 
on a new site (the one originally intended being no longer 



available); from among the sketch competitors five were 
invited to join in a final competition, viz. Messrs Austin and 
Paley, C. A. Nicholson, Gilbert Scott (grandson of Sir Gilbert 
Scott), Malcolm Stark and W. J. Tapper. Mr Scott's design 
was selected (May 1903) and the building of it commenced not 
long after. It is a design in revived Gothic, of the orthodox 
type as to detail, though containing some points of decided 
originality in the general treatment. The condition proposed 
in the first instance by the committee, that the designs sent in 
must be in the Gothic style, ga"f rise to a strong protest, in the 
architectural journals and elsewhere, on the ground that the 
revival of ancient styles was a mistaken and exploded fallacy; 
and in deference to this expression of opinion the 
committee officially withdrew the limitation as to style. 
That, in view of their obvious bias, they would confine 
their selection to designs in the Gothic style, was, 
however, a foregone conclusion. It is much to be 
regretted that the opportunity was not taken to evolve 
a modern and Protestant type of cathedral, with a 
central area and a dome as its principal feature. 

In the architecture of public buildings one of the 
earliest incidents in this latest period was the completion 
of the Albert Hall, which, though the work of 
an engineer, and commonplace in detail, is Bagiish 
in the main a fine and novel architectural con- buiidines 
ception, and a practical success (considering 
its abnormal size) as a building for musical perform- 
ances. Had its constructor been bold enough to roof 
it with a solid masonry dome, with an " eye " in the 
centre (as in the Pantheon) instead of a huge dish-cover 
of glass and iron, there would have been little to find 
fault with in its general conception. It was also the 
first modern English building of importance to be 
decorated externally with symbolical figure composition, 
in the shape of the large frieze in coarse mosaic of 
terra-cotta, which is carried round the upper portion 
of the exterior, and which, if not very interesting in 
detail, at all events fulfils very well its purpose as a 
piece of decorative effect. The subject of the govern- 
ment offices in London forms in itself an important 
chapter in recent architectural history. The home 
and foreign office block was finished in 1874; a 
sumptuous, but weak and ill-planned building designed 
by Scott, invito. Minerva, in a style alien to his own 
predilections. In 1884 took place the great competition 
for the war and admiralty offices conjointly, won by 
a commonplace but admirably drawn design, presenting 
some good points in planning. The building was to 
stand between Whitehall and St James's Park, with 
a front both ways. The competition came to nothing, 
and the successful architects were eventually employed 
to build the new admiralty as it now stands, a mean 
and commonplace building with no street frontage, in 
which economy was the main consideration, and 
totally discreditable to the greatest naval power in 
the world. In 1898-1899 it was at last resolved to 
build a war office and other government offices much 
needed, and an irregular site opposite the Horse Guards 
was selected for the war office and one in Great George 
Street for the others. In this case there was no competition, 
but the government selected two architects after inquiry as to 
their works ("classic" architecture being a sine qua non); 
W. Young (d. 1900) for the war office, and J. M. Brydon for the 
Great George Street block. The war office site is inadequate 
and totally unsymmetrical, the boundary of the building being 
settled by the boundary of the street curb, and the inner court- 
yards are of very mean proportions compared with the great 
courtyard of the home and foreign office. Both architects 
produced grandiose designs, but in regard to the war office at 
least the government threw away a great opportunity. 

There can only be further enumerated a few of the more 
important buildings erected in England during the later years 



MODERN 



ARCHITECTURE 



Plate XIII. 




fhoto, Neurdein. 

Fig. 126— CATHEDRAL, MARSEILLES. (VAUDOYER AND 
ESPERANDIEU.) 



Fig. 127.— MAIRIE, Xth ARROND1SSEMENT, 
PARIS. (ROUYER.) 




Fke*i,A.Livy. 



Fig. 128.— BIBLIOTHEQUE STE GENEVIEVE, PARIS. (LABROUSTE.) 



Plate XIV. 



ARCHITECTURE 



[MODERN 




FIwto.L.L. Paris. 



Fig. 129.— PAVILLON RICHELIEU, THE LOUVRE, PARIS. (VISCONTI.) 




Photo, Neurdein. 



Fig. 130.— PETIT PALAIS, PARIS. (GIRAULT.) 



MODERN] 



ARCHITECTURE 



439 



of the 19th century, and mention made of the general course 
which architecture has taken in regard to special classes of 
buildings. The Natural History Museum (Plate XI., fig. 120), 
completed in 1881 by Alfred Waterhouse, may stand as a type 



■f — a — □ — a — cr— q — u — a — □ — D — p 1 " — ■ — •" 
.SUGGESTED •C°8HIDOIt-TO -DINING- HALL- 




Fig. 101. — Plan of a Master's House, New Christ's Hospital. 
(Webb and Bell.) 

of the taste for the employment of terra-cotta, with all its 
dangerous facilities in ornamental detail, of which that architect 
specially set the example. Detail is certainly overdone here, 
but the building is strikingly original; a point not to be over- 



which has been extensively imitated; a refined variety of free 
classic, always quiet and delicate in detail, though perhaps 
rather wanting in architectonic force. The next great archi- 
tectural competition was that for the completion of the 
South Kensington Museum, the bare brick exterior of which, 
waiting for architectural completion, had long been a national 
disgrace. The competition produced some fine and striking 
designs, some of them perhaps more so than the selected 
one by Sir Aston Webb, whose fine plan, however, justified the 
selection. Another competition which excited general interest 
was that in 1894, for the rebuilding on a country site of Christ's 





Fig. 102.- 



-Sheffield Town Hall. (Mountford.) 



looked in these days of architectural copying. The Imperial 
Institute, the result of a competition among six selected archi- 
tects, represents also a type of architecture which its architect, 
T. E. Collcutt, maybe said to have matured for himself, and 



Fig. 103. — Oxford Town Hall. (Hare.) 

Hospital schools, also gained by Aston Webb (in collaboration 
with Ingress Bell), by a design which, in its arrangement of 
schoolhouses in detached blocks (fig. 101), but in a symmetrical 
grouping, opened up a new idea in public-school planning, and 
struck a blow at the picturesque but insanitary quadrangle 
system. Among notable public buildings o'f the period ought 
to be mentioned Norman Shaw's New Scotland Yard, built 
in a style neither classic nor Gothic, but partaking of the elements 
of both (Plate X., fig. 119). A competition in 1908 for the 
design of the new county hall for the London County Council, 
to be " English Renaissance " in style, was won by a young 
architect, till then unknown, Mr Ralph Knott. 

In recent years there has been a great movement for building 
town halls; towns rather vying with each other in this way. 
Of late nearly all of these have been carried out in some variety 
of free classic. Among the more important in point of scale is 
that of Sheffield, by E. W. Mountford (1856-1908) (fig. 102); 
among smaller ones, those of Oxford, by H. T. Hare (fig. 103) ; 

and Colchester, by John Belcher, are 
particularly good examples of recent 
architecture of this class, the former 
distinguished also by an exceptionally 
good plan. The merit of excellent 
planning also belongs to Aston Webb 
and Ingress Bell's Birmingham law 
courts, one of the modern terra-cotta 
buildings of somewhat too florid 
detail, though picturesque as a whole. 
Among public halls the M'Ewan 
Hall at Edinburgh, completed in 
1898 from the designs of Sir Rowand 
Anderson, deserves mention as one 
of the most original and most care- 
fully designed of recent buildings in 
Great Britain. 

The various new buildings erected 
in connexion with the university of 
■"• "^ Oxford, those by T. G. Jackson (b. 

1835) especially, form an important 
incident in modern English archi- 
tecture. Mr Jackson succeeded to a remarkable degree in design- 
ing new buildings which are in harmony with the old architecture 
of the university city; sometimes perhaps a little too imitative 
of it, but at any rate he has the credit of having added rather 



44-° 



ARCHITECTURE 



[MODERN 



extensively to Oxford without spoiling it; while his school 
buildings in different parts of the country have a refinement and 
domesticity of feeling which is the true note of school archi- 
tecture. Among buildings of an educational class, the move in 
technical education has led to the erection of a good many large 
polytechnic and similar institutions, which in many cases have 
been well treated architecturally; the Northampton Institute at 
Clerkenwell (fig. 104), by Mountford, being perhaps one of the 




Fig. 104. — Northampton Institute, Clerkenwell. (Mountford.) 

boldest and most effective of recent public buildings. In the 
building of hospitals and asylums much has been done, and great 
progress made in the direction of hygienic and practical planning 
and construction, but the tendency has been (perhaps rightly) 
towards making this practical efficiency the main consideration 
and reducing architectural treatment to the simplest character. 
St Thomas's hospital at Lambeth exemplifies the treatment 
of hospital architecture at the commencement of the last quarter 
of the 19th century; the separate pavilion system had been 
already adopted on'practical grounds, but the building is treated 




Fig. 105. — Cragside. (R. Norman Shaw.) 

in a sumptuous architectural style, as if representing so many 
detached mansions — a treatment which woul i now be deprecated 
as an expenditure foreign to the main purpose of the building. 
One recent hospital, however, that at Birmingham, by W. 
Henman, combining architectural effect with the latest hygienic 
improvements, was the first large hospital in Great Britain in 
which the system of mechanical ventilation was completely and 
consistently carried out. 

In theatre building there has been an immense improvement 
in regard to planning, ventilation and fireproof construction, 
but little to note in an architectural sense, since theatres in 
England are never designed by eminent architects, the financial 
and practical aspects being alone considered. 

In domestic architecture the tendency has been to quit 
picturesque irregularity for a more formal and more dignified 
treatment. Such a house as Norman Shaw's " Cragside," built 
in the earlier part of our period (fig. 105), however its picturesque 



treatment may still be admired, would hardly be built now on 
a large scale; its architect himself has of late years shown a 
preference for a symmetrical and regular treatment of BnS J lstl 
house architecture sometimes to the extent of making domestic 
the mansion look too like a barrack. In street archi- and street 
tecture, however, the tendency has been towards a f™ 
more characteristic and more picturesque treatment; 
nor is there any class of building in which the improvement in 
English architecture has been more marked and more unques- 
tionable. Many of the new residential streets in the west end of 
London present a really picturesque ensemble, and many shops 
and other commercial street buildings have been erected with 




Fig. 106. — London City & Midland Bank, Ludgate Hill Branch. 
(Collcutt.) 

admirable fronts from the designs of some of the best architects 
of the day. Norman Shaw's building at the corner of St James's 
Street and Pall Mall was one of the first, and is still one of the 
best examples of modern street architecture, though surpassed 
by the same architect's more recent building opposite, at the 
south-west angle of St James's Street — one of the finest and 
most monumental examples of street architecture in London. 
Among other examples may be cited T. E. Collcutt's London 
City & Midland Bank in Ludgate Hill (fig. 106) and R. Blom- 
field's narrow house-front in Buckingham Gate (fig. 107). The 
introduction of sculpture in street fronts is also beginning to 
receive attention; and a simple house-front recently erected 
in Margaret Street, London, from the design of Beresford Pite 
(fig. 108), is an excellent example of the use of sculpture in 



MODERN] 



ARCHITECTURE 



441 



connexion with ordinary street architecture. It is significant of 
the increased attention accorded to street architecture, that the 
most important architectural event in England at the very close 
of the 19th century, was the outlay of £2000 by the London 
County Council, in fees to eight architects for designs for the 
front of the proposed new streets of Kingsway and Aldwych. 
The idea was to treat these streets as comprehensive architectural 
designs with a certain unity of effect. Unfortunately this idea 




Fig. 107. — House in Buckingham Gate, London. (R. Blomfield.) 

was abandoned for merely commercial reasons, it being feared that 
there would be a difficulty in letting the sites if tenants were 
required to conform their frontages to a general design. In the 
case of Aldwych, which is a crescent street, this decision was 
fatal. A crescent loses all its effect unless treated as a complete 
and symmetrical architectural design. 

The competition for the Queen Victoria Memorial, consisting 
of a processional road from Whitehall to Buckingham Palace, 
culminating in a sculptural trophy in front of the palace, 
attracted a great deal of attention in 1901. Of the five invited 
competitors — Sir Aston Webb (b. 1849), T. G. Jackson, Ernest 
George (b. 1839), Sir Thomas Drew (b. 1838), and Sir Rowand 
Anderson (b. 1834) the two latter representing Ireland and 
Scotland respectively, — Sir Aston Webb's design was selected, 
and unquestionably showed the best and most effective manner 
of laying out the road, as well as a very pleasing architectural 
treatment of the semicircular forecourt in front of the palace, 
with pavilions and fountain-basins symmetrically spaced; 
but some of this was subsequently sacrificed on grounds of 
economy. The building, a triumphal arch flanked by pavilions, 



forming the entry to the processional road from Whitehall, is 
a dignified design. 

In France, still the leading artistic nation of the world, the art 
of architecture has been in a most flourishing and most active 
state in the most recent period. It is true that there Recent 
is not the same variety as in modern English archi- French 
tecture, nor have there been the same discussions and archi- 
experiments in regard to the true aim and course of 
architecture which have excited so much interest in England; 
because the French architects, unlike the English, know exactly 
what they want. They have a " school " of architecture; they 
adhere to the scholastic or academic theory of architecture as 
an art founded on the study of classic models; and on this 
basis their architects receive the 
most thorough training of any in 
the world. This predominance of 
the academic theory deprives their 
architecture, no doubt, of a good 
deal of the element of variety and 
picturesqueness; a French architect 
pur sang, in fact, never attempts 
the picturesque, unless in a country 
residence, and then the results are 
such that one wishes the attempt 
had not been made. But, on the 
other hand, modern French archi- 
tecture at its best has a dignity and 
style about it which no other nation 
at present reaches, and which goes 
far to atone for a certain degree 
of sameness and repetition in its 
motives; and living under a govern- 
ment which recognizes the import- 
ance of national architecture, and 
is willing to spejid public money 
liberally on it (with the full appro- 
bation of its public), the French 
architects have opportunities which 
English ones but seldom enjoy — 
the predominant aim with a British 
government being to see how little 
they can spend on a public building. 
The two great Paris exhibitions of 
1889 and 1900 may be regarded as 
important events in connexion with 
architecture, for even the temporary 

buildings erected for them showed -••—■■^ ^asata** 

an amount of architectural interest gsfti""""""* 
and originality which could be met Fig. 108.— House in Mar- 
with nowhere else, and which in each garet Street, London. (Beres- 
case left its mark behind it, though f° r( i Pite.) 
with a difference; for while in the 1889 exhibition the main 
object was to treat temporary structures — iron and concrete 
and terra-cotta — in an undisguised but artistic manner, 
in those of the 1900 exhibition the effort was to create an 
architectural coup d'xil of apparently monumental structures 
of which the actual construction was disguised. In spite of 
some eccentricities the amount of invention and originality 
shown in these temporary buildings was most remarkable; 
but fortunately the exhibition left something more permanent 
behind it in the shape of the two art-palaces and the new bridge 
over the Seine. The two palaces are triumphs of modern 
classic architecture; the larger one (by MM. Thomas, Louvet 
and Deglane) is to some extent spoiled by the apparently 
unavoidable glass roof; the smaller one, by M. Girault, escapes 
this drawback, and, still more refined than its greater opposite, 
is one of the most beautiful buildings of modern times; the 
central portion is shown in Plate XIV., fig. 130. The architectural 
pylons, with their accompanying ■ sculpture, which flank the 
entries to the bridge, are worthy of the best period of French 
Renaissance. Thus much, at least, has the 1900 exhibition 
done for architecture. 




442 



ARCHITECTURE 



[MODERN 



At the beginning of the last quarter of the 19th century stands 
one of the most important of modern French buildings, the Paris 
hotel de ville, commenced shortly after the war, from the 
designs of MM. Ballu and Deperthes, planned on an immense 
scale, and on the stateliest and most monumental lines: the 
plan is given in fig. 109. The central block is, externally, a 




Fig. 109. — Plan of H6tel de Ville, Paris. 



A, Salle des Fetes. 

B, Salle a manger. 



F, Salle des Cariatides. 

G, General Secretary. 



C, Salons de Reception. H, Prefect. 



D, Council Chamber. 

E, Grand Staircase. 



K, Committee Rooms. 
L, Public Works. 



M, Corridor. 

N, President of Council 

O, Library. 

P, Refreshment Room. 



restoration of the old hotel de ville, the remainder carried out 
in an analogous but somewhat more modern style. The interior 
has been the scene of sumptuous pictorial decoration, in which all 
the first artists of the day were employed — unfortunately in 
too scattered a manner and on no pre- 
dominant or consistent scheme. One of the 
most characteristic architectural efforts of 
the French has consisted in the erection of 
the various smaller ho tels-de- ville or mairies, 
in the city and suburban districts of the 
capital; as at Pan tin, Lilas, Suresnes and 
in various arrondissements within the city 
proper (Plate XIII., fig. 127). Nothing shows 
the quality of modern French architecture 
better, or perhaps more favourably, than this | 
series of district town halls; all have a dis- 
tinctly municipal character and a certain 
family resemblance of style amid their 
diversity of details; all are refined speci- 
mens of pre-eminently civilized architecture. 
Among the greater architectural efforts of 
France is the immense block of the new 
Sorbonne, by M. Nenot, a building sufficient 
in itself for an architectural reputation. 
Among smaller French buildings of peculiar 
merit may be mentioned the Musee Galliera, 
in the Trocadero quarter of Paris, designed 
by M. Ginain — a work of pure art in archi- 
tecture such as we should nowadays look 
for in vain out of France; the Ecole de 
Medecine, by the same refined architect 
(fig. no); and the chapel in rue Jean 
Goujon (Guilbert), erected as a memorial to 
the victims of the bazaar fire, again a 
notable instance of a work of pure thought 
in architecture — a new conception out of old materials. The 
new Opera Comique (Bernier) should also be mentioned, the 
rather disappointing result of a competition which excited 
great interest at the time. Street architecture has been carried 
out of late in Paris in a sumptuous style, with great stone fronts 



and a profusion of carved ornament, such as we know nothing of 
in England; and though there is a rather monotonous repetition 
of the same style and character throughout the new or newly 
built streets, it is impossible to deny the effect of palatial dignity 
they impart to the city. In the matter of country houses the 
French architect is less fortunate; when he attempts what he 
regards as the rural picturesque, his good taste seems 
entirely to desert him, and the maison de campagne is 
generally a mere riot of gimcrack bargeboards and 
finials. In Paris, the taste for the contortions of what 
is called art nouveau has led to the erection, here and 
there, of ugly and eccentric fronts with preposterous 
ornamental details; but the invasion of this element 
is only partial and will probably not prove other than a 
passing phase. 

The great military success of Germany in 1870, and 
the founding of the German empire, gave, as is usual 
in such crises, a decided impetus to public aermaay. 
architecture, of which the central and most 
important visible sign is the German Houses of Parlia- 
ment (Plate IX., fig. 117), by Paul Wallot (b. 1841), 
whose design was selected in a competition. There is 
something essentially German in the quality of this 
national building; classic architecture minus its refine- 
ment. The detail is coarse; the finish of the end 
pavilions of the principal front absolutely unmeaning — 
mere architectural rodomontade; the central cupola of 
glass and iron, on a square plan, probably the ugliest 
central feature on any great building in Europe; and 
yet there is undeniable power about the whole thing; it 
is the characteristic product of a conquering nation not 
reticent in its triumph. The new cathedral at Berlin, by 
Julius Raschdorff (b. 1823), is the other most important German 
work of the period (fig. in); a building very striking and 
unusual in plan, but absolutely commonplace in its archi- 
tectural detail; school classic of the most ordinary type, without 
even any of those elements of originality 
which are to be found in the Houses of 
Parliament. A curious feature in the plan 
(fig. 112) is that the building, alone of any 
cathedral we can recall, has its principal 
general entrance at the side, the end 
entrance being reserved for a special 




Fig. no. — Ecole de Medecine, Paris. (Ginain.) 

imperial cortege on special occasions, the cathedral also serving the 
second purpose of an imperial mausoleum. Theatre building has 
been carried on very largely in Germany,and among its productions 
the Lessing theatre at Berlin (fig. 113) (Hermann von der Hude 
and Julius Hennicke, d. 1892) is a favourable example of German 



MODERN] 



ARCHITECTURE 



443 



classic at its best, besides being, like most modern German 
theatres, very well planned (fig. 1 14). Hamburg has had its new 
municipal buildings (Grotjan), a florid Renaissance building with 
a central tower, showing in its general effect and grouping a good 
deal of Gothic feeling. Mention may also be made of the Im- 
perial law courts (Reichsgerichtsgebaude) at Leipzig, designed 
by Ludwig Hoffmann (b. 1852) and finished in 1895, a building 




Other 
countries. 



genius in architecture, who had the good fortune to be appre- 
ciated and given a free hand by his government. The design 
is based on classic architecture, but with a treatment so com- 
pletely individual as to remove it almost entirely from 
the category of imitative or revival architecture; some- 
what fantastic it may be, but as an original architectural 
creation it stands almost alone among modern public buildings. 
In Vienna the scholastic classic style has been retained with 
much more purity and refinement than in the German capital, 
and the Parliament Houses (Plate IX., fig. 116), by Theophil 
Hansen (1813-1891), if they show no originality of detail, have 
the merit of original and very effective grouping. Budapest, on 
the other hand, which has almost sprung into existence since 1875 




Fig. hi. — Cathedral at Berlin. (Raschdorff.) 

with no more charm about it, externally, than the Berlin Parlia- 
ment Houses, but with some good interior effects. The new 
post offices in Germany have been an important undertaking, 
and are, at all events, buildings of more mark than those in 
England. There has also been a great deal of new development 
in street architecture, which shows an immense variety, and a 
constantly evident determination to do something striking; but 




Fig. 113. — Lessing Theatre, Berlin. (Von der Hude and 
Hennicke.) 

we find in it neither the dignity of Parisian street architecture nor 
the refinement of modern London work; there is an element of 
the bombastic about it. 

No modern building on the European continent is more 
remarkable than the Brussels law courts (Plate XL, fig. 121) 
from the designs of Joseph Poelaert (1816-1879), an original 



Fig. 112.- — Plan of Cathedral at Berlin. 

as the rival of the Austrian capital, has erected a great Parliament 
building of florid character (Plate IX., fig. 115), in a style in 
which the Gothic element is prevalent, though the central feature 
is a dome. The plan (see fig. 92) is obviously based on that of the 
Westminster building; the exterior design, however, has the merit 
of clearly indicating the position of the two Chambers as part of 
the architectural design, the want of which is the one serious de- 
fect of Barry's noble struc- 
ture. In Italy modern 
architecture is at a very 
low ebb; the one great 
work of this period was the 
building of the facade to 
the Duomo at Florence, 
from the design of de 
Fabris, who did not live 
to see its completion. As 
the completion in modern 
times of a building of 
world-wide fame, it is a 
work of considerable in- 
terest, and, on the whole, 
not unworthy of its posi- 
tion; that it should 
harmonize quite satis- 
factorily with the ancient 
structure was hardly to 
be expected. It was prob- 
ably the completion of 
this facade which led the 
city of Milan to start a 
great architectural com- 
petition, in the early 



Fig. 



114. — Plan of Lessing Theatre, 
Berlin. 



'eighties, for the erection of a new facade to its celebrated 
cathedral, not because the facade had never been completed, but 
because it had been spoiled and patched with bad 18th-century 
work. The ambition was a legitimate one, and the competition, 
open to all the world, excited the greatest interest; but the 
young Italian architect, Brentano, to whom the first premium 



444 



ARCHITRAVE— ARCHON 



was awarded, died shortly afterwards, and other causes, partly 
financial, led to the postponement of the scheme, though it 
is understood that there is still an intention of carrying out 
Brentano's design under the direction of the official architectural 
department of the city. 

In summing up the present position of modern architecture, 
it may be said that architecture is now a more cosmopolitan 
art than it has been at any previous period. The 
elusion. separate development of a national style has become 
in the present day almost an impossibility. Increased 
means of communication have brought all civilized nations into 
close touch with each other's tastes and ideas, with the natural 
consequence that the treatment of a special class of building 
in any one country will not differ very materially from its 
treatment in another; though there are nuances of local taste 
in detail, in manner of execution, in the materials used. And 
the civilized countries have almost with one consent returned, 
in the main, to the adoption of a school of architecture based 
on classic types. The taste for medievalism is dying out even in 
Great Britain, which has been its chief stronghold. 

What course the future of modern architecture will take it 
is not easy to prophesy. What is quite certain is that it is now 
an individual art, each important building being the production, 
not of an unconsciously pursued national style, but of a personal 
designer. As far as there is a ruling consensus in architectural 
taste, this will tend to become, like dress and manners, more and 
more cosmopolitan; and it seems probable that it will be based 
more or less on the types left us by Classic and Renaissance 
architecture. There are, however, two influences which may 
have a definite effect on the architecture of the near future. 
One of these is the possible greater rapprochement between 
architecture and engineering, of which there are already some 
signs to be seen; architects will learn more of the kind of struc- 
tural problems which are now almost the exclusive province 
of the engineer, and there will be a demand that engineering 
works shall be treated, as they well may be, with some of the 
refinement and expression of architecture. The other influence 
lies in the closer connexion, which is already taking place, 
between architecture and the allied arts, so that an important 
building will be regarded and treated as a field for the application 
of decorative sculpture and painting of the highest class, and 
as being incomplete without these. It is in this closer union 
of architecture with the other arts that there lies the best hope 
for the architecture of the future. 

Authorities. — The literature of architecture as a modern art is 
limited, the most important publications of recent times being 
mainly devoted to the study and illustration of ancient architecture. 
The following, however, may be named : — James Fergusson, History 
of Modern Architecture (2nd ed., London, 1873); T. G. Jackson, 
Modern Gothic Architecture (London, 1873); J. T. Micklethwaite, 
Modern Parish Churches (London, 1874) ; E. R. Robson, School 
Architecture (London, 1874); J- J- Stevenson, House Architecture 
(London, 1880) ; E. E. Viollet-le-Duc, How to Build a House (London, 
1874); Lectures on Architecture (London, 1881); H. C. Burdett, 
Hospitals and Asylums of the World (London, 1892-1893); Professor 
Oswald Kuhn, Kranke'nhduser (Stuttgart, 1897); E. O. . Sachs, 
Modern Opera-Houses and Theatres (London, 1897-1899); E. 
Wyndham Tarn, The Mechanics of Architecture (London, 1893); 
R. Norman Shaw, R.A., T. G. Jackson, R.A., and others, Architecture, 
a Profession or an Art (London, 1892); W. H. White, The Architect 
and his Artists (London, 1892); Architecture and Public Buildings 
in Paris and London (London, 1884); H. H. Statham, Architecture 
for General Readers (London, 1895); Modern Architecture (London, 
1898); Herrmann Muthesius, Die englische Baukunst der Gegenwart 
(Berlin and Leipzig, 1900) ; Der Architekten Verein zu Berlin, 
Berlin und Seine Bauten (Berlin, 1896). The real literature of 
modern architecture, however, is-to be found mainly in the articles 
and illustrations in the best periodical architectural publications of 
various countries. Among these Italy has none worth mention, 
and France, with all her architectural enthusiasm, has had no first- 
class architectural periodical since the extinction, about 1890, of the 
Revue generate de V architecture, conducted for more than fifty years 
by the late Cesar Daly, and in its day the first periodical of its class 
in the world. Among the best periodical publications are: The 
Architectural Record (quarterly), (New York); The Architectural 
Review (monthly), (Boston); the Allgemeine Bauzeitung (quarterly), 
(Vienna); the Berlin Architeklurwelt (monthly), (Berlin); The 
Builder (weekly), (London); La Construction moderne (weekly), 
(Paris). (H. H. S.) 



ARCHITRAVE (from Lat. arcus, an arch, and trabs, trabem, a 
beam), an architectural term for the chief beam which carries 
the superstructure and rests immediately on the columns. 
In the ordinary entablature it is the lowest of the three divisions, 
the other two being the frieze and the cornice (see Order). 
The term is also applied to the moulded frame of a doorway. 

ARCHIVE (Lat. archivum, a transliteration of Gr. apxeiov, 
an official building), a term (generally used in the plural 
" archives "), properly denoting the building in which are kept 
the records, charters and other papers belonging to any state, 
community or family, but now generally applied to the documents 
themselves (see Record). 

ARCHIVOLT (from Lat. arcus, an arch, and volta, a vault), 
an architectural term applied to the mouldings of an architrave, 
when carried round an arched opening. 

ARCHON (iipxoiv, ruler), the title of the highest magistrate 
in many ancient Greek states. It is only in Athens that we have 
any detailed knowledge of the office, and even in this one case 
the evidence presents problems of the first importance which 
are incapable of decisive solution. There is no doubt, that the 
archons represented the ancient kings, whose absolutism, under 
conditions which we can only infer, yielded in process of time to 
the power of the noble families, supported no doubt by the fight- 
ing force of the state. As to the process by which this change 
was effected there are two accounts. Traditionally, the monarchy 
after the death of Codrus (?io68 B.C.) gave place to the life 
archon whose tenure of office was limited afterwards to ten 
years and then to one year. Aristotle's Constitution of Athens 
(q.v.) speaks of five stages: (1) the institution of the polemarch 
who took over the military duties of the king; (2) the institution 
of the archon to relieve the king of his civil duties; (3) the tenure 
of office was reduced to ten years (?752 B.C.); (4) the office 
was taken from the " royal " clan and thrown open to all Eupa- 
tridae (? 712 B.C.); (5) office was made annual, and to the existing 
three offices were added the six thesmothetae whose duty it 
was to record judicial decisions. The value of this latter account 
is, of course, debatable, but it is at least compatible with the 
general trend of development from hereditary absolutism, civil, 
military and religious, in the person of the " king," to a con- 
stitutional oligarchy. The change was clearly effected by the 
devolution of the military and civil powers of the king to the 
polemarch and the archon, while the archon basileus (or king) 
retained control of state religion. It is equally clear that owing 
to the predominating importance of civil affairs, the archon 
became the chief state official and gave his name to the year 
(hence archon eponymus) .' It should be noticed that the analogy 
which has often been suggested between the early history of 
the archonship at Athens, and such cases as the mayors of the 
palace in French history, or the tycoon (shogun) and mikado 
in Japanese history, is misleading. In these cases it is the old 
royal house that retains the royal title and the semblance of power, 
while the real authority passes into new hands. In Athens, 
the new civil office is vested in the old royal family, while the old 
title along with its religious functions is transferred. The early 
history of the thesmothetae is not clear, but this much is certain 
that there is no adequate reason for supposing, as many historians 
do, that in early times, they, with the three chief archons, con- 
stituted a collective or collegiate magistracy. It is true Thucy- 
dides (i. 126) states that, in the time of the Cylonian conspiracy 
(? 632 B.C.), " the nine archons were {i.e. collectively) the principal 
officials," but at the same time the responsibility for the action 
then taken attached to the Alcmaeonidae alone, because one 
of their number, Megacles, was at that time the archon {i.e. 
responsibility was personal, not collective). Again, the Con- 
stitution of Athens says that down to Solon's time the archons 
had no official residence, but that afterwards they used the 
Thesmotheteion. It is a reasonable inference from this statement 
that the thesmothetae had previously sat together apart from 
the superior archons and that it was only after Solon that col- 
legiate responsibility began. 

Evolution of the Office. — The history of the democratization of 
the archonship is beset with equal difficulty. In the early days, 



MODERN] 



ARCHITECTURE 



Plate XV. 




Copyright igoi 6y Detroit Photographic Co. 

Fig. 131.— "FLAT-IRON" BUILDING, NEW YORK. 
(For method of construction, see Steel Construc- 
tion, and Plate II., Fig. 4, of that article.) 



Copyright ifjos by Detroit Publishing Co. 

Fig. 134.— THE UNIVERSITY CLUB, NEW YORK. 



Plate XVT. 



ARCHITECTURE 



[MODERN 




ARCHON 



445 



the importance of the office (confined as it was to the highest 
class) must have been immense; there was no audit, no written 
law, no executive council. The popular assembly was ill- 
organized and probably summoned by the archons themselves. 
The only control came from the Areopagus which elected them 
and would generally be favourably disposed, and from the fact 
that the military and civil powers were not vested in the same 
hands. Although the institution of the popular courts by Solon 
had within it the germ of democratic supremacy, it is clear that 
the immediate result was small; thus, in the next decade 
anarchia was continuous and Damasias held the archonship 
for more than two years in defiance of the new constitution; 
the prolonged dissension in this matter shows that the office 
of archon still retained its supreme importance. Gradually, 
however, the archonship lost its power, especially in judicial 
matters, until it retained merely the right of holding the pre- 
liminary investigation and the formal direction of the popular 
courts. Its administrative powers, save those wielded by the 
polemarch (see below and cf. Strategus), dwindled away into 
matters of routine. We know that Peisistratus ruled by con- 
trolling the archonship, which was always held by members of 
his family, and the archonship of Isagoras was clearly an 
important party victory; we know further the names of three 
important men who held the office between Cleisthenes' reform 
and the Persian War (Hipparchus, Themistocles (q.v.), Aristides) 
from which we infer that the office was still the prize of party 
competition. On the other hand, after 487 B.C. the list of 
archons contains no name of importance. Presumably this is 
due to the growing importance of the Strategus and to the 
institution of sortition (see below), which, whether as cause or 
effect, is presumably by the sth century indicative of diminished 
importance. There can, on these assumptions, be no doubt 
that, from the early years of the 5th century B.C., the archonship 
was of practically no importance. Furthermore we find that 
(probably after the Persian War) the office is thrown open to the 
second class, and finally in 457 B.C. we meet an archon, Mnesi- 
theides, of the third, or Zeugite, class. Plutarch (Aristides, 22) 
says that after the great struggle of the Persian War Aristides 
threw open the office to all the citizens. But in fact the members 
of the fourth class were not formally admitted even in the 4th 
century (though by a fiction they were allowed to pose for the 
time as Zeugites). Furthermore it is not till 457 that even a 
Zeugite archon is known, according to the Constitution of Athens 
(c. 26), which dates the change as five years after the death of 
Ephialtes and does not connect it with Aristides. 

Sortition. — The next question constitutes perhaps the most 
important problem in Greek political development. At what 
date was election by lot, or sortition, introduced for the archon- 
ship? From the Constitution of Athens (c. 22) we gather that 
from the fall of the Tyranny to 487 B.C. the archons were alperoi, 
not k\ijpwtoL (i.e. chosen by vote, not by lot), and that in 487, 
limited sortition was introduced, whereby fifty candidates were 
elected by each tribe, and from these the archons and their 
" secretary " were chosen by lot. But against this must be set 
the statement by the same authority that this double method 
was part of the Solonian reform. The solution of the dilemma 
is a matter of inference. Three indications favour the former 
view: (1) the "anarchia" which occurred so often between 
Solon and Peisistratus shows that the office was at that time a 
question of party (i.e. elective); (2) the statement that Solon 
invented sortition for the office is put as the basis of a comparison 
(6dev, crqixtiov) and, therefore, may fairly be regarded as a 
hypothesis; (3) there is no indication that the change made in 
487 B.C. was a return to an obsolete method, and on the same 
argument it is odd that Solon's alleged system should not have 
been revived at the end of the Tyranny. On the other hand 
Herodotus (vi. 109) states that, in 490, before the battle of 
Marathon, the polemarch was chosen by lot. If this be true, 
it follows that the office of polemarch must have lost its military 
importance, which was not the case, inasmuch as the polemarch 
at Marathon gave the casting vote in favour of immediate battle. 
Whether, therefore, Solon or Aristides was the first to introduce 



sortition, it is perfectly clear that the lot was not used between 
the Tyranny and 487 B.C. and that after 487 the lot was always 
used (see J.E. Sandys, Constitution of Athens c. 8 note 1, c. 22 § 5, 
note) ; in fact, at a date not known the mixed system of Aristides 
gave place to double sortition, in which the first nomination also 
was by lot. To enter here into the theory of the lot is impossible. 
It should, however, be observed that in the somewhat material 
atmosphere of constitutional Athens the religious significance 
of the lot had vanished; no important office in the 5th and 4th 
centuries was entrusted to its decision. The real effect of 
sortition was to equalize the chances of rich and poor without 
civil strife. Now it is perfectly clear that it could not have been 
this object which impelled Solon to introduce sortition; for in 
his time the archonship was not open to the lower classes, and, 
therefore, election was more democratic than sortition, whereas 
later the case was reversed. It should further be mentioned that, 
before the discovery of the Aristotelian Constitution in 1 89 1 , Grote, 
C. F. Hermann, Busolt and others had maintained that the lot 
was not used in Athens before the time of Cleisthenes ; and in spite 
of the treatise, it must be admitted that there is no satisfactory 
evidence, historical or inferential, that their theory was unsound. 

Qualifications and Functions. — It remains to give a brief 
analysis of the qualifications and functions of the archons after 
the year 487 B.C. After election (in the time of Aristotle in the 
month Anthesterion; in the 3rd century in Munychion) a short 
time had to elapse before entering on office to allow of the 
dokimasia (examination of fitness). In this the whole life of the 
nominee was investigated, and each had to prove that he was 
physically without flaw. Failure to pass the scrutiny involved 
a certain loss of civic rights (e.g. that of addressing the people"*. 
The successful candidate had to take an oath to the people 
(that he would not take bribes, &c.) and to go through certain 
preliminary rites. Any citizen could bring an impeachment 
(eisangelia) against the archons. Any delinquency involved a 
trial before the Heliaea. Finally an examination took place at 
the end of the year of office, when each archon had to answer for 
his actions with person and possessions; till then he could not 
leave the country, be adopted into another family, dispose of 
his property, nor receive any " crown of honour." A similar 
investigation took place with regard to the assessors (paredri) 
whom the three senior archons chose to assist them. The archons 
at the end of their year of office (some say on entering upon office) 
became members of the Areopagus, which was, therefore, a body 
composed of ex-archons of tried probity and wisdom. The 
archons as a body retained some duties such as the appointment 
of jurymen, the sortition of the athlothetae, &c. (but see Gilbert's 
Antiquities, Eng. trans., p. 251, n. 1). On entering upon office 
the archon (archon eponymus) made proclamation by his herald 
that he would not interfere with private property. His official 
residence was the Prytaneum where he presided over all questions 
of family, e.g. the protection of parents against children and 
vice versa, protection of widows, wardship of heiresses and 
orphans, divorce; in religious matters he superintended the 
Dionysia, the Thargelia, the processions in honour' of Zeus the 
Saviour and Asclepius. The archon basileus superintended the 
holy places, the mysteries, the Lampadephoria (Torch race), &c, 
questions of national religion and certain cases of bloodguiltiness. 
His official residence was the Stoa Basileios, and his wife, as 
officially representing the wife of Dionysus, was called Basilinna. 
The polemarch, who was at any rate titular commander down 
to about 487 B.C. (see above; and Herod, vi. 109, foSe/coros 
\pt}4>iSo<t>6pos) , became in the 5th century a sort of consul who 
watched over the rights of resident aliens (metoeci) in their 
family and legal affairs. He offered sacrifices to Artemis Agrotera 
and Enyalios, superintended epitaphia and arranged for the 
annual honours paid to the tyrannicides. His official residence 
was the Epilyceum (formerly called the Polemarcheion) . 

Bibliography. — G. Gilbert, Constitutional Antiquities (Eng. 
trans., 1895) ; Eduard Meyer's Geschichte des Alterthums, ii. sect. 228 ; 
A. H. J. Greenidge, Handbook of Greek Constitutional Hist. (1895); 
J. W. Headlam, Election by Lot in Athens (Camb., 1891); and 
authorities quoted under Greece: History, ancient, and Athens: 
History. (J. M. M.) 



446 



ARCHPRIEST— ARCOT 



ARCHPRIEST (Lat. archipresbyter, Gr. apxnr pea fivr epos), in 
the Christian Church, originally the title of the chief of the 
priests in a diocese. The office appears as early as the 4th cent- 
ury as that of the priest who presided over the presbyters of 
the diocese and assisted the bishop in matters of public worship, 
much as the archdeacon helped him in administrative affairs. 
Where, as in Germany, the dioceses were of vast extent, these 
were divided into several archpresbyterates. Out of these 
developed the rural deaneries, the office of archpriest being 
ultimately merged in that of rural dean, with which it became 
synonymous. It thus became strictly subordinate to the 
jurisdiction of the archdeacon. In Rome itself, as the office of 
archdeacon grew into that of cardinal-camerlengo, so that of 
archpriest of St Peter's developed into that of the cardinal-vicar. 
In England from 1598 until the appointment of a vicar-apostolic 
in 1623 the Roman Catholic clergy were placed by the pope 
under an " archpriest " as superior of the English mission. 
In the Lutheran Church in Germany the title archpriest {Erz- 
priester) was in some cases long retained as the equivalent of 
that of superintendent, sometimes also still called dean (Dechant), 
his functions being much the same as those of the rural dean. 

ARCHYTAS (c. 428-347 B.C.), of Tarentum, Greek philosopher 
and scientist of the Pythagorean school, famous as the intimate 
friend of Plato, was the son of Mnesagoras or Histiaeus. Equally 
distinguishedin natural science,philosophyand the administration 
of civic affairs, he takes a high place among the versatile savants 
of the ancient Greek world. He was a man of high character 
and benevolent disposition, a fine flute-player, and a generous 
master to his slaves, for whose children he invented the rattle. 
He took a prominent part in state affairs, and, contrary to 
precedent, was seven times elected commander of the army. 
Under his leadership, Tarentum fought with unvarying success 
against the Messapii, Lucania and even Syracuse. After a 
life of high intellectual achievement and uninterrupted public 
service, he was drowned (according to a tradition suggested by 
Horace, Odes, i. 28) on a voyage across the Adriatic, and was 
buried, as we are told, at Matinum in Apulia. He is described 
as the eighth leader of the Pythagorean school, and was a pupil 
(not the teacher, as some have maintained) of Philolaus. In 
mathematics, he was the first to draw up a methodical treatment 
of mechanics with the aid of geometry; he first distinguished 
harmonic progression from arithmetical and geometrical pro- 
gressions. As a geometer he is classed by Eudemus, the greatest 
ancient authority, among those who " have enriched the science 
with original theorems, and given it a really sound arrangement." 
He evolved an ingenious solution of the duplication of the cube, 
which shows considerable knowledge of the generation of cylinders 
and cones. The theory of proportion, and the study of acoustics 
and music were considerably advanced by his investigations. 
He was said to be the inventor of a kind of flying-machine, a 
wooden pigeon balanced by a weight suspended from a pulley, 
and set in motion by compressed air escaping from a valve. 1 
Fragments of his ethical and metaphysical writings are quoted 
by Stobaeus, Simplicius and others. To portions of these 
Aristotle has been supposed to have been indebted for his doc- 
trine of the categories and some of his chief ethical theories. 
It is, however, certain that these fragments are mainly forgeries, 
attributable to the eclecticism of the 1st or 2nd century a.d., 
of which the chief characteristic was a desire to father later 
doctrines on the old masters. Such fragments as seem to be 
authentic are of small philosophical value. It is important to 
notice that Archytas must have been famous as a philosopher, 
inasmuch as Aristotle wrote a special treatise (not extant) 
On the Philosophy of Archytas. Some positive idea of his specu- 
lations may be derived from two of his observations: the one 
in which he notices that the parts of animals and plants are in 
general rounded in form, and the other dealing with the sense of 
hearing, which, in virtue of its limited receptivity, he compares 

1 If this be the proper translation of Aulus Gellius, Nodes Atticae, 
x. 12. .9," . . . simulacrum columbae e ligno . . . factum; ita erat 
■scilicet libramentis suspensum et aura spiritus inclusa atque occulta 
concitum." (See Aeronautics.) 



with vessels, which when filled can hold no more. Two important 
principles are illustrated by these thoughts, (1) that there is no 
absolute distinction between the organic and the inorganic, and 
(2) that the argument from final causes is no explanation of 
phenomena. Archytas may be quoted as an example of Plato's 
perfect ruler, the philosopher-king, who combines practical 
sagacity with high character and philosophic insight. 

See G. Hartenstein, De Arch. Tar. frag. (Leipzig, 1833) ; O. F. 
Gruppe, Uber d. Frag. d. Arch. (1840); F. Beckmann, De Pythag. 
reliq. (Berlin, 1844, 1850); Egger, De Arch. Tar. vit., op. phit.; 
Ed. Zeller, Phil. d. Griech. ; Theodor Gomperz, Greek Thinkers, ii. 
259 (Eng. trans. G. G. Berry, Lond., 1905); G. J. Allman, Greek 
Geometry from Thales to Euclid (1889) ; Florian Cajori, History of 
Mathematics (New York, 1894); M. Cantor, Gesch. d. gr. Math. 
(1894 foil.). The mathematical fragments are collected by Fr. Blass, 
Melanges Graux (Paris, 1884). For Pythagorean mathematics see 
further Pythagoras. 

ARCIS-SUR-AUBE, a town of eastern France, capital of an 
arrondissement in the department of Aube, on the left bank of 
the Aube, 23 m. N. of Troyes on the Eastern railway to Chalons- 
sur-Marne. Pop. (1906) 2803. Fires in 1719, 1727 and 1814 
destroyed the ancient buildings, and it is now a town built in 
modern style with wide and regular streets. A chateau of the 
1 8th century occupies the site of an older one in which Diana 
of Poitiers, mistress of Henry II., resided. The only other 
building of interest is the church, which dates from the 15th 
century. In front of it there is a statue of Danton, a native 
of the town. Arcis-sur-Aube has a tribunal of first instance. 
Its industries include -important hosiery manufactures, and it 
carries on trade in grain and coal. The town communicates 
with Paris by means of the Aube, which becomes navigable at 
this point. 

A battle was fought here on the 20th and 21st of March 
1814 between Napoleon and the Austro-Russian army under 
Schwarzenberg (see Napoleonic Campaigns) . 

ARCOLA, a village of northern Italy, 16 m. E.S.E. of Verona, 
on the Alpone stream, near its confluence with the Adige below 
Verona. The village gives its name to the three days' battle of 
Areola (15th, 16th and 17th of November 1796), in which the 
French, under General Napoleon Bonaparte, defeated the Aus- 
trians commanded by Allvintzy (see French Revolutionary 
Wars). 

ARCOS DE LA FRONTERA, a town of southern Spain, in the 
province of Cadiz ; on the right bank of the river Guadalete, 
which flows past Santa Maria into the Bay of Cadiz. Pop. (1900) 
13,926. The town occupies a ridge of sandstone, washed on 
three sides by the river, and commanding fine views of the lofty 
peak of San Cristobal, on the east, and the fertile Guadalete 
valley, celebrated in ancient Spanish ballads for its horses. At 
the highest point of the ridge is a Gothic church with a fine 
gateway, and a modern tower overlooking the town. The fame 
of its ten bells dates from the wars between Spaniards and Moors 
in which " Arcos of the Frontier " received its name. After its 
capture by Alphonso the Wise of Castile (1252-1284), the town 
was a Christian stronghold on the borders of Moorish territory. 
Another church contains several Moorish banners, taken in 
1483 at the battle of Zahara, a neighbouring village. The 
ruined citadel, the theatre, and the palace of the dukes of Arcos 
are the only other noteworthy buildings. Roman remains have 
been found in the vicinity, and the ridge of Arcos is honeycombed 
with rock-hewn chambers, said to be ancient cave-dwellings. 

See Galeria de Arcobricenses illustres (Arcos, 1892), and Riqueza 
y cultura de Arcos de la Frontera (Arcos, 1898) ; both by M. Mancheno 
y Olivares. 

ARCOSOLIUM (from Lat. arcus, arch, and solium, a sarco- 
phagus), an architectural term applied to an arched recess used 
as a burial place in a catacomb (q.v.). 

ARCOT, the name of a city and two districts of British India 
in the presidency of Madras. Arcot city is the principal town in 
the district of North Arcot. It. occupies a very prominent place 
in the history of the British conquest of India, but it has now 
lost its manufactures and trade and preserves only a few mosques 
and tombs as traces of its former grandeur. It is a station on 
the line of railway from Madras to Beypur, but has ceased to be 



ARCTIC— ARCUEIL 



447 



a military cantonment. The most famous episode in its history 
is the capture and defence of Arcot by Clive. In the middle 
of the 1 8th century, during the war between the rival claimants 
to the throne of the Carnatic, Mahommed Ali and Chanda Sahib, 
the English supported the claims of the former and the French 
those of the latter. In order to divert the attention of Chanda 
Sahib and his French auxiliaries from the siege of Trichinopoly, 
Clive suggested an attack upon Arcot and offered to command 
the expedition. His offer was accepted; but the only force 
which could be spared to him was 200 Europeans and 300 native 
troops to attack a fort garrisoned by 1100 men. The place, 
however, was abandoned without a struggle and Clive took 
possession of the fortress. The expedition produced the desired 
effect; Chanda Sahib was obliged to detach a large force of 
10,000 men to recapture the city, and the pressure on the English 
garrison at Trichinopoly was removed. Arcot was afterwards 
captured by the French; but in 1760 was retaken by Colonel 
Coote after the battle of Wandiwash. It was also taken by 
Hyder Ah when that invader ravaged the Carnatic in 1780, and 
held by him for some time. The town of Arcot, together with 
the whole of the territory of the Carnatic, passed into the hands 
of the British in 1801, upon the formal resignation of the govern- 
ment by the nawab, Azim-ud-daula, who received a liberal 
pension. 

The district of North Arcot is bounded on the N. by the 
districts of Cuddapah and Nellore; on the E. by the district 
of Chingleput; on the S. by the districts of South Arcot and 
Salem; and on the W. by the Mysore territory. The area of 
North Arcot is 7386 sq. m., and the population in 1001 was 
2,207,712, showing an increase of 4% in the decade. The aspect 
of the country, in the eastern and southern parts, is flat and 
uninteresting; but the western parts, where it runs along the 
foot of the Eastern Ghats, as well as all the country northwards 
from Trivellam to Tripali and the Karkambadi Pass, are moun- 
tainous, with an agreeable diversity of scenery. The elevated 
platform in the west of the district is comparatively cool, being 
2000 ft. above the level of the sea, with a mean maximum of the 
thermometer in the hottest weather of 88°. The hills are com- 
posed principally of granite and'syenite, and have little vegetation. 
Patches of stunted jungle here and there diversify their rugged 
and barren aspect; but they abound in minerals, especially 
copper and iron ores. The narrow valleys between the hills 
are very fertile, having a rich soil and an abundant water-supply 
even in the driest seasons. The principal river in the district 
is the Palar, which rises in Mysore, and flows through North 
Arcot from west to east past -the towns of Vellore and Arcot, into 
the neighbouring district of Chingleput, eventually falling into 
the sea at Sadras. Although a considerable stream in the rainy 
season, and often impassable, the bed is dry or nearly so during 
the rest of the year. Other smaller rivers of the district are the 
Paini, which passes near Chittore and falls into the Palar, the 
Sonamukhi and the Chayaur. These streams are all dry during 
the hot season, but in the rains they flow freely and replenish 
the numerous tanks and irrigation channels. The administrative 
headquarters are at Chittore, but the largest towns are Vellore 
(the military station), Tirupati (a great religious centre), and 
Walla japet and Kalahasti (the two chief places of trade). 

The district of South Arcot is bounded on the N. by the dis- 
tricts of North Arcot and Chingleput; on the E. by the French 
territory of Pondicherry and the Bay of Bengal; on the S. by 
the British districts of Tanjore and Trichinopoly; and on the 
VV. by the British district of Salem. It contains an area of 5217 
sq. m.; and its population in 1901 was 2,349,804, showing an 
increase of 9 % in the decade. The aspect of the district resembles 
that of other parts of the Coromandel coast. It is low and sandy 
near the sea, and for the most part level till near the western 
border, where ranges of hills form the boundary between this 
and the neighbouring district of Salem. These ranges are in 
some parts about 5000 ft. high, with solitary hills scattered about 
the district. In the western tracts, dense patches of jungle 
furnish covert to tigers, leopards, bears and monkeys. The 
principal river is the Coleroon which forms the southern boundary 



of the district, separating it from Trichinopoly. This river is 
abundantly supplied with water during the greater part of the 
year, and two irrigating channels distribute its waters through 
the district. The other rivers are the Vellar, Pennar, and Gada- 
lum, all of which are used for irrigation purposes. Numerous 
small irrigation channels lead off from them, by means of which 
a considerable area of waste land has been brought under culti- 
vation. Under the East India Company, a commercial resident 
was stationed at Cuddalore, and the Company's weavers were 
encouraged by many privileges. The manufacture and export 
of native cloth have now been almost entirely superseded by the 
introduction of European piece goods. The chief seaport of the 
district of South Arcot is Cuddalore, close to the site of Fort 
St David. The principal crops in both districts are rice, millet, 
other food grains, oil-seeds and indigo. 

ARCTIC (Gr. "Ap/cTos, the Bear, the northern constellation 
of Ursa Major), the epithet applied to the region round the 
North Pole, covering the area (both ocean and lands) where 
the characteristic polar conditions of climate, &c, obtain. 
The Arctic Circle is drawn at 66° 30' N. (see Polar Regions). 

ARCTINUS, of Miletus, one of the earliest poets of Greece 
and contributors to the epic cycle. He flourished probably about 
744 B.C. (01. 7). His poems are lost, but an idea of them can be 
gained from the Chrestomathy written by Proclus the Neo-Platonist 
of the 5th century or by a grammarian of the same name in the 
time of the Antonines. The Aethiopis {Aidioirls), in five books, 
was so called from the Aethiopian Memnon, who became the ally 
of the Trojans after the death of Hector. As the opening shows, 
it took up the narrative from the close of the Iliad. It begins 
with the famous deeds and death of the Amazon Penthesileia, 
and concludes with the death and burial of Achilles and the 
dispute between Ajax and Odysseus for his arms. The title 
thus only applied to part of the poem. The Sack of Troy (TXiou 
nepcrts) gives the stories of the wooden horse, Sinon, and Laocoon, 
the capture of the city, and the departure of the Greeks under 
the wrath of Athene at the outrage of Ajax on Cassandra. The 
Little Iliad ('Iykxs yutxpa) of Lesches formed the transition between 
the Aethiopis and the Sack of Troy. 

Kinkel, Epicorum Graecorum Fragmenta (1877); Welcker, Der 
epische Cyclus; Miiller, History of the Literature of Ancient Greece; 
Lang, Homer and the Epic (1893) ; Monro, Journal of Hellenic Studies 
(1883); T. W. Allen in Classical Quarterly, April 1908, pp. 82 foil. 

ARCTURUS, the brightest star in the northern hemisphere, 
situated in the constellation Bootes (q.v.) in an almost direct 
line with the tail (f and r\) of the constellation Ursa Major 
(Great Bear); hence its derivation from the Gr. apKros, bear, 
and oBpos, guard. Arcturus has been supposed to be referred 
to in various passages of the Hebrew Bible; the Vulgate reads 
Arcturus for stars mentioned in Job ix. 9, xxxvii. 9, xxxviii. 31, 
as well as Amos v. 8. Other versions, as also modern authorities, 
have preferred, e.g., Orion, the Pleiades, the Scorpion, the Great 
B ear (cf . A mos in the ' 'International Critical Comment. " series,and 
G. Schiaparelli, Astronomy in the O.T., Eng. trans., Oxford, 1905, 
ch. iv. ) . According to one of the Greek legends about Areas, son of 
Lycaon, king of Arcadia, he was killed by his father and his flesh 
was served up in a banquet to Zeus, who was indignant at the 
crime and restored him to life. Subsequently Areas, when hunting, 
chanced to pursue his mother Callisto, who had been trans- 
formed into a bear, as far as the temple of Lycaean Zeus; to 
prevent the crime of matricide Zeus transported them both to 
the heavens (Ovid, Metam. ii. 410), where Callisto became the 
constellation Ursa Major, and Areas the star Arcturus (see 
Lycaon and Callisto). 

ARCUEIL, a town of northern France, in the department of 
Seine, on the Bievre, 2§ m. N.E. of Sceaux on the railway from 
Paris to Limours. Pop. (1906) 8660. The town has an interest- 
ing church dating from the 13th to the 15th century. It takes 
its name from a Roman aqueduct, the Arcus Juliani (Arculi), 
some traces of which still remain. In 1613-1624 a bridge- 
aqueduct over 1300 ft. long was constructed to convey water 
from the spring of Rungis some 4 m. south of Arcueii, across 
the Bievre to the Luxembourg palace in Paris. In 1868-187 2 



448 



ARCULF— ARDASHIR 



another aqueduct, still longer, was superimposed above that of 
the 17 th century, forming part of the system conveying water 
from the river Vanne to Paris. The two together reach a height 
of about 155 ft. Bleaching, and the manufacture of bottle 
capsules, patent leather and other articles are carried on at 
Arcueil ; and there are important stone-quarries. 

ARCULF, a Gallican bishop and pilgrim-traveller, who 
visited the Levant about 680, and was the earliest Christian 
traveller and observer of any importance in the Nearer East 
after the rise of Islam. On his return he was driven by contrary 
winds to Britain, and so came to Iona, where he related his 
experiences to his host, the abbot Adamnan (679-704). This 
narrative, as written out by Adamnan, was presented to Aldfrith 
the Wise, last of the great Northumbrian kings, at York about 
701, and came to the knowledge of Bede, who inserted a 
brief summary of the same in his Ecclesiastical History of the 
English Nation, and also drew up a separate and longer digest 
which obtained great popularity throughout the middle ages as 
a standard guide-book (the so-called Libellus de locis Sanctis) 
to the Holy Places of Syria. Arculf is the first to mention the 
column at Jerusalem, which claimed to mark the exact centre of 
the Inhabited Earth, and later became one of the favourite 
Palestine wonders. Besides a valuable account of the principal 
sacred sites of Judaea, Samaria and Galilee as they existed in the 
7th century, he also gives important information as to Alexandria 
and Constantinople, briefly describes Damascus and Tyre, the 
Nile and the Lipari volcanoes, and refers to the caliph Moawiya I . 
(a.d. 661-680), whom he pictures as befriending Christians and 
rescuing the " sudarium " of Christ from the Jews. Arculf's 
record is especially useful from its plans, drawn from personal 
observation by the traveller himself, of the churches of the Holy 
Sepulchre and of Mount Sion in Jerusalem, of the Ascension 
on Olivet and of Jacob's well at Sichem. It is also a useful 
witness to the prosperity and trade of Alexandria after the 
Moslem conquest: it tells us how the Pharos was still lit up every 
night; and it gives us (from Constantinople) the first form of the 
story of St George which ever seems to have attracted notice in 
Britain. 

Thirteen MSS. of the original Arculf-Adamnan narrative exist, 
and fully 100 of Bede's abridgment: of the former, the most im- 
portant, containing all the plans, are (1) Bern, Canton Library, 582, of 
9th cent.; (2) Paris, National Library, Lat. 13,048, of 9th cent. ; a third 
MS., London, B. Mus., Cotton, Tib. D. V., of 8th-9th cents., though 
damaged by fire and lacking the illustrations, is of value for the 
text, being the oldest of all. Among editions the first is of 1619, 
by Gretser; the best, that of 1877, by Tobler, in Itinera et De- 
scriptiones Terrae Sanctae; we may also mention that of 1870, by 
Delpit, in his Essai sur les anciens pilerinages & Jerusalem; see also 
Delpit's remarks upon Arculf in the same work, pp. 260-304; 
Beazley, Dawn of Modern Geography, i. 131-40 (1897). 

ARDASHIR, the modern form of the Persian royal name 
Artaxerxes (q.v.), "he whose empire is excellent." After the 
three Achaemenian kings of this name, it occurs in Armenia, in 
the shortened form Artaxias (Armenian, Artashes or Artaxes), 
and among the dynasts of Persia who maintained their inde- 
pendence during the Parthian period (see Persis) . One of these, 
(1) Artaxerxes or Ardashir I. (in his Greek inscriptions he calls 
himself Artaxares, and the same form occurs in Agathias ii. 25, 
iv. 24), became the founder of the New-Persian or Sassanian 
empire. Of his reign we have only very scanty information, as 
the Greek and Roman authors mention only his victory over the 
Parthians and his wars with Rome. A trustworthy tradition 
about the origin of his power, from Persian sources, has been 
preserved by the Arabic historian Tabari (Th. Noldeke, Ge- 
schichtc der Perser und Araber zur Zeit der Sasaniden, aus der 
arabischen Chronik des Tabari, 1879). He was the second son of 
Papak (Babek), the offspring of Sassan (Sasan), after whom the 
dynasty is named. Papak had made himself king of the district 
of lstak.hr (in the neighbourhood of Persepolis, which had fallen 
to ruins). After the death of Papak and his oldest son Shapur 
(Shahpuhr, Sapores), Ardashir made himself king (probably 
a.d. 212), put his other brothers to death and began war against 
the neighbouring dynasts of Persis. When he had conquered a 
great part of Persis and Carmania, the Parthian king Artabanus 



IV. interfered. But he was defeated in three battles and at last 
killed (a.d. 226). Ardashir now considered himself sovereign of 
the whole empire of the Parthians and called himself " King of 
Kings of the Iranians." But his aspirations went farther. In 
Persis the traditions of the Achaemenian empire had always been 
alive, as the name of Ardashir himself shows, and with them the 
national religion of Zoroaster. Ardashir, who was a zealous 
worshipper of Ahuramazda and in intimate connexion with the 
magian priests, established the orthodox Zoroastrian creed as the 
official religion of his new kingdom, persecuted the infidels, and 
tried to restore the old Persian empire, which under the Achae- 
menids had extended over the whole of Asia from the Aegean Sea 
to the Indus. At the same time he put down the local dynasts 
and tried to create a strong concentrated power. His empire is 
thus quite different in character from the Parthian kingdom of the 
Arsacids, which had no national and religious basis but leant 
towards Hellenism, and whose organization had always been very 
loose. Ardashir extirpated the whole race of the Arsacids, with 
the exception of those princes who had found refuge in Armenia, 
and in many wars, in which, however, as the Persian tradition 
shows, he occasionally suffered heavy defeats, he succeeded in 
subjugating the greater part of Iran, Susiana and Babylonia. 
The Parthian capital Ctesiphon (q.v.) remained the principal 
residence of the Sassanian kingdom, by the side of the national 
metropolis Istakhr, which was too far out of the way to become 
the centre of administration. Opposite to Ctesiphon, on the 
right bank of the Tigris, Ardashir restored Seleucia under the 
name of Weh-Ardashir. The attempt to conquer Mesopotamia, 
Armenia and Cappadocia led to a war with Rome, in which he 
was repelled by Alexander Severus (a.d. 233). Before his death 
(a.d. 241) Ardashir associated with himself on the throne his son 
Shapur, who successfully continued his work. 

Under the tombs of Darius I. at Persepolis, on the surface of 
the rock, Ardashir has sculptured his image and that of the god 
Ahuramazda (Ormuzd or Ormazd). Both are on horseback; 
the god is giving the diadem to the king. Under the horse of the 
king lies a defeated enemy, the Parthian king Artaban; under 
the horse of Ormuzd, the devil Ahriman, with two snakes rising 
from his head. In the bilingual inscription (Greek and Pahlavi), 
Ardashir I. calls himself "the Mazdayasnian [i.e. " worshipperof 
Ahuramazda "] god Artaxares, king of the kings of the Arianes 
(Iranians), of godly origin, son of the god Papak the king." 
(See Sir R. Ker Porter, Travels (1821-1822), i. 548 foil.; Flandin 
et Coste, Voyage en Perse, iv. 182; F. Stolze and J. C. Andreas, 
Persepolis, pi. 116; Marcel Dieulafoy, V Art antique de la Perse, 
1 884-1 889, v. pi. 14). A similar inscription and sculpture is on a 
rock near Gur (Firuzabad) in Persia. On his coins he has the 
same titles (in Pahlavi) . We see that he, like his father and his 
successors, were worshipped as gods, probably as incarnations of a 
secondary deity of the Persian creed. 

Like the history of the founder of the Achaemenian empire, 
that of Ardashir has from the beginning been overgrown with 
legends; like Cyrus he is the son of a shepherd, his future 
greatness is predicted by dreams and visions, and by the calcula- 
tions of astronomers he becomes a servant at the court of King 
Artabanus and then flies to Persia and begins the rebellion; he 
fights with the great dragon, the enemy of god, &c. A Pahlavi 
text, which contains this legend, has been translated by Noldeke 
(Geschichte des Artachshir i Papakan, 1879). On the same 
tradition the account of Firdousi in the Shahnama is based; it 
occurs also, with some variations, in Agathias ii. 26 f. Another 
work, which contained religious and moral admonitions which 
were put into the mouth of the king, has not come down to us. 
On the other hand the genealogy of Ardashir has of course been 
connected with the Achaemenids, on whose behalf he exacts 
vengeance from the Parthians, and with the legendary kings of 
old Iran. 

(2) Ardashir II. (379-383). Under the reign of his brother 
Shapur II. he had been governor (king) of Adiabene, where he 
persecuted the Christians. After Shapur's death, he was raised to 
the throne by the magnates, although more than seventy years 
old. Having tried to make himself independent from the court, 



ARDEA— ARDECHE 



449 



and having executed some of the grandees, he was deposed after a 
reign of four years. 

(3) Ardashir III. (628-630), son of Kavadh II., was raised to 
the throne as a boy of seven years, but was killed two years 
afterwards by his general, Shahrbaraz. (Ed. M.) 

ARDEA, a town of the Rutuli in Latium, 3 m. from the S.W. 
coast, where its harbour (Castrum Inui) lay, at the mouth of 
the stream now known as Fosso dell' Incastro, and 23 m. S. 
of Rome by the Via Ardeatina. It was founded, according to 
legend, either by a son of Odysseus and Circe, or by Danae, 
the mother of Perseus. It was one of the oldest of the coast 
cities of Latium, and a place of considerable importance; accord- 
ing to tradition the Ardeatines and Zacynthians joined in the 
foundation of Saguntum in Spain. It was the capital of Turnus, 
the opponent of Aeneas. It was conquered by Tarquinius 
Superbus, and appears as a Roman possession in the treaty with 
Carthage of 509 b.c, though it was later one of the thirty cities 
of the Latin league. In 445 b.c. an unfair decision by the Romans 
in a frontier dispute with Aricia led, according to the Roman 
historians, to a rising; the town became a Latin colony 442 B.C., 
and shortly afterwards it appears as the place of exile of Camillus. 
It had the charge of the common shrine of Venus in Lavinium. 
It was devastated by the Samnites, was one of the 12 Latin 
colonies that refused in 209 b.c. to provide more soldiers, and 
was in 186 used as a state prison, like Alba and Setia. In imperial 
times the unhealthiness of the place led to its rapid decline, 
though it remained a colony. In the forests of the neighbourhood 
the imperial elephants were kept. A road, the Via Ardeatina, 
led to Ardea direct from Rome; the gate by which it left the 
Servian wall was the Porta Naevia; a large tomb behind the 
baths of Caracalla lay on its course. The gate by which it left 
the Aurelian wall has been obliterated by the bastion of Antonio 
da Sangallo (Ch. Hulsen in Romische Mitteilungen, 1894, 320). 

The site of the primitive city, which later became the citadel, 
is occupied by the modern town; it is situated at the end of a 
long plateau between two valleys, and protected by perpendicular 
tufa cliffs some 60 ft. high on all sides except the north-east, 
where it joins the plateau. Here it is defended by a fine wall 
of opus quadratum of tufa, in alternate courses of headers and 
stretchers. Within its area are scanty remains of the podium 
of a temple and of buildings of the imperial period. The road 
entering it from the south-west is deeply cut in the rock. The 
area of the place was apparently twice extended, a further 
portion of the narrow plateau, which now bears the name of 
Civita Vecchia, being each time taken in and defended by a mound 
and ditch; the nearer and better-preserved is about J m. from 
the city and measures some 2000 ft. long, 133 ft. wide and 66 ft. 
high, the ditch being some 80 ft. wide. The second, \ m. farther 
north-east, is smaller. In the cliffs below the plateau to the 
north are early rock habitations, and upon the plateau primitive 
Latin pottery has been found. In 1900 a group of tombs cut in 
the rock was examined; they are outside the farther mound 
and ditch, and belong, therefore, to the period after the second 
extension of the city. 

See O. Richter, in Annali dell' Istituto (1884), 90; J. H. Parker 
in Archaeologia, xlix. 169 (1885); A. Pasqui, in Notizie degli scavi, 
(1900) 53- (T. As.) 

ARDEBIL, or Ardabil, chief town of a district, or sub- 
province, of same name, of the province of Azerbaijan in north- 
western Persia, in lat. 38 14' N., and long. 48 21' E., and at 
an elevation of 4500 ft. It is situated on the Baluk Su (Fish 
river), a tributary of the Kara Su (Black river), which flows 
northwards to the Aras, and in a fertile plain bounded on the 
west by Mount Savelan, a volcanic cone with an altitude of 
15,792 ft. (Russian triangulation) , and on the east by the Talish 
mountains (9000 ft.). Ardebil has a population of about 10,000, 
and post and telegraph offices. Its trade, principally in the 
hands of Armenians, is still important, but is chiefly a transit 
trade between Russia and Persia by way of Astara, a port on 
the Caspian 30 m. north-east of Ardebil. It is surrounded by a 
ruinous mud wall flanked by towers; a quarter of a mile east of 
it stands a mud fort, 180 yds. square, constructed according 

11. 15 



to European system of fortification. Inside the city are the 
famous sepulchres and shrines of Shaikh Safi ud-din and his 
descendant Shah Ismail I. (1502- 15 24) the first Shiah shah of 
Persia and founder of the Safavi dynasty. Plans and photo- 
graphs of the shrines were taken in 1897 by Dr F. Sarre of Berlin 
and published in 1901 (Denkmctler Persischer Baukunst; 65 large 
folio plates). 

European and Chinese merchants resided at Ardebil in the 
middle ages, and for a long time the city was a great emporium 
for central Asian and Indian merchandise, which was forwarded 
to Europe via Tabriz, Trebizond and the Black Sea, and also 
by way of the Caucasus and the Volga. Since the beginning of 
the 1 6th century, when Persia fell under the sway of the Safavis, 
the place has been much frequented by pilgrims who come to 
pay their devotions at the shrine of Shaikh Safi. This shrine 
is a richly endowed establishment with mosques and college 
attached, and had a fine library containing many rare and 
valuable MSS. presented by Shah Abbas I. at the beginning 
of the 17th century, and mostly carried off by the Russians in 
1828 and placed in the library at St Petersburg. The grand 
carpet which had covered the floor of one of the mosques for 
three centuries was purchased by a traveller about 1890 for 
£100, and was finally acquired by the South Kensington Museum 
for many thousands. This beautiful carpet measures 34 ft. by 
17 ft. 6 in., and contains 380 hand-tied knots in the square inch, 
which gives over 32,500,000 knots to the whole carpet (W. Griggs, 
Asian Carpet Designs). (A. H.-S.) 

ARDECHE, an inland department of south-eastern France, 
formed in 1790 from the Vivarais, a district of Languedoc. 
Pop. (1906) 347,140. Area, 2145 sq. m. It is bounded N.W. 
by the department of Loire, E. by the Rhone which divides it 
from Isere and Drome, S. by Gard and W. by Lozere and Haute- 
Loire. The surface of Ardeche is almost entirely covered by 
the Cevennes mountains, the main chain, continued in the 
Boutieres mountains, forming its western boundary. Its centre 
is traversed from south-east to north-west by the Coiron range 
which extends from the Rhone to the Mont Mezenc (5755 ft.), 
the highest point in the department, and the oldest of its many 
volcanoes. These mountains separate the southern half of the 
department, which comprises the basin of the Ardeche, from the 
northern half which is watered by numerous smaller tributaries 
of the Rhone, the chief of which are the Erieux and the Doux. 
A few rivers belong to the Atlantic side of the watershed, the chief 
being the Loire, which rises on the western borders of the depart- 
ment, and the Allier, which for a short distance separates it 
from Lozere. Nearly all the rivers of the department are of 
torrential swiftness and subject to sudden floods. The scenery 
through which they flow is often of great beauty and grandeur. 
Natural curiosities are the Pont d'Arc, over the Ardeche, and 
the Chaussee des Geants, near Vals. The climate in the valley 
of the Rhone is, in general, warm, and sometimes very hot; 
but westward, as the elevation increases, the cold becomes more 
intense and the winters longer. Some districts, especially in 
summer, are liable to sudden alterations in the temperature. 
Rye, wheat and potatoes are the chief crops cultivated. Good 
red and white wines are grown in the hilly region bordering the 
Rhone valley, the white wine of St Peray being highly esteemed. 
The principal fruits are the chestnut, which is largely exported, 
the olive and the walnut. In the rearing of silk-worms, Ardeche 
ranks second to Gard among French departments, and great 
numbers of mulberry trees are grown for the purposes of this 
industry. The many goats and sheep of Ardeche make it one 
of the chief sources of supply of skins for glove-making. Mines 
of coal, iron, lead and zinc are worked, and the quarries furnish 
hydraulic lime (Le Teil) and other products. Besides flour-mills, 
distilleries and saw-mills, there are important silk-mills and 
leather-works and paper-factories. Annonay is the principal 
industrial town. The department exports wine, cattle, lime, 
mineral waters, silk, paper, &c. Hot springs are numerous, 
and some of them, as those of Vals, St Lauren t-les-Bains, 
Celles and Neyrac, are largely resorted to. Ardeche is served 
by the Paris-Lyon-Mediterranee railway and has some 43 m. 

11 



45° 



ARDEE— ARDENNES 



of navigable waterway. The department is divided into the 
arrondissements of Privas, Largentiere and Tournon, with 31 
cantons and 342 communes. It forms the diocese of Viviers 
and part of the archiepiscopal province of Avignon. It is in the 
region of the XV. arm)' corps, and within the circumscription 
of the academie (educational division) of Grenoble. Its court 
of appeal is at Nimes. Privas, the capital, Annonay, Aubenas, 
Largentiere and Tournon are the principal towns. Bourg-St 
Andeol, Thines, Melas and Cruas have interesting Romanesque 
churches. Mazan has remains of a Cistercian abbey founded 
in the 12th century to which its vast church belongs. Viviers 
is an old town with a church of various styles of architecture 
and several old houses. 

ARDEE, a market-town of Co. Louth, Ireland, in the south 
parliamentary division, on the river Dee, 48 m. N. by W. from 
Dublin on a branch of the Great Northern railway. Pop. 
(iooi) 1883. It has some trade in grain and basket-making. 
The town is of high antiquity, and its name (Ather-dee) is taken 
to signify the ford of the Dee. A form Ath-Firdia, however, is 
connected with the ancient story of the warrior Cuchullain of 
Ulster, who, while defending the ford against the men of Con- 
naught, was forced to slay many with whom he was on friendly 
terms, and among them the warrior Firdia,. whom he regarded 
with special affection. A castle of the lords of the manor was 
built early in the 14th century, and remains, as does another 
adjacent fortified building of the same period. Roger de Peppart, 
lord of the manor early in the 13th century, founded the present 
Protestant church and a house of Crutched Friars. There was 
also a house of Carmelite Friars, but neither of these remains. 
Ardee received its first recorded charter in 1377. It had a full 
share in the several Irish wars, being sacked by Edward Bruce 
(1315) and by O'Neill (1538); and it was taken by the Irish and 
recaptured by the English in the wars of 1641, and was occupied 
later by the forces of James II. and of William III. It returned two 
members to the Irish parliament. A large rath, or encampment, 
with remains of fortifications, stands to the south of the town. 

ARDEN, FOREST OF, a district in the north of Warwickshire, 
England, the " woodland " as opposed to the " felden," or 
"fielden," i.e. open country, in the south, the river Avon sep- 
arating the two. Originally it was part of a forest tract of far 
wider extent than that within the confines of the county, and 
now, though lacking the true character of a forest, it is still 
unusually well wooded. The undulating surface ranges for the 
most part from 250 to 500 ft. in elevation. Wide lands in this 
district were held in the time of Edward the Confessor by Alwin, 
whose son Thurkill of .Warwick, or "of Arden," founded the 
family of the Warwickshire Ardens who in Queen Elizabeth's 
time still held several of the manors ascribed to Thurkill in 
Domesday. Shakespeare, whose mother Mary Arden claimed to 
be of this family, knew the district well, living as he did at 
Stratford; and its natural characteristics, then still unchanged, 
inspired his pictures of forest life in As You Like It. The name 
of the Forest of Arden, besides remaining a convenient designa- 
tion of a well-marked physical area, is preserved in such place- 
names as Henley-in-Arden and Hampton-in-Arden. 

ARDENNES, a district covering some portion of the ancient 
forest of Ardenne, and extending over the Belgian province of 
Luxemburg, part of the grand duchy, and the French depart- 
ment of Ardennes. Bruzen Lamartiniere states in his Diction- 
naire Geographique that the Gauls and Bretons called it by a 
word signifying " the forest," which was turned into Latin as 
Arduenna silva, and he thinks it quite probable that the name 
was really derived from the Celtic word ardu (dark, obscure). 
The Arduenna Silva was the most extensive forest of Gaul, and 
Caesar {Bello Gallico, lib. vi. cap. 29) describes it as extending 
from the Rhine and the confines of the Treviri as far as the 
limits of the Nervii. In book v. the Roman conqueror describes 
his campaign against Indutiomarus and the Treviri in the 
Ardenne forest. Strabo gave it still greater extent, treating it 
as covering the whole region from the Rhine to the North Sea. 
It is safer to give it the more reasonable dimensions of Caesar, 
and to accept the verdict of later commentators that it never 



extended west of the Scheldt. At the division of the empire 
of Charlemagne between the three sons of Louis the Debonnaire, 
effected by the pact of Verdun in 843, the forest had become a 
district and is called therein pagus Arduensis. It was part of 
the division that fell to Lothair, and several of the charters 
of 843 expressly specify certain towns as being situated in this 
pagus. In the 10th century the district had become a comitatus, 
subject to the powerful count of Verdun, who changed his style 
to that of count of Ardenne. 

The Belgian Ardennes may be said now to extend from the 
Meuse above Dinant on the west to the grand duchy of Luxem- 
burg and Rhenish Prussia as far north as the Baraque de 
Michel on the east, and from a line drawn eastward from Dinant 
through Marche, Durbuy and Stavelot to the Hautes Fagnes 
on the north, to the French frontier roughly marked by the 
Semois valley in the south. Within these limits there are still 
some of the finest woods in Europe, which seem to have come 
down to us almost intact from the days of the Arduenna of 
Caesar. Notable among these portions of the great forest are 
the woods of St Hubert, the woods round La Roche, and those 
of the Amerois, Herbeumont, and Chiny on the Semois. In the 
grand duchy the forest has almost entirely disappeared, but 
owing to the compulsory law of replanting in Belgium this fate 
does not seem likely to attend the Belgian Ardennes. 

In addition to being a forest the Ardennes is a plateau, and 
it offers to the geologist a most interesting field of investigation. 
The greater part of the Ardennes is occupied by a large area of 
Devonian beds, through which rise the Cambrian masses of 
Rocroi and Stavelot, and a few others of smaller size. Upon 
the folded slates and schists which constitute these inliers the 
Devonian rests with marked unconformity; but north of the 
ridge of Condroz Ordovician and Silurian beds make their 
appearance. Near Dinant carboniferous beds are infolded 
among the Devonian. Along the northern margin lies the 
intensely folded belt which constitutes the coalfield of Namur, 
and, beneath the overlying Mesozoic beds, is continued to the 
Boulonnais, Dover and beyond. The southern boundary of this 
belt is formed by a great thrust-plane, the faille du midi, along 
which the Devonian beds of the south have been thrust over the 
carboniferous beds of the coalfield. 

The Ardennes are the holiday ground of the Belgian people, 
and much of this region is still unknown except to the few 
persons who by a happy chance have discovered its remoter 
and hitherto well-guarded charms. There is still an immense 
quantity of wild game to be found in the Ardennes, including 
red and roe deer, wild boar, &c. The shooting is preserved 
either by the few great landed proprietors left in the country, 
or by the communes, who let the right of shooting to individuals. 
Occasionally it is still stated in the press that wolves have been 
seen in the Ardennes, but this is a mere fiction. The last wolf 
was destroyed there in the 18th century. 

ARDENNES, a department of France on the N.E. frontier, 
deriving its name from that of the forest, and formed in 1790 
from parts of Champagne, Picardy and Hainault. Pop. (1906) 
317,505. Area, 2028 sq. m. It is bounded N. and N.E. by 
Belgium, E. by the department of Meuse, S. by that of Marne, 
and W. by that of Aisne. In shape it is quadrilateral with a 
cape-like prolongation into Belgium on the north. The slope 
of the department is from north-east to south-west, though its 
longest river, the Meuse, entering it in the south-east, pursues 
a winding course of in m. in a north-westerly, and after- 
wards through deep gorges in a northerly, direction. The other 
principal river, the Aisne, crosses the southern border and takes 
a northerly, then a westerly course, separating the region known 
as Champagne Pouilleuse from the more elevated plateau of 
Argonne which forms the central zone of the department and 
stretches to the left bank of the Meuse. The highest points of 
the department are found in the wooded highlands of the 
Ardennes which, with an altitude varying between 980 and 1640 
ft., cover the north and north-east. The climate is comparatively 
mild in the south-west, but becomes colder and more rainy 
towards the north and north-east. Agriculture is carried on to 



ARDGLASS— ARECIBO 



45 1 



most advantage in the Champagne and Argonne. Wheat and 
oats are the predominant cereals. Potatoes, rye, lucerne and 
other kinds of forage are also important crops. Pasturage is 
found chiefly on the banks of the Aisne and Meuse and on the 
plateau of Rocroi in the north. Horse-raising is carried on in 
the neighbourhood of Buzancy in the south, and at Bourg- 
Fidele in the north. Fruit-growing is confined to the west and 
central districts. The working of slate is very important, 
especially in the neighbourhood of Fumay, and quarries pro- 
ducing freestone, lime-stone and other minerals are found 
in several places. Flour-mills, saw-mills, sugar-works, dis- 
tilleries and leather-works are scattered over the department, 
but iron-founding and various branches of metal-working which 
are active along the valley of the Meuse (Nouzon, &c.) are the 
chief industries. To these may be added wool-weaving, centred 
at Sedan, and minor industries such as the manufacture of 
basket-work, wooden shoes, &c. Coal and raw wool are pro- 
minent imports, while iron goods, cloth, timber, live-stock, 
alcohol and the products of the soil are exported. Various 
branches of the Eastern railway traverse the department. The 
Meuse is canalized within the department, and the Canal des 
Ardennes, uniting that river with the Aisne, and the lateral canal 
of the Aisne are together about 65 m. long. Ardennes is divided 
into five arrondissements: Mezieres, Rocroi, Rethel, Vouziers 
and Sedan, with 31 cantons and 503 communes. The department 
forms part of the ecclesiastical province of Reims and of the 
circumscriptions of the appeal-court of Nancy and the VI. army 
corps. In educational matters, it is included in the academic 
(educational area) of Lille. Mezieres, the capital, Charleville, 
Rocroi, Sedan and Rethel are the chief towns, Outside them 
its finest examples of architecture are the churches of Mouzon 
(13th century) and Vouziers (15th century). 

ARDGLASS (" Green Height " ), a small town of Co. Down, 
Ireland, in the east parliamentary division, at the head of a 
rocky bay, in a picturesque situation between two hills, 32 m. 
S. by E. of Belfast on a branch of the Belfast & Co. Down 
railway. Pop. (1001) 501. Soon after the Norman invasion it 
became of the first importance as a port, a fact attested by the 
remains of no fewer than five castles in close proximity, which 
give the town a picturesque aspect. There are also an ancient 
church crowning the eastern hill, and a curious fortified ware- 
house (called the New Works), dating probably from the 14th 
century, when a trading company was established here under a 
grant from Henry IV. Ardglass was a royal burgh and sent 
a representative to the Irish parliament. The chief industry is 
the herring fishery. Ships of 500 tons may enter the harbour at 
all times. In summer Ardglass is a frequented resort of visitors ; 
good bathing and a golf links contribute to its attractions. 

ARDITI, LUIGI (1822-1903), Italian musical composer and 
conductor, was born in Piedmont, and studied music at the 
Conservatoire in Milan, starting professionally as a violinist, 
and touring with Bottesini, the double-bass player, in the 
United States in 1847. He began composing at an early age, 
and in 1840 produced an overture, followed by an opera 
/ Briganti in 1841, and other works. He paid frequent visits to 
America, conducting the opera in New York, where he produced 
his La Spia in 1856. In 1858 he became conductor of the opera 
at Her Majesty's theatre in London, and both in London and 
abroad he became famous in this capacity, having the reputation 
of being Madame Patti's favourite conductor. His vocal waltz 
77 Bacio was often sung by her. In 1896 he published his 
Reminiscences , and after a long and active musical life he died 
at Brighton on the 1st of May 1903. 

ARDMORE, a township and the county-seat of Carter county, 
Oklahoma, U. S. A., just S. of the Arbuckle Mountains, about 
120 m. S. by E. of Guthrie. Pop. (1900) 5681; (1907) 8759 
(2122 being negroes, and 108 Indians); (1910) 8618. It 
is served by the Chicago, Rock Island & Pacific, the St Louis & 
San Francisco, and the Gulf, Colorado & Santa Fe railways. 
Ardmore is the market-town and distributing point for the 
surrounding agricultural region, which is the home of a large 
part of the Chickasaw and Choctaw nations. It is situated 



890 ft. above the sea in a cotton and grain producing region, in 
which cattle are raised and fruit and vegetables grown; coal, 
oil, natural gas and rock asphalt (which is used for paving the 
streets of Ardmore) are found in the vicinity. Ardmore is an 
important cotton market, and has cotton gins, a cotton compress, 
machine shops, bridge works, foundries, bottling works and 
manufactories of cotton-seed oil, brick, concrete, flour, brooms, 
mattresses and dressed lumber. At Ardmore are the Saint 
Agnes Academy, a Catholic school for girls, and Saint Agnes 
College for boys, a conservatory of music, Hargrove College, 
and the Selvidge Commercial College. Near Ardmore is a 
summer school on the Chautauqua (q.v.) system. Ardmore was 
founded in 1887, and was incorporated in 1898. 

ARDRES, a town of northern France in the department of 
Pas-de-Calais, 10J m. by rail S.S.E. of Calais, with which it is also 
connected by a canal. Pop. (1906) 1269. The " Field of the 
Cloth of Gold," where Henry VIII. of England and Francis I. 
of France met in 1520, was at Balinghem in the immediate 
neighbourhood. The town is an important market for cattle. 

ARDROSSAN, a seaport, burgh of barony, and police burgh 
of Ayrshire, Scotland, 32 m. from Glasgow by the Glasgow 
& South-Western railway, and 29^ m. by the Lanarkshire 
& Ayrshire branch of the Caledonian railway. Pop. (1901) 
6077. The rise of Ardrossan was due to the enterprise of Hugh, 
1 2 th earl of Eglinton, who began the construction of the present 
town and harbour in 1806. The harbour was intended to be 
in connexion with a canal from Glasgow to Ardrossan, but this 
was only completed as far as Johnstone. Owing to the costliness 
of the undertaking, and the death of the earl in 1819, the works 
were suspended after an outlay of £100,000, but his successor 
completed the scheme on a reduced scale at an expense of another 
£100,000. The dock accommodation has since been consider- 
ably extended, and the town enjoys great prosperity. Steamers 
run every week-day to Arran and Belfast, and during summer 
there is a service also to Douglas in the Isle of Man. The exports 
consist principally of coal and iron from collieries and iron- 
works in the neighbourhood; and the imports of timber, ores 
and general goods. Shipbuilding thrives and the fisheries are 
important. The town is governed by a provost and council. 

Saltcoats (pop. 8120), a mile to the south, is a popular sea- 
side resort, with a brisk trade, due to its proximity to Ardrossan 
and Stevenston; the making of salt, once a leading industry, 
has ceased. 

Ardrossan dates from an early period. The name Arthur 
of Ardrossan is found in connexion with a charter dated 1226; 
and Sir Fergus of Ardrossan accompanied Edward Bruce in his 
Irish expedition in 1316, and in 1320 signed the appeal to the 
pope, made by the barons of Scotland, against the aggressions 
of England. The family of Ardrossan is now merged, by 
marriage, in that of the earl of Eglinton and Winton. The castle 
where Wallace surprised the English garrison and threw their 
corpses into the dungeon, grimly styled " Wallace's Larder," 
was finally destroyed by Cromwell, who is said to have used 
part of its masonry for the construction of the fort at Ayr; but 
its ruins still exist. 

AREA, a Latin word, originally meaning a threshing-floor, 
namely a raised space in a field exposed on all sides to the 
wind; now applied in English (1) to a plot of ground on which a 
structure is to be erected, (2) to the court or sunk space in the 
front or rear of a building, (3) to the superficial space covered 
by a district, country, &c, or by a building or court. 

ARECIBO, a city and port on the north coast of Porto Rico, 
at the mouth of a small stream called the Rio Grande de Arecibo, 
and contiguous to one of the most fertile regions of the island. 
Pop. (1899) 8008; of the tributary district, about 30,000; (1910) 
9612. It is connected with San Juan, Mayaguezand Ponce by 
railway. It is a well-built and active commercial city, and has 
a large export trade in coffee and sugar. The harbour is an open 
roadstead, very dangerous to shipping in northerly winds, and 
the discharge and loading of cargoes is effected by means of 
lighters at considerable risk and expense. Arecibo was founded 
in 1788. 



452 



AREMBERG— AREOI 



AREMBER6, or Arenberg, formerly a German duchy of 
the Holy Roman Empire in the circle of the Rhine Palatinate, 
between Julich and Cologne, and now belonging to the Prussian 
administrative district of Coblenz. The hamlet of Aremberg 
is at the foot of a basalt hill 2067 ft. high, on the summit of 
which are the ruins of the castle which was the original seat of 
the family of Aremberg. 

The lords of Aremberg first appear early in the 12th century, 
but had died out in the male line by 1279. From the marriage 
of the heiress Mathilda (1282-1299) with Engelbert II., count 
of La Marck (d. 1328), sprang two sons. The elder of these, 
Adolf II, (d. 1347), inherited the countship of La Marck; the 
second, Engelbert III. (d. 1387), the lordship of Aremberg, 
which he increased by his marriage with Marie de Looz, heiress 
of Lumain. The lordship of Aremberg remained in his family 
till 1547, when it passed, by his marriage with Margaret, sister 
of the childless Robert III., to John of Barbancon, of the great 
house of Ligne, who assumed the name and arms of Aremberg, 
and was created a count of the Empire by Charles V. He was 
governor of Friesland, and for a while commanded the Spanish 
and Catholic forces against the " beggars," falling at the battle 
of Heiligerlee in 1568. His son Charles (d. 1618) greatly in- 
creased the possessions of the house by his marriage with Ann of 
Croy, heiress of Croy and of Chimay-Aerschot, and in 1576 was 
made prince of the Empire by Maximilian II. His grandson, 
Philip Francis, was made duke in 1644 by the emperor 
Ferdinand III., and was succeeded by his brother Charles 
Eugene (d. 1681), who married Marie Henriette de Vergy de 
Cusance, heiress of Perwez (d. 1700). Their son, Duke Philip 
Charles Francis, was killed in 1691 fighting against the Turks, 
and was succeeded by Leopold (1754), a distinguished soldier 
of the War of the Spanish Succession, and patron of Rousseau 
and Voltaire. His son Charles (d. 1778) was an Austrian field- 
marshal during the Seven Years' War, and married Louise 
Margaret of La Marck-Lumain, heiress of the countship of 
Schleiden and lordship of Saffenberg. By the peace of Luneville 
(February 1801), the next duke, Louis Engelbert, lost the greater 
part of his ancestral domain, but received in compensation 
Meppen and Recklinghausen. On the establishment of the con- 
federation of the Rhine, his son Prosper Louis (to whom, 
becoming blind, he had ceded his domains in 1803) became a 
member (1806), and showed great devotion to the interests of 
France; but in 1810 he. lost his sovereignty, Napoleon incor- 
porating Meppen with France and Recklinghausen with the 
grand -duchy of Berg, and indemnifying him by a rent of 
240,702 francs. In 1815 he received back his possessions, which 
were mediatized by the congress of Vienna, Recklinghausen 
falling to Prussia and Meppen to Hanover. On account of the 
one portion he became a peer of the Westphalian estates, and 
by the other a member of the upper house in Hanover. 
George IV. of England (9th May 1826) elevated the duke's 
Hanoverian possessions to a dukedom under the title of Aremberg 
Meppen. His brother Auguste Raymond, Comte de la Marck 
(1753-1833), became famous during the early stages of the 
French Revolution for his friendship with Mirabeau (q.v.). 
Duke Prosper Louis died in 1861, and was succeeded by his son 
Engelbert (d. 1875), who was followed in his turn by his son 
Engelbert (b. 1872). 

The duke of Aremberg is one of the wealthiest of the great 
continental nobles. His feudal domain in Germany covers an 
area of over 1100 sq. m., besides which he has large estates in 
Belgium and France. The duke has residences in Brussels, 
where he has a famous collection of pictures, and at the chateau 
of Klemenswerth near Meppen. 

ARENA (Lat. for " sand ") I , the central area of an amphitheatre 
on which the gladiatorial displays took place, its name being 
derived from the sand with which it was covered. The word 
is applied sometimes to any level open space on which spectacles 
take place. 

ARENDAL, a seaport of Norway, in Nedenaes ami (county), 
on the south coast, 46 m. N.E. from Christiansand. Pop. (1900) 
11,155. It r ' ses picturesquely above the mouth of the river Nid, 



with a good harbour protected by an island from the open waters 
of the Skagerrack. The town itself occupies several islets, and 
some of the houses are supported above the water on piles. The 
chief exports are timber (very largely exported to Great Britain), 
wood-pulp, sealskins and felspar. In 1879 Arendal ranked 
second (after Chris tiania) as a ship-owning port; in 1899 it had 
dropped to the fifth place. In and near the town are factories 
for wood-pulp, paper, cotton and joinery; and at Fevig, 8 m. 
north-east, a shipbuilding yard and engineering works. The 
neighbourhood is remarkable for the number of beautiful and 
rare minerals found there; one of these, a variety of epidote, 
was formerly called Arendalite. Louis Philippe stayed here for 
some time during his exile. 

ARENIG GROUP, in geology, the name now applied by British 
geologists to the lowest stage of the Ordovician System in 
Britain. The term was first used by Adam Sedgwick in 1847 
with reference to the " Arenig Ashes and Porphyries " in the 
neighbourhood of Arenig Fawr, in Merioneth, North Wales. 

The rock-succession in the Arenig district has been recognized 
by W. G. Fearnsides {" On the Geology of Arenig Fawr and Moel 
Llanfnant," Q.J.G.S. vol. lxi., 1905, pp. 608-640, with maps) 
as follows: — _,. 

ii o \ Dicranograptus — shales. 

<3-§ 1 Derfel or Orthis — limestone. 

U r Rhyolitic ashes = Upper "1 Upper Ashes 

Massive ashes = Middle l of 

Acid andesitic ashes = Lower | Arenig. 

Daerfawr Shales. Zone of Didymograptus Murchisoni. 

Platy ashes ) Lower Ashes of Arenig 

-Great Agglomerate ) (Hypersthene Andesites). 

Olchfa or Bifidus — shales (Didymograptus bifidus). 

Filltirgerig or Hirundo Beds ) mdymograptus kirundo. 

Erwent or Ogygta — limestone ) J * r ■ 

I Didymograptus 



o 

T3 



_0 
■3 O. 

Is' 

1—1 



,»o, 



Llyfnant or ■ Extensus — flags 
Basal Grit 






extensus. 



(unconformity) 

The above succession is divisible into: (1) a lower series of 
gritty and calcareous sediments, the " Arenig Series," as. it is 
now understood; (2) a middle series, mainly volcanic, with 
shales, the " Llandeilo Series"; and (3) the shales and lime- 
stones of the Bala or Caradoc Stage. It was to the middle series 
(2) that Sedgwick first applied the term " Arenig." 

In the typical region and in North Wales generally the Arenig 
series appears to be unconformable upon the Cambrian rocks; 
this is not the case in South Wal es. The Arenig series is represented 
in North Wales by the Garth grit and Ty-Obry beds, by the Shelve 
series of the Corndon district, the Skiddaw slates of the Lake 
District, the Ballantrae group of Ayrshire, and by the Ribband 
series of slates and shales in Wicklow and Wexford. It may be 
mentioned here that the " Llanvirn " Series of H, Hicks was 
equivalent to the bifidus-shalzs and the Lower Llandeilo Series. 

References. — Adam Sedgwick, Synopsis of the Classification 
of the British Palaeozoic Rocks (1885); Sir A. Ramsay, "North 
Wales," Geol. Survey Memoir, vol. iii. ; C. Lapworth, Ann. Mag. Nat. 
Hist. vol. vi., 1880; G. A. J. Cole and C. V. Jennings, Q.J.G.S. 
vol. xlv., 1889; C. V. Jennings and G. J. Williams, ibid. vol. xlvii., 
1891; Messrs Crosfield and Skeat, ibid. vol. Hi., 1896; G. L. Elles, 
Geol. Mag., 1904; T. E. Marr and T. Roberts, Q.J.G.S., 1885; 
H. Hicks, ibid. vol. xxxi., 1875. See also Ordovician. (J. A. H.) 

AREOI, or Areoiti, a secret society which originated in 
Tahiti and later extended its influence to other South Pacific 
islands. To its ranks both sexes were admitted. The society 
was primarily of a religious character. Members styled them- 
selves descendants of Oro-Tetifa, the Polynesian god, and were 
divided into seven or more grades, each having its characteristic 
tattooing. Chiefs were at once qualified for the highest grade, 
but ordinary members attained promotion only through initiatory 
rites. The Areois enjoyed great privileges, and were considered 
as depositaries of knowledge and as mediators between God and 
man. They were feared, too, as ministers of the taboo and were 
entitled to pronounce a kind of excommunication for offences 
against its rules. The chief religious purpose of the society was 
the worship of the generative powers of nature, and the ritual 
and ceremonies of initiation were grossly licentious. But the 



AREOPAGUS 



4-53 



Areois were also a social force. They aimed at communism in 
all things. The women members were common property; the 
period of cohabitation was limited to three days, and the female 
Areois were bound by oath at initiation to strangle at birth any 
child born to them. If, however, the infant was allowed to 
survive half an hour only, it was spared; but to have the right 
of keeping it the mother must find a male Areoi willing to adopt 
it. The Areois travelled about, devoting their whole time to 
feasting, dancing (the chief dance of the women being the grossly 
indecent Timorodeementionedby Captain Cook), and debauchery, 
varied by elaborate realistic stage presentments of the lives and 
loves of gods and legendary heroes. 

AREOPAGUS ("Apeios IM70S), a bare, rocky hill, 370 ft. 
high, immediately west of the northern rim of the acropolis of 
Athens. The ancients interpreted the name as " Hill of Ares." 
Though accepted by some modern scholars, this derivation of 
the word is rendered improbable by the fact that Ares was not 
worshipped on the Areopagus. A more reasonable explanation 
connects the name with Arae, " Curses," commonly known as 
Semnae, " Awful Goddesses," whose shrine was a cave at the 
foot of the hill, of which they were the guardian deities (Aeschyl. 
Eumen. 417, 804; Schol. on Lucian, vol. iii. p. 68, ed. Jacobitz; 
Paus. i. 28. 6). 

The Boule, or Council, of the Areopagus (17 kv 'ApeiC}) Uayia 
PovKr]), named after the hill, is to be compared in origin and 
fundamental character with the council of chiefs or elders which 
we find among the earliest Germans, Celts, Romans, and other 
primitive peoples. Under the kings of Athens it must have 
closely resembled the Boule of elders described by Homer; and 
there can be no doubt that it was the chief factor in the work 
of transforming the kingship into an aristocracy, in which it 
was to be supreme. It was composed of ex-archons. Aristotle 
attributes to it for the period of aristocracy the appointment 
to all offices {Ath. Pol. viii. 2), the chief work of administration, 
and the right to fine or otherwise punish in cases, not only of 
violation of laws, but also of immorality (ibid. iii. 6; cf. Isoc. vii. 
46; Androtion and Philochorus, in Miiller, Frag. Hist. Graec. 
i. 387. 17, 394. 60). x This evidence is corroborated by the 
remnants of political power left to it in later time, after its 
importance had been greatly curtailed, and by the designation 
Boule, which in itself indicates that the body so termed was once 
a state council. In a passage bearing incidentally upon the 
early constitution of Athens, Thucydides (i. 126. 8) informs us 
that at the time of the Cylonian insurrection the Athenians, we 
may suppose in their assembly ('EK/cXijoxa), commissioned the 
archons with absolute power to deal with the trouble at their 
discretion. From this passage, if we accept the Aristotelian view 
as to the early supremacy of the Areopagitic council, we must 
infer that a modification of the aristocracy in a popular direction 
had at that time already taken place. 

In addition to its political functions, the council from the 
time of Draco, if not earlier, exercised jurisdiction in certain 
cases of homicide (see below, ad fin.). The assumption that in 
their criminal jurisdiction the Areopagites were called Ephetae 
till after the legislation of Draco (cf. Philoch. 58, in Miiller, 
ibid. 394) would explain the otherwise obscure circumstances 
that, according to Plutarch (Sol. 19), Draco (q.v.) in his 
laws mentioned only the Ephetae, and that Pollux (viii. 125) 
included the Areopagus among the localities in which sat the 
Ephetae. 2 The same assumption would supply a reason for 

1 Neither Herodotus nor Thucydides tells us anything as to its 
powers : but their silence on this point need not surprise us, as they 
had no especial occasion for referring to the subject, and in general 
it may be said that before the 4th century B.C. writers took little 
interest in the constitutional history of the remote past. The state- 
ment of Thucydides (i. 126. 8) that at the time of the Cylonian 
insurrection the nine archons attended to a great part of the business 
of government does not contradict the Aristotelian view, for their 
administration may well have been under Areopagitic supervision 
(see also Akchox) ; and, as is stated in the text, the supremacy 
of the council may have already suffered considerable limitation. 
The Eumenides of Aeschylus is a glorification of the institution, 
though for obvious reasons it is there represented as an essentially 
judicial body. 

1 it is possible also to explain the alleged absence of reference to 



the notion entertained by many writers of later time that the 
Areopagitic council was instituted by Solon (q.v.) — a notion 
partly explained also by the desire of political thinkers to ascribe 
to Solon the making of a complete constitution. Conformably 
with the view here presented we may suppose that the name 
" Boule of the Areopagus " developed from the simple term 
" Boule " in order to distinguish it from the new Boule (q.v), 
or Council of Four Hundred. The popular reforms of Solon 
(594 B.C.), so far as they were carried into effect, tended practi- 
cally to limit the Council of the Areopagus, though constitutionally 
it retained all its earlier powers and functions, augmented by the 
right to try persons accused of conspiracy against the state 
(Arist. Ath. Pol. viii. 4). In the exercise of its duty as the 
protector of the laws it must have had power to inhibit in the 
Four Hundred, or in the Ecclesia, a measure which it judged 
unconstitutional or in any way prejudicial to the state, and in 
the levy of fines for violation of law or moral usage it remained 
irresponsible. As censor of the conduct of citizens it inquired 
into every man's source of income and punished the idle (Plut. 
Sol. 22). 

The tyrants (560-510 B.C.) left to the council its cognizance 
of murder cases (Demosth. xxiii. 66; Arist. Ath. Pol. xvi. 8) 
and probably the nominal enjoyment of all its prerogatives; 
but their method of filling the archonship with their own kinsmen 
and creatures gradually converted the Areopagites into willing 
supporters of tyranny. Though hostile, therefore, to the policy 
of Cleisthenes, their council seems to have suffered no direct 
abridgment of power from his reforms. After his legislation 
it gradually changed character and political sentiment by the 
annual admission of ex-archons who had held office under a 
popular constitution. In 487 B.C., however, the introduction 
of the lot as a part of the process of filling the archonship (see 
Archon) began to undermine its ability. This deterioration 
was necessarily slow; it could not have advanced far in 480 B.C., 
when on the eve of the battle of Salamis, as we are informed 
(Arist. Polit. viii. 4, p. 1304a, 17; Ath. Pol. xxiii. 25; Plut. 
Them. '10; Cic. Off. i. 22, 75), the council of the Areopagus 
succeeded in manning the fleet by providing pay for the seamen, 
thereby regaining the confidence and respect of the people: 
The patriotic action of the council and its attendant popularity 
enabled it to recover considerable administrative control, which 
it continued to exercise for the next eighteen years, although 
its deterioration in ability, becoming every year more noticeable, 
as well as the rapid rise of democratic ideas, prevented it from 
fully re-establishing the supremacy which Aristotle, with some 
exaggeration, attributes to it for this period. Its prestige was 
seriously undermined by the conduct of individual members, 
whose corrupt use of power was exposed and punished by 
Ephialtes, the democratic leader. Following up this advantage, 
Ephialtes (462 B.C.), and less prominently Archestratus and 
Pericles (q.v.), proposed and carried measures for the transfer 
of most of its functions to the Council of Five Hundred, the 
Ecclesia, and the popular courts of law (Arist. Ath. Pol. xxv. 2, 
xxvii. 1, xxxv. 2; Plut. Per. 9). Among these functions were 
probably jurisdiction in cases of impiety, the supervision of 
magistrates and the censorship of the morals of citizens, the 
inhibition of illegal and unconstitutional resolutions in the 
Five Hundred and the Ecclesia, the examination into the fitness 
of candidates for office, and the collection of rents from the sacred 
property (cf. Wilamowitz-Mollendorff, Arist. u. Ath. ii. 186-197; 
Busolt, Grieck. Gesch. (2nd ed.) iii. 269-294; G. Gilbert, Const. 
Antiq. of Sparta and Athens, Eng. trans., 154 f.). It retained 

the Areopagitic council in the Draconian laws by the supposition 
that Solon, while leaving untouched the Draconian laws concerned 
with the cases of homicide which came before the Ephetae, substi- 
tuted a law of his own regarding wilful murder, which fell within 
the jurisdiction of the Areopagites. This view finds strong support 
in the circumstance that the copy of the Draconian laws (C.I. A . i. 61 ) , 
made in pursuance of a decree of the people of the year 409-408 B.C., 
does not contain the provision for cases of premeditated homicide; 
cf. G. de Sanctis, 'At6U, 135. The relation of the Ephetae to the 
court of the Areopagus is obscure; cf. Philippi, Der Areopag und 
die Epheten (Berlin, 1874); Busolt, Griechische Geschichte (2nd ed.), 
ii. 138 ff. 



454 



AREQUIPA 



jurisdiction in cases of homicide and the care of sacred olive 
trees. From this time to the establishment of the Thirty (462- 
404 B.C.) the Areopagitic council, degraded still further by the 
opening of the archonship to the Zeugitae (457 B.C.) and by the 
absolute use of the lot in filling the office, was a political nullity. 
The first indication of a revival of its prestige is to be traced in 
the action attributed to it by Lysias during the siege of Athens 
(404 B.C.) (in Eratosth. 69: irparroixnjs fitv rrjs tv 'Apdcg Tf.ay<# 
fiov\rjs aoirripla). After the surrender of Athens and the 
appointment of the Thirty, the repeal of the laws of Ephialtes 
and Archestratus prepared the way for the rehabilitation of the 
council as guardian of the constitution by the restored democracy 
(Arist. Ath. Pol. xxxv. 2; decree of Tisamenus, in Andoc. i. 84; 
cf . Din. i. 9) . Although under the new conditions the Areopagites 
could not hope to recover their full supremacy, they did exercise 
considerable political influence, especially in crises. In the time 
of Demosthenes, accordingly, we find them annulling the election 
of individuals to offices for which they were unfit (Plut. Phoc. 16), 
exercising during a crisis a disciplinary power extending to life 
and death over all the Athenians " in conformity with ancestral 
law," procuring the banishment of one, the racking of another, 
and the infliction of capital punishment on several of the citizens. 
This authority seems to have been delegated to them by the 
assembly with reference either to individual cases or temporarily 
to the whole body of Athenians (Din. i. 10, 62 f.; Aeschin. 
iii. 252; Lye. Leoc. 52; Demosth. xviii. 132 f.; Plut. Demosth. 
14). Religion, too, was their care (Pseud. Demosth. lix. 80 f.). 
Lycurgus (ibid.) even goes so far as to claim chat by their action 
during the crisis after Chaeroneia they had saved the state. 
After the period of the great orators their influence continued 
to grow. Demetrius of Phalerum empowered them to assist 
the gynaeconomi in supervising festivals held in private houses 
{Philoch. in Miiller, ibid. i. 408. 143). Under Roman supremacy 
in addition to earlier functions they had jurisdiction in cases 
of forgery, tampering with the standard measures, and probably 
other high crimes, the supervision of buildings, and the care of 
religion and of education (Cic. Fam. xiii. 1; Alt. v. 9; Tac. 
Ann. ii. 55; Plut. Cic. 24; C.I.G. i. 123. 9; C.I. A. ii. 476; 
iii. 703, 714, 716; Acts xvii. 19). Their council acquired, too, 
in conjunction with the assembly, with or without the co- 
operation of the Five Hundred (or Six Hundred), the right to 
pass decrees and to represent their city in foreign relations 
(CI. A. iii. 10, 31, 40, 41, 454, 457, 458). From the overthrow 
of the Thirty to the end of their history they enjoyed a high 
reputation for ability and integrity (Isoc. vii.; Demosth. xxiii. 
65 f.; Val. Max. viii. 1. Amb. 2; Gell. xii. 7; Lucian, Bis Ace. 
iv. 12. 14). About a.d. 400 their council came to an end (Theo- 
doret, Curat, ix. 55). 

With regard to the jurisdiction of the council in cases of 
homicide, the procedure, so far as it may be gathered from the 
orators and other sources, was as follows: — accusations were 
brought by relatives within the circle of brothers' and sisters' 
children, supported by the wider kin and the phratry (Demosth. 
xliii. 57). On receiving the accusation the king-archon by 
proclamation warned the accused to keep away from temples 
and other places forbidden to such persons. He made three 
investigations of the case in the three successive months, and 
brought it to trial in the fourth month. As he was forbidden to 
hand a case over to his successor, it resulted that in the last three 
months of the year no accusations of homicide could be brought 
(Ant. vi. 42). After the examination he assigned the case to 
the proper court, and presided over it during the trial, which 
took place in the open air, that the judges and the accuser might 
not be polluted by being brought under the same roof with the 
offender (Ant. v. n). The accuser and the accused, standing 
on two white stones termed " Relentlessness " ('AvalSeia) and 
" Outrage " ("Tj3pis) respectively (Paus. i. 28. 5), bound them- 
selves to the truth by most solemn oaths (Demosth. xxiii. 68). 
Each was allowed two speeches, and the trial lasted three days. 
After the first speech the accused, unless charged with parricide, 
was at liberty to withdraw into exile (Poll. viii. 117). If con- 
demned, he lost his life, and his property was confiscated. A 



tie vote acquitted (Aeschyl. Eumen. 735; Ant. v. 51; Aeschin. 
iii. 252). See further Greek Law. 

Authorities. — Among other works may be mentioned E. Dugit, 
Htude sur I'Areopage athenien (Paris, 1867); E. Caillemer, " Areo- 
pagus," in Daremberg et Saglio, Diet. d. Antiq. grecq. et rom. (Paris, 
1873) i. 395-404; A. Philippi, Areopag und Epheten (Berlin, 1874)'. 
The discovery of the Aristotelian " Constitution of Athens " (Ath. 
Pol.) has largely rendered obsolete all works published before 1891. 
See Hermann-Thumser, Griechische Staatsalterttimer (6th ed., Frei- 
burg, 1892), 365-371, 387-391, 788; U. von Wilamowitz-Mollendorff, 
Aristoteles und Athen (Berlin, 1893), ii. 186-200; J. J. Terwen, De 
Areopago Atheniensium Quaestiones Variae (Utrecht, 1894); G. 
Gilbert, Constitutional Antiquities of Athens and Sparta (Eng. trans., 
London and New York, 1895), 114, 122, 137, 154,282; F. Cauer, 
"Aischylos und der Areopag," in Rhein. Mus. (1895), N.F. i. 348- 
356; Wachsmuth and Thalheim, s.v. " Areios pagos " in Pauly- 
Wissowa, Realencycl. d. kl. Altertumswiss. (Stuttgart, 1896), ii. 627- 
633; ;G. de Sanctis, 'AtSU, Storia delta Repubblica Ateniese (Rome, 
1898); L. Ziehen, " Drakontische Gesetzgebung," in Rhein. Mus. 
(1899), N.F. liv. 321-344. See also Cleisthenes; Perici.es and 
Athens. (G. W. B.) 

AREQUIPA, a coast department of southern Peru, bounded 
N. by the departments of Ayacucho and Cuzco, E. by Puno and 
Moquegua, S. and W. by Moquegua and the Pacific. It is 
divided into seven provinces. Area, 21,947 sq. m.; pop. (1896) 
229,007. It is traversed by an important railway line from 
Mollendo (Islay) to Puno, on Lake Titicaca, 325 m. long, with 
extensions to Santa Rosa, Peru and La Paz, Bolivia. The 
highest point reached by this line is 14,660 ft. The department 
includes an arid, sand-covered region on the coast traversed 
by deep gorges formed by river courses, and a partly barren, 
mountainous region inland composed of the high Cordillera 
and its spurs toward the coast, between which are numerous 
highly fertile valleys watered by streams from the snow-clad 
peaks. These produce cotton, rice, sugar-cane, wheat, coffee, 
Indian corn, barley, potatoes and fruit. The mountainous 
region is rich in minerals, and there is a valuable deposit of 
borax near the capital, Arequipa. 

AREQUIPA, a city of southern Peru, capital of the depart- 
ment of the same name, about 90 m. N.E. by N. of its seaport 
Mollendo (107 m. by rail), and near the south-west foot of the 
volcano Misti which rises to a height of 19,029 ft. above sea-level. 
The population was estimated at 35,000 in 1896. The city is 
provided with a tram line, and is connected with the coast at 
Mollendo (Islay) by a railway 107 m. long, and with Puno, on 
Lake Titicaca, by an extension of the same line 218 m. long. 
The city occupies a green, fertile valley of the Rio Chile, 7753 ft. 
above the sea, surrounded by an arid, barren desert. It is built 
on the usual rectangular plan and the streets are wide and well 
paved. The edifices in general are low, and are massively built 
with thick walls and domed ceilings to resist earthquakes, and 
lessen the danger from falling masonry. The material used is 
a soft, porous magnesian limestone, which is well adapted to 
the purpose in view. Arequipa is the seat of a bishopric created 
in 1609-1612, and possesses a comparatively modern cathedral, 
its predecessor having been destroyed by fire in 1849. It has 
several large churches, and formerly possessed five monasteries 
and three nunneries, which have been closed and their edifices 
devoted to educational and other public purposes. The religious 
element has always been a dominating factor in the life of the 
city. A university, founded in 1825, three colleges, one of them 
dating from colonial times, a medical school, and a public library, 
founded in 1821, are distinguishing features of the city, which 
has always taken high rank in Peru for its learning and liberalism, 
as well as for its political restlessness. The city's water-supply 
is derived from the Chile river and is considered dangerous 
to new arrivals because of the quantity of saline and organic 
matter contained. The climate is temperate and healthy, and 
the fertile valley (10 m. long by 5 m. wide) surrounding the city 
produces an abundance of cereals, fruits and vegetables common 
to both hot and temperate regions. Pears and strawberries 
grow side by side with oranges and granadillas, and are noted 
for their size and flavour. The trade of the city is principally 
in Bolivian products — mineral ores, alpaca wool, &c. — but it 
also receives and exports the products of the neighbouring 



ARES— ARETE 



455 



Peruvian provinces, and the output of the borax deposits in the 
neighbourhood. Arequipa was founded by Pizarro in 1540, 
and has been the scene of many events of importance in the 
history of Peru. It was greatly damaged in the earthquakes of 
1582, 1609, 1784 and 1868, particularly in the last. It was 
captured by the Chileans in 1883, near the close of the war 
between Chile and Peru. 

ARES, in ancient Greek mythology, the god of war, or rather 
of battle, son of Zeus and Hera. (For the Roman god, identified 
with Ares, see Mars.) As contrasted with Athena, who added 
to her other attributes that of being the goddess of well-con- 
ducted military queries, he personifies brute strength and
the wild rage of conflict. His delight is in war and bloodshed; 
he loves fighting for fighting's sake, and takes the side of the 
one or the other combatant indifferently, regardless of the justice 
of the cause. His quarrelsomeness was regarded as inherited 
from his mother, and it may have been only as an illustration 
of the perpetual strife between Zeus and Hera that Ares was 
accounted their son. According to a later tradition, he was the 
son of Hera (Juno) alone, who became pregnant by touching 
a certain flower (Ovid, Fasti, v. 255). All the gods, even Zeus, 
hate him, but his bitterest enemy is Athena, who fells him to 
the ground with a huge stone. Splendidly armed, he goes to 
battle, sometimes on foot, sometimes in the war chariot made 
ready by his sons Deimos and Phobos (Panic and Fear) by whom 
he is usually accompanied. In his train also are found Enyo, the 
goddess of war who delights in bloodshed and the destruction 
of cities; his sister, Eris, goddess of fighting and strife; and 
the Keres, goddesses of death, whose function it is especially 
to roam the battle-field, carrying off the dead to Hades. In 
later accounts (and even in the Odyssey) Ares' character is some- 
what toned down; thus, in the " Homeric " hymn to Ares, 
he is addressed as the assistant of Themis (Justice), the enemy 
of tyrants, and leader of the just. It is to be noted, however, that 
in this little poem he is to some extent confounded with the 
planet named after him (Ares, or Mars). 

The primitive character of Ares has been much discussed. 
He is a god of storms; a god of light or a solar god; a chthonian 
god, one of the deities of the subterranean world, who could 
bring prosperity as well as ruin upon men, although in time his 
destructive qualities obscured the others. In this last aspect 
he was one of the chief gods of the Thracians, amongst whom 
his home was placed even in the time of Homer. In Scythia 
an old iron sword served as the symbol of the god, to which 
yearly sacrifices of cattle and horses were made, and in earlier 
times (as apparently also at Sparta) human victims, selected 
from prisoners of war, were offered. Thus Ares developed into 
the god of war, in which character he made his way into Greece. 
This theory may have been nothing more than an instance of 
the Greek tendency to assign a northern or " hyperborean " 
home to deities in whose character something analogous to the 
stormy elements of nature was found. But it appears that the 
Thracians and Scythians in historical times (Herodotus i. 59) 
worshipped chiefly a war god, and that certain Thracian settle- 
ments, formed in Greece in prehistoric times, left behind them 
traces of the worship of a god whom the Greeks called Ares. 
The story of his imprisonment for thirteen months by the 
Aloiidae (Iliad, v. 385) points to the conquest of this chthonian 
destroyer of the fields by the arts of peace, especially agriculture, 
of which the grain-fed sons of Aloeus (the thresher) are the 
personification. 

In Homer Ares is the lover of Aphrodite, the wife of Hephaestus, 
who catches them together in a net and holds them up to the 
ridicule of the gods. In what appears to be a very early develop- 
ment of her character, Aphrodite also was a war goddess, known 
under the name of Areia; and in Thebes, the most important 
seat of the worship of Ares, she is his wife, and bears him Eros 
and Anteros, Deimos and Phobos, and Harmonia, wife of Cadmus, 
the founder of the city (Hesiod, Theog. 933). In the legend of 
Cadmus and his family Ares plays a prominent part. His 
worship was not so widely spread over Greece as that of other 
gods, although he was honoured here and there with festivals 



and sacrifices. Thus, at Sparta, under the name of Theritas, 
he was offered young dogs and even human beings. The Dio- 
scuri were said to have brought his image from Colchis to Laconia, 
where it was set up in an old sanctuary on the road from Sparta 
to Therapnae. At Athens, he had a temple at the foot of the 
Areopagus, with a statue by Alcamenes. It was here, according 
to the legend, that he was tried and acquitted by a council of 
the gods for the murder of Halirrhothius, who had violated 
Alcippe, the daughter of Ares by Agraulos. The figure of Ares 
appears in various stories of ancient mythology. Thus, he 
engages in combat with Heracles on two occasions to avenge the 
death of his son Cycnus; once Zeus separates the combatants 
by a flash of lightning, but in the second encounter he is severely 
wounded by his adversary, who has the active support of Athena; 
maddened by jealousy, he changes himself into the boar which 
slew Adonis, the favourite of Aphrodite; and stirs up the war 
between the Lapithae and Centaurs. His attributes were the 
spear and the burning torch, symbolical of the devastation 
caused by war (in ancient times the hurling of a torch was the 
signal for the commencement of hostilities). The animals sacred 
to him were the dog and the- vulture. 

The worship of Ares being less general throughout Greece than 
that of the gods of peace, the number of statues of him is small; 
those of Ares-Mars, among the Romans, are more frequent. 
Previous to the 5th century B.C. he was represented as full- 
bearded, grim-featured and in full armour. From that time, 
apparently under the influence of Athenian sculptors, he was 
conceived as the ideal of a youthful warrior, and was for a time 
associated with Aphrodite and Eros. He then appears as a 
vigorous youth, beardless, with curly hair, broad head and 
stalwart shoulders, with helmet and chlamys. In the Villa 
Ludovisi statue (after the style of Lysippus) he appears seated, 
in an attitude of thought; his arms are laid aside, and Eros 
peeps out at his feet. In the Borghese Ares (also taken for 
Achilles) he is standing, his only armour being the helmet on his 
head. He also appears in many other groups, with Aphrodite, 
in marble and on engraved gems of Roman times. But before 
this grouping had recommended itself to the Romans, with their 
legend of Mars and Rhea Silvia, the Greek Ares had again 
become under Macedonian influence a bearded, armed and 
powerful god. 

Authorities.— H. D. Muller, Ares (1848) ; H. W. Stoll, Ober die 
urspriingliche Bedeutung des A. und der Athene (1881); F. A. Voigt, 
" Beitrage zur Mythologie des Ares und Athena " in Leipziger 
Studien, iv. 1881 ; W. H. Roscher, Studien zur vergleichenden Mytho- 
logie, i., 1873; C. Tumpel, Ares und Aphrodite (1880); articles in 
Pauly-Wissowa's Realencyclopadie, Roscher's Lexikon der Mytho- 
logie, and Daremberg and Saglio's Dictionnaire des Antiquites (s.v. 
Mars) ; Preller, Griechische Mythologie. 

ARETAEUS, of Cappadocia, a Greek physician, who lived at 
Rome in the second half of the 2nd century a.d. We possess 
two treatises by him, each in four books, in the Ionic dialect: 
On the Causes and Indications of Acute and Chronic Diseases, 
and On their Treatment. His work, was founded on that of 
Archigenes; like him, he belonged to the eclectic school, but 
did not ignore the theories of the " Pneumatics," who made the 
heart the seat of life and of the soul. 

Editions by Kiihn (1828), Ermerius (1848). English translations : 
Wigan (1723); Moffat (1786); Reynolds (1837); Adams (1856). 
See Locher, Aretaeus aus Kappadocien (1847). 

ARETAS (Arab. Haritha), the Greek form of a name borne by 
kings of the Nabataeans resident at Petra in Arabia. (1) A 
king in the time of Antiochus IV. Epiphanes (2 Mace. v. 8). 
(2) The father-in-law of Herod Antipas (Jos. Ant. xviii. 5. 1, 3). 
In 2 Cor. xi. 3.2 he is described as ruler of Damascus (q.v.) at the 
time of Paul's conversion. Herod Antipas had married a 
daughter of Aretas, but afterwards discarded her in favour of 
Herodias. This led to a war with Aretas in which Antipas was 
defeated. 

An Aretas is mentioned in 1 Mace. xv. 22, but the true 
reading is probably Ariarathes (king of Cappadocia). See 
Nabataeans. • 

ARETE (O. Fr. areste, Lat. arista, ear of corn, fish-bone or 
spine), a ridge or sharp edge; a French term used in Switzerland 



456 



ARETHAS— AREZZO 



to denote the sharp bayonet-like edge of a mountain (such as the 
Matterhorn), that slopes steeply upward with two precipitous 
sides meeting in a long ascending ridge. Hence the word has 
passed into common use to denote any sharp mountain edge 
denuded by frost action above the snowline, where the con- 
sequent angular ridges give the characteristic " house-roof 
structure " of these altitudes. 

ARETHAS (c. 860-940), Byzantine theological writer and 
scholar, archbishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia, was born at 
Patrae. He was the author of a Greek commentary on the 
Apocalypse, avowedly based upon that of Andrew, his pre- 
decessor in the archbishopric. In spite of its author's modest 
estimate, Arethas's work is by no means a slavish compilation; 
it contains additions from other sources, and especial care has 
been taken in verifying the references. His interest was not, 
however, confined to theological literature; he annotated the 
margins of his classical texts with numerous scholia (many of 
which are preserved), and had several MSS. copied at his own 
expense, amongst them the Codex Clarkianus of Plato (brought 
to England from the monastery of St John in Patmos), and the 
Dorvillian MS. of Euclid (now at Oxford). 

Most divergent opinions have been held as to the time in which 
Arethas lived ; the reasons for the dates given above will be found 
succinctly stated in the article " Aretas," by A. Julicher in Pauly- 
Wissowa's Realencyclopddie der klassischen Altertutnswissenschaft 
(1896). The text of the commentary is given in Migne, Patrologia 
Graeca, cvi. ; see also O. Gebhardt and A. Harnack, Texte und 
Vntersuchungen zur Geschichte der altchristlichen Litt. i. pp. 36-46 
(1882), and Vita Euthymii (patriarch of Constantinople, d. 917), 
ed. C. de Boor (1888); H. Wace, Dictionary of Christian Biography, 
i. ; C. Krumbacher, Geschichte der byzantinischen Litteratur (1897); 
G. Heinrici in Herzog-Hauck, Realencyklopddie (1897). 

ARETHUSA, in Greek mythology, a nymph who gave her 

name to a spring in Elis and to another in the island of Ortygia 

near Syracuse. According to Pausanias (v. 7. 2), Alpheus, a 

mighty hunter, was enamoured of Arethusa, one of the retinue 

of Artemis; Arethusa fled to Ortygia, where she was changed into 

a spring; Alpheus, in the form of a river, made his way beneath 

the sea, and united his waters with those of the spring. In 

Ovid (Metam. v. 572 foil.), Arethusa, while bathing in the 

Alpheus, was seen and pursued by the river god in human form; 

Artemis changed her into a spring, which, flowing underground, 

emerged at Ortygia. In the earlier form of the legend, it is 

Artemis, not Arethusa, who is the object of the god's affections, 

and escapes by smearing her face with mire, so that he fails to 

recognize her (see L. R. Farnell, Cults of the Greek States, ii. 

p. 428) . The probable origin of the story is the part traditionally 

taken in the foundation of Syracuse by the Iamidae of Olympia, 

who identified the spring Arethusa with their own river Alpheus, 

And the nymph with Artemis Alpheiaia, who was worshipped at 

Ortygia. The subterranean passage of the Alpheus in the upper 

part of its course (confirmed by modern explorers), and the 

freshness of the water of Arethusa in spite of its proximity to 

the sea, led to the belief that it was the outlet of the river. 

Further, according to Strabo (vi. p. 270), during the sacrifice of 

oxen at Olympia the waters of Arethusa were disturbed, and a 

cup thrown into the Alpheus would reappear in Ortygia. In 

Virgil (Eel. x. 1) Arethusa is addressed as a divinity of poetical 

inspiration, like one of the Muses, who were themselves originally 

nymphs of springs. 

For Arethusa on Syracusan coins, see B. V. Head, Historia 
Numorum, pp. 151, 155. 

ARETINO, PIETRO (1492-1556), Italian author, was born in 
1492 at Arezzo in Tuscany, from which place he took his name. 
He is said to have been the natural son of Luigi Bacci, a gentle- 
man of the town. He received little education, and lived for 
some years poor and neglected, picking up such scraps of infor- 
mation as he could. When very young he was banished from 
Arezzo on account of a satirical sonnet which he composed 
against indulgences. He went to Perugia, where for some time 
he worked as a bookbinder, and continued to distinguish himself 
by his daring attacks upon religion. After some years' wandering 
through parts of Italy he reached Rome, where his talents, wit 
and impudence commended him to the papal court. This 



favour, however, he lost in 1523 by writing a set of obscene 
sonnets, to accompany an equally immoral series of drawings 
by the great painter, Giulio Romano. He left Rome and was 
received by Giovanni de' Medici, who introduced him at Milan 
to Francis I. of France. He gained the good graces of that 
monarch, and received handsome presents from him. Shortly 
after this Aretino attempted to regain the favour of the pope, 
but, having come to Rome, he composed a sonnet against a 
rival in some low amour, and in return was assaulted and severely 
wounded. He could obtain no redress from the pope, and 
returned to Giovanni de' Medici. On the death of the latter in 
December 1526, he withdrew to Venice, where he afterwards 
continued to reside. He spent his time here in writing comedies, 
sonnets, licentious dialogues, and a few devotional and religious 
works. He led a profligate life, and procured funds to satisfy 
his needs by writing sycophantish letters to all the nobles and 
princes with whom he was acquainted. This plan proved 
eminently successful, for large sums were given him, apparently 
from fear of his satire. So great did Aretino 's pride grow, that 
he styled himself the " divine," and the " scourge of princes," 
He died in 1556, according to some accounts by falling from his 
chair in a fit of laughter caused by hearing some indecent story 
of his sisters. The reputation of Aretino in his own time rested 
chiefly on his satirical sonnets or burlesques; but his comedies, 
five in number, are now considered the best of his works. His 
letters, of which a great number have been printed, are also 
commended for their style. The dialogues and the licentious 
sonnets have been translated into French, under the title 
Academie des Dames. 

AREZZO (anc. Arretium), a town and episcopal see of Tuscany, 
Italy, the capital of the province of Arezzo, 54 m. S.E. of Florence 
by rail. Pop. (1901) town, 16,780; commune, 46,926. It is an 
attractive town, situated on the slope of a hill 840 to 970 ft. above 
sea-level, in a fertile district. The walls by which it is surrounded 
were erected in 1320 by Guido Tarlati di Pietramala, its warlike 
bishop, who died in 1327, and is buried in the cathedral; they 
were reconstructed by Cosimo I. de' Medici between 1541 and 
1568, on which occasion the bronze statues of Pallas and the 
Chimaera, now at Florence, were discovered. The town itself is 
fan-shaped, the streets, which contain some fine old houses with 
projecting eaves and many towers, radiating from the citadel 
(Eortezza), which was constructed in 1502, and dismantled by 
the French in 1800. The cathedral, close by, is a fine specimen of 
Italian Gothic begun in 1277, but not completed internally until 
1511, while the facade was not begun until 1 880. The interior is 
spacious and contains some fine 14th-century sculptures, those of 
the high altar, which contains the tomb of St Donatus, the patron 
saint of Arezzo, being the best; very good stained-glass windows 
of the beginning of the 16th century by Guillaume de Marcillat, 
and some terra-cotta reliefs by Andrea della Robbia. Arjother 
fine church is S. Maria della Pieve, having a campanile and a 
facade of 1216, the latter with three open colonnades running for 
its whole length above the doors. The interior was restored to its 
original style in 1863-1865. The Romanesque choir and apse 
belong to the nth century, the rest of the interior is con- 
temporary with the facade. In the square behind the church is a 
colonnade designed by Vasari. In the cloisters of S. Bernardo, on 
the site of the ancient amphitheatre, is a remarkable view of 
medieval Rome. S. Francesco contains famous frescoes by Piero 
de' Franceschi, representing scenes from the legend of the Holy 
Cross, and others by Spinello Aretino, a pupil of Giotto. There 
are several other frescoes by the latter in S. Domenico. Among 
the Renaissance buildings the churches of S. Maria delle Grazie 
and the Santissima Annunziata may be noted. The collection of 
majolica in the municipal museum is very fine, and so is that of 
the Funghini family. In the middle ages Arezzo was generally on 
the Ghibelline side; it succumbed to Florence in 1289 at the 
battle of Campaldino, but at the end of the century recovered its 
strength under the Tarlati family. In 1336 it became subject to 
Florence for six years, and after intestine struggles, finally came 
under her rule in 1384. Among the natives of Arezzo the most 
famous are the Benedictine monk Guido of Arezzo, the inventor 



ARGALI— ARGENSON 



457 



of the modem system of musical notation (died c. 1050), the 
poet Petrarch, Pietro Aretino, the satirist (1492-1556), and 
Vasari, famous for his lives of Italian painters. The town never 
possessed a distinct school of artists. 

See C. Signorini, Arezzo, Cittd.yProvin.cia, Guida illustrate (Arezzo, 
1904). (T. As,) 

ARGALI, the Tatar name of the great wild sheep, Ovis ammon, 
of the Altai and other parts of Siberia. Standing as high as a 
large donkey, the argali is the finest of all the wild sheep, the 
horns of the rams, although of inferior length, being more 
massive than those of Ovis poll of the Pamirs. There are several 
local races of argali, among which O. ammon hodgsoni of Ladak 
and Tibet is one of the best known. There are likewise several 
nearly related central Asian species, such as O. sairensis and 
0. lUtledalei. (See Sheep.) 

ARGAO, a town on the east coast of Cebu, Philippine Islands, 
36 m. S.S.W. of the town of Cebu. Pop. (1903) 35,448. Large 
quantities of a superior quality of cacao are produced in the 
vicinity, and rice and Indian corn are other important products. 
A limited amount of cotton is raised and woven into cloth. The 
language is Cebu-Visayan. Argao was founded in 1608. , 

ARGAUM, a village of British India in the Akola district of the 
Central Provinces, 32 m. north of Akola. The village is mem- 
orable for an action which took place on the 28th of November 
1803 between the British army, commanded by Major-General 
Wellesley (afterwards duke of Wellington), and the Mahrattas 
under Sindhia and the raja of Berar, in which the latter were 
defeated with great loss. A medal struck in England in 1851 
commemorates the victory. 

ARGEI, the name given by the ancient Romans to a number of 
rush puppets (24 or 27 according to the reading of Varro, de Ling, 
lat. vii. 44, or 30 according to Dionysius i. 38) resembling men tied 
hand and foot, which were taken down to the ancient bridge 
over the Tiber {pons sublicius) on the 14th of May by the ponti- 
fices and magistrates, with the flaminica Dialis in mourning guise, 
and there thrown into the Tiber by the Vestal virgins. There 
were also in various parts of the four Servian regions of the city 
anumberof sacella Argeorum (chapels), round whicha procession 
seems to have gone on the 17th of, March (Varro, L.L. v. 46-54; 
Jordan, Rom. Topogr. vol. ii. 603), and it has been conjectured 
that the puppets were kept in these chapels until the time came 
for them to be cast into the river. The Romans had no historical 
explanation of these curious rites, and neither the theories of 
their scholars nor the beliefs of the common people, who fancied 
that the puppets were substitutes for old men who used at one 
time to be sacrificed to the river, are worth serious consideration. 
Recently two explanations have been given: (1) that of W. 
Mannhardt, who by comparing numerous examples of similar 
customs among other European peoples arrived at the con- 
clusion that the rite was of extreme antiquity and of dramatic 
rather than sacrificial character, and that its object was possibly 
to procure rain; (2) that of Wissowa, who refuses to date it 
farther back than the latter half of the 3rd century B.C., and sees 
in it the yearly representation of an original sacrifice of twenty- 
seven captive Greeks (taking Argei as a Latin form of ' Apyeioi) 
by drowning in the Tiber. This second theory is, however, not 
borne out by any Roman historical record. 

See Wissowa's arguments in the article " Argei " in his edition 
of Pauly's Realencyclopadie. For the other view see W. Mannhardt, 
Antike Wald und Feldkulte, 178 foil.; W. W. Fowler, Roman Festi- 
vals, pp. in foil. (W. W. F.*) 

ARGELANDER, FRIEDRICH WILHELM AUGUST (1799- 
1875), German astronomer, was born at Memel on the 22nd of 
March 1709. He studied at the university of Konigsberg, and 
was attracted to astronomy by F. W. Bessel, whose assistant he 
became (October 1, 1820). His treatise on the path of the great 
comet of 181 1 appeared in 1822; he was, in 1823, entrusted 
with the direction of the observatory at Abo; and he exchanged 
it for a similar charge at Helsingfors in 1832. His admirable 
investigation of the sun's motion in space was published in 
1837; and in the same year he was appointed professor of 
astronomy in the university of Bonn, where he died on the 17th 
of February 1875. He also published Observations Astrono- 



micae Aboae Factae (3 vols., 1830-1832); DLX Slettarum 
Fixarum Positiones Mediae (1835); and the first seven volumes 
of Astronomische Beobachtungen auf der Sternwarte zu Bonn 
(1 846-1869) , containing his observations of northern and southern 
star-zones, and his great Durchmusterung (vols, iii.-v., 1859- 
1862) of 324,198 stars, from the north pole to -z" Dec. The 
corresponding atlas was issued in 1863. His observations 
(begun in 1838) and discussions of variable stars were embodied 
in vol. vii. of the same series. 

See E. Schonfeld in Vierteljahrsschrift der Astronomischen Gesell- 
schaft, x. pp. 150-178. 

ARGENS, JEAN BAPTISTE DE BOYER, Marquis d' 
(1704-1771), was born at Aix in Provence on the 24th of June 
1704. He entered the army at the age of fifteen, and after a 
dissipated and adventurous youth settled for a time at Amster- 
dam, where he wrote some historical compilations and began 
his more famous Lettres juives (The Hague, 6 vols., 1738-1742), 
Lettres chinoises (The Hague, 6 vols., 1739-1472), and Lettres 
cabalistiques (2nd ed., 7 vols., 1769); also the Memoires secrets 
de la ripublique des lettres (7 vols., 1 743-1478), afterwards revised 
and augmented as Histoire de V esprit humam (Berlin, 14 vols., 
1765-1768). He was invited by Prince Frederick (afterwards 
Frederick the Great) to Potsdam, and received high honours at 
court; but Frederick was bitterly offended by his marrying 
a Berlin actress, Mile Cochois. Argens returned to France in 
1769, and died near Toulon on the nth of January 1771. 

ARGENSOLA, LUPERCIO LEONARDO DE (1559-1613), 
Spanish dramatist and poet, was baptized at Barbastro on the 
14th of December 1559. He was educated at the universities 
of Huesca and Saragossa, becoming secretary to the duke de 
Villahermosa in 1585. He was appointed historiographer of 
Aragon in 1599, and in 1610 accompanied the count de Lemos 
to Naples, where he died in March 1613. His tragedies — Filis, 
Isabela and Alejandra-~a.re said by Cervantes to have "filled 
all who heard them with admiration, delight and interest "; 
Filis is lost, and Isabela and Alejandro, which were not printed 
till 1772, are ponderous imitations of Seneca. Argensola's 
poems were published with those of his brother in 1634; they 
consist of excellent translations from the Latin poets, and of 
original satires. His " echoing sonnets "- — such as Despues que 
al mundo el rey dvoino vino — lend themselves to parody; but 
his diction is singularly pure. 

His brother, Bartolome Leonardo de Argensola (1562- 
1631), Spanish poet and historian, was baptized at Barbastro 
on the 26th of August 1562, studied at Huesca, took orders, and 
was presented to the rectory of Villahermosa in 1588. He was 
attached to the suite of the count de Lemos, viceroy of Naples, 
in 1610, and succeeded his brother as historiographer of Aragon 
in 1613. He died at Saragossa on the 4th of February 1631. 
His principal prose works are the Conquista de las Islas Molucas 
(1609), and a supplement to Zurita's Anales de AfagOn, which 
was published in 1630. His poems (1634), like those dfhis elder 
brother, are admirably finished examples of pungent wit. His 
commentaries on contemporary events, and his Alteraciones 
popular es, dealing with a Saragossa rising in 1591, are lost. An 
interesting life of this writer by Father Miguel Mir precedes a 
reprint of the Conquista de'las Islas Molucas, issued at Saragossa 
in 1891. 

ARGENSON, the name, derived from an old hamlet situated in 
what is now the department of Indre-et-Loire, of a French 
family which produced some prominent statesmen, soldiers and 
men of letters. 

Rene de Voyer, seigneur d'Argenson (1596-1651), French 
statesman, was born on the 21st of November 1596. He was a 
lawyer by profession, and became successively avocat, councillor 
at the parlement of Paris, mattre des requites, and councillor 
of state. Cardinal Richelieu entrusted him with several missions 
as inspector and intendant of the forces. In 1623 he was 
appointed intendant of justice, police and finance in Auvergne, 
and in 1632 held similar office in Limousin, where he remained 
till 1637. After the death of Louis XIII. (1643) he retained his 
administrative posts, was intendant of the forces at Toulon 



45» 



ARGENSON 



(1646), commissary of the king at the estates of Languedoc 
(1647), and intendant of Guienne (1648), and showed great 
capacity in defending the authority of the crown against the 
rebels of the Fronde. After his wife's death he took orders 
(February 1651), but did not cease to take part in affairs of 
state. In 1651 he was appointed by Mazarin ambassador at 
Venice, where he died on the 14th of July 165 1. 

His son, Marc Rene de Voyer, comte d'Argenson (1623- 
1700), was born at Blois on the 13th of December 1623. He 
also was a lawyer, being councillor at the parlement of Rouen 
(1642) and maitre des requites. He attended his father in all his 
duties and succeeded him at the embassy at Venice. In 1655 he 
returned from his embassy, ruined, and lost favour with Mazarin, 
who removed him from his office of councillor of state. He then 
gave up public affairs and retired to his estates, where he occupied 
himself with good works. In September 1656 he entered the 
Company of the Holy Sacrament, a secret society for the diffusion 
of the Catholic religion. Besides writing the Annals of the 
society, he composed many pious works, which were destroyed 
in the fire at the Louvre in 187 1. Some of his correspondence 
with the once famous letter- writer, Jean Louis Guez de Balzac 
(1597-1654), has been published. He died in May 1700, leaving 
two sons, Marc Rene (see below), and Francois Elie(i656-i728), 
who became archbishop of Bordeaux. 

See Fr. Rabbe, " Compagnie du Saint-Sacrement," in the Revue 
historique (Nov. 1899); Beauchet-Filleau, Les Annates de la com- 
pagnie du Saint-Sacrement (Paris, 1900) ; R. Allier, La Cabale des 
devots (Paris, 1902). 

Marc Rene de Voyer, marquis de Paulmy and marquis 
d'Argenson' (1652-1721), son of the preceding, was born at 
Venice on the 4th of November 1652. He became avocat in 1669, 
and lieutenant-general in the sinichaussee of Angouleme (1679). 
After the death of Colbert, who disliked his family, he went to 
Paris and married Marguerite Lefevre de Caumartin, a kins- 
woman of the comptroller-general Pontchartrain. This was 
the beginning of his fortunes. He became successively maitre 
des requites (1694), member of the conseil des prises (prize court) 
( I 695), procureur-gtntral of the commission of inquest into 
false titles of nobility (1696), and finally lieutenant-general 
of police (1697). This last office, whith had previously been 
filled by N. G. de la Reynie, was very important. It not only 
gave him the control of the police, but also the supervision of 
the corporations, printing press, and provisioning of Paris. 
All contraventions of the police regulations came under his 
jurisdiction, and his authority was arbitrary and absolute. 
Fortunately, he had, in Saint-Simon's phrase, "a nice discernment 
as to the degree of rigour or leniency required for every case that 
came before him, being ever inclined to the mildest measures, 
but possessed of the faculty of making the most innocent 
tremble before him; courageous, bold, audacious in quelling 
ententes, and consequently the master of the people." During 
the twenty-one years that he exercised this office he was a party 
to every private and state secret; in fact, he had a share in every 
event of any importance in the history of Paris. He was the 
familiar friend of the king, who delighted in scandalous police 
reports; he was patronized by the duke of Orleans; he was 
supported by the Jesuits at court; and he was feared by all. 
He organized the supply of food in Paris during the severe winter 
of 1709, apd endeavoured, but with little success, to run to 
earth the libellers of the government. He directed the destruc- 
tion of the Jansenist monastery of Port Royal (1709), a pro- 
ceeding which provoked many protests and pamphlets. Under 
the regency, the Chambre de Justice, assembled to inquire into 
the malpractices of the financiers, suspected d'Argenson and 
arrested his clerks, but dared not lay the blame on him. On 
the 28th of January 17 18 he voluntarily resigned the office of 
lieutenant-general of police for those of keeper of the seals — 
in the place of the chancellor d'Aguesseau — and president 
of the council of finance. He was appointed by the regent to 
suppress the resistance of the parlements and to reorganize 
the finances, and was in great measure responsible for permitting 
John Law to apply his financial system, though he soon quarrelled 



with Law and intrigued to bring about his downfall. The regent 
threw the blame for the outcome of Law's schemes on d'Argenson, 
who was forced to resign his position in the council of finance 
(January 1720). By way of compensation he was created 
inspector-general of the police of the whole kingdom, but had 
to resign his office of keeper of the seals (June 1720). He died 
on the 8th of May 1721, the people of Paris throwing taunts and 
stones at his coffin and accusing him of having ruined the kingdom. 
In 1 7 16 he had been created an honorary member of theAcademie 
des Sciences and, in 1 7 1 8, a member of the French Academy. 

See the contemporary memoirs, especially those of Saint-Simon 
(de Boislisle's ed.), Dangeau and Math. Marais; Barbier's Journal; 
" Correspondance administrative sous Louis XIV." in Coll. des doc. 
ined. sur I'histoire de France, edited by G. B. Depping (1850-1855); 
Correspondance des controleurs-generaux des finances, pub. by de Bois- 
lisle (1873-1900) ; Correspondance de M. de Marville avec M. de 
Maurepas (1896-1897); Rapports de police de Rene d'Argenson, 
pub. by P. Cottin (Paris, undated) ; P. Clement, La police sous 
Louis XIV. (1873). 

Rene Louis de Voyer de Paulmy, marquis d'Argenson 
(1694-17 57), eldest son of the preceding, was a lawyer, and held 
successively the posts of councillor at the parlement (17 16), 
mattredes requites (17 18), councillor of state (1719), and intendant 
of justice, police and finance in Hainaut. During his five years' 
tenure of the last office he was mainly employed in provisioning 
the troops, who were suffering from the economic confusion 
resulting from Law's system. He returned to court in 1724 
to exercise his functions as councillor of state. At that time 
he had the reputation of being a conscientious man, but ill 
adapted to intrigue, and was nicknamed " la b6te." He entered 
into relations with the philosophers, and was won over to the 
ideas of reform. He was the friend of Voltaire, who had been 
a fellow-student of his at the Jesuit college Louis-le-grand, and 
frequented the Club de l'Entresol, the history of which he wrote 
in his memoirs. It was then that he prepared his Considirations 
sur le gouvernement de la France, which was published posthu- 
mously by his son. He was also the friend and counsellor of 
the minister G. L. de Chauvelin. In May 1 744 he was appointed 
member of the council of finance, and in November of the same 
year the king chose him as secretary of state for foreign affairs, 
his brother, the comte d'Argenson (see below), being at the same 
time secretary of state for war. France was at that time engaged 
in the War of the Austrian Succession, and the government had 
been placed by Louis XV. virtually in the hands of the two 
brothers. The marquis d'Argenson endeavoured to reform the 
system of international relations. He dreamed of a " European 
Republic," and wished to establish arbitration between nations 
in pursuance of the ideas of his friend the abbe de Saint-Pierre. 
But he failed to realize any part of his projects. The generals 
negotiated in opposition to his instructions; his colleagues 
laid the blame on him; the intrigues of the courtiers passed 
unnoticed by him; whilst the secret diplomacy of the king 
neutralized his initiative. He concluded the marriage of the 
dauphin to the daughter of Augustus III., king of Poland, but 
was unable to prevent the election of the grand-duke of Tuscany 
as emperor in 1745. On the 10th of January 1747 the king 
thanked him for his services. He then retired into private life, 
eschewed the court, associated with Voltaire, Condillac and 
d'Alembert, and spent his declining years in working at the 
Academie des Inscriptions, of which he was appointed president 
by the king in 1747, and revising his Mimoires. Voltaire, in 
one of his letters, declared him to be " the best citizen that had 
ever tasted the ministry." He died on the 26th of January 1757. 

He left a large number of manuscript works, of which his son, 
Antoine Rene (1722-1787), known as the marquis de Paulmy, 
published the Considerations sur le gouvernement de France 
(Amsterdam, 1764) and Essais dans le gout de ceux de Montaigne 
(ib. 1785). The latter, which contains many useful biographical 
notes and portraits of his contemporaries, was republished in 
1787 a.sLoisirs d'un ministre d'ttat. Argenson's most important 
work, however, is his Mtmoires, covering in great detail the 
years 1725 to 1756, with an introductory part giving his recollec- 
tions since the year 1696. They are, as they were intended to be, 



ARGENSON 



459 



valuable " materials for the history of his time." There are two 
important editions, the first, with some letters, not elsewhere 
published, by the marquis d'Argenson, his great-grand-nephew 
(5 vols., Paris, 1S57 et seq.); the second, more correct, but less 
complete, published by J. B. Rathery, for the Societe de l'Histoire 
de France (9 vols., Paris, 1859 et seq.). The other works of the 
marquis d'Argenson, in MS., were destroyed in the fire at the 
Louvre library in 187 1. 

See Sainte-Beuve, Causeries du lundi (vols. xii. and xiv.) ; Le- 
vasseur. " Le Marquis dArgenson " in the Memoires de V Academie 
des Sciences Morales et Politiques (vol. lxxxvii., 1868) ; and, especially, 
E. Zevort, Le Marquis d' Argenson et le ministere des affaires etrangeres 
(Paris, 1880). See also G. de R. de Flassan, Ilistoire de la diplomatic 
francaise (2nd ed., 181 1) ; Voltaire, Siecle de Louis XV.; E. Boutaric, 
Correspondance secrete inedite de Louis XV. (1866); E. Champion, 
" Le Marquis d'Argenson," in the Revolution francaise (vol. xxxvi., 
1899); A. Alem, D'Argenson economiste (Paris, 1899); Arthur Ogle, 
The Marquis d'Argenson (1893). 

Marc Pierre de Voyer de Paulmy, comte d'Argenson 
(1696-1764), younger brother of the preceding, was born on the 
1 6th of August 1696. Following the family tradition he studied 
law and was councillor at the parlement of Paris. He suc- 
ceeded his father as lieutenant-general of police in Paris, but 
held the post only five months (January 26 to June 30, 1720). 
He then received the office of intendant of Tours, and resumed 
the lieutenancy of police in 1722. On the 2nd of January 1724 
he was appointed councillor of state. He gained the confidence 
of the regent Orleans, administering his fortune and living with 
his son till 1737. During this period he opened his salon to the 
philosophers Chaulieu, la Fare and Voltaire, and collaborated 
in the legislative labours of the chancellor d'Aguesseau. In 
March 1737 d'Argenson was appointed director of the censorship 
of books, in which post he showed sufficiently liberal views to 
gain the approval of writers — a rare thing in the reign of Louis 
XV. He only retained this post for a year. He became president 
of the grand council (November 1738), intendant of the gSniralite 
of Paris (August 1740), was admitted to the king's council 
(August 1742), and in January 1743 was appointed secretary 
of state for war in succession to the baron de Breteuil. As 
minister for war he had a heavy task; the French armies 
engaged in the War of the Austrian Succession were disorganized, 
and the retreat from Prague had produced a disastrous effect. 
After consulting with Marshal Saxe, he began the reform of the 
new armies. To assist recruiting, he revived the old institution 
of local militias, which, however, did not come up to his expecta- 
tion. In the spring of 1744 three armies were able to resume 
the offensive in the Netherlands, Germany and Italy, and in 
the following year France won the battle of Fontenoy, at which 
d'Argenson was present. After the peace in 1748 he occupied 
himself with the important work of recasting the French army 
on the model of the Prussian. He unified the types of cannon, 
grouped the grenadiers into separate regiments, and founded 
the Ecole Militaire for the training of officers (1751). An edict 
of the 1st of November 1751 granted patents of nobility to all 
who had the rank of general officer. In addition to his duties 
as minister of war he had the supervision of the printing, postal 
administration and general administration of Paris. He was 
responsible for the arrangement of the promenade of the Champs 
Elysees and for the plan of the present Place de la Concorde. 
He was exceedingly popular, and, although the court favour- 
ites hated him, he had the support of the king. Nevertheless, 
after the attempt of R. F. Damiens to assassinate the king, 
Louis abandoned d'Argenson to the machinations of the court 
favourites and dismissed both him and his colleague, J. B. de 
Machault d'Arnouville (February 1757). D'Argenson was exiled 
to his estates at Les Ormes near Saumur, but he had previously 
found posts for his brother, the marquis d'Argenson, as minister 
of foreign affairs, for his son Marc Rene as master of the 
horse, and for his nephew Marc Antoine Rene as commissary 
of war. From the time of his exile he lived in the society of 
savants and philosophers. He had been elected member of the 
Academie des Inscriptions in 1749. Diderot and d'Alembert 
dedicated the Encyclopedic to him, and Voltaire, C. J. F. Henault, 
and J. F Marmcntel openly visited him in his exile. After the 



death of Madame de Pompadour he obtained permission to 
return to Paris, and died a few days after his return, on the 22nd 
of August 1764. 

Marc Antoine Rene de Voyer, marquis de Paulmy 
d'Argenson (1722-1787), nephew of the preceding and son of 
Rene Louis, was born at Valenciennes on the 22nd of November 
1722. Appointed councillor at the parlement (1744), and matlre 
des requeies (1747), he was associated with his father in the 
ministry of foreign affairs and with his uncle in the ministry of 
war, and, in recognition of this experience, was commissioned 
to inspect the troops and fortifications and sent on embassy 
to Switzerland (1748). In 1751 his uncle recognized him as his 
deputy and made over to him the reversion of the secretariate 
of war. He then worked on the great reform of the army, and 
after the dismissal of his uncle became minister of war (February 
1757). But the outbreak of the Seven Years' War made this post 
exceedingly difficult to hold, and he resigned on the 23 rd of 
March 1758. He was ambassador to Poland from 1762 to 1764, 
but failed to procure the nomination of the French candidate 
to that throne. From 1766 to 1770 he was ambassador at Venice. 
Failing to obtain the embassy at Rome, he retired at the age of 
forty-eight and devoted the rest of his life to indulging his tastes 
for history and biography. He brought together a large library, 
very rich in French poetry and romance, and undertook various 
publications with the help of his librarian. In 1775 he began 
his Bibliotheque universelle des romans, of which forty volumes 
appeared within three years, but subsequently handed over the 
publication to other editors. His great work, Melanges tire's 
d'une grande bibliotheque, was published in 65 volumes (Paris, 
1 779-1 788). At his death he forbade his library to be dispersed: 
it was bought by the comte d'Artois (afterwards Charles X.) and 
formed the nucleus of the present Bibliotheque de l'Arsenal at 
Paris (the marquis having been governor of the arsenal). He 
died on the 13th of August 1787. 

See contemporary memoirs; also Dacier's eulogium in the 
Academie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres (November 1788); and 
Sainte-Beuve, Causeries du lundi (vol. xii.). 

Marc Rene, marquis de Voyer de Paulmy d'Argenson 
(1721-1782), known as the marquis de Voyer, son of Marc Pierre 
de Voyer, the minister of war, was born in Paris on the 20th of 
September 1721. He served in the army of Italy and the army 
of Flanders in the War of the Austrian Succession, arid was 
mestre de camp (proprietary colonel) of the regiment of Berry 
cavalry at the battle of Fontenoy (May 10, 1745), where he was 
promoted brigadier. He was associated with his father in his 
work of reorganizing the army, was made inspector of cavalry 
and dragoons (1749), and succeeded his father as master of the 
horse (1752). He introduced English horses into France. He 
was lieutenant-general of Upper Alsace in 1753 and governor 
of Vincennes in 1754, and served afterwards under Soubise in 
the Seven Years' War. He was wounded at Crefeld in 1758, and 
was promoted lieutenant-general (1 759). He followed his father 
into exile at Les Ormes (1763), and in the last years of the reign 
of Louis XV. sided with the malcontents headed by Choiseul; 
but on the rupture with England he rejoined the service of the 
king (1775). He was appointed inspector of the sea-board, and 
put the roadstead of the island of Aix in a state of defence during 
the American War of Independence. He caught marsh-fever 
while attempting to drain the marshes of Rochefort, and died 
at Les Ormes on the 18th of September 1782. 

Marc Rene Marie de Voyer de Paulmy, marquis d'Argen- 
son (1771-1842), son of the preceding, was born in Paris in 
September 1771. He was brought up by his father's cousin, 
the marquis de Paulmy, governor of the arsenal, and was made 
lieutenant of dragoons in 1 789. Although, at the age of eighteen, 
he had succeeded to several estates and a large fortune, he em- 
braced the revolutionary cause, joining the army of the North 
as Lafayette's aide-de-camp and remaining with it even after 
Lafayette's defection. Leaving France to take one of his sisters 
to England, he was denounced on his return as a royalist con- 
spirator, on the charge of having in his possession portraits of 
the royal family. He then went to live in Touraine, married 



4-6o 



ARGENT AN— ARGENTINA 



the widow of Prince Victor de Broglie, and saved her and her 
children from proscription. He introduced new agricultural 
instruments and processes on his estates, and installed 
machinery imported from England in his ironworks in Alsace. 
He was an enthusiastic adherent of Napoleon, by whom he was 
appointed in May 1809 prefect of Deux-N£thes. He helped 
to repel the English invasion of the islands of South Beveland 
and Walcheren (August 1809), and afterwards directed the 
defence works of Antwerp, but resigned this post (March 1813) 
in consequence of the complaints of the inhabitants and the 
exacting demands of the emperor. In May 1814 he refused the 
prefecture of Marseilles offered to him by the Bourbons, but 
was elected deputy from Belfort in 181 5 during the Hundred 
Days. On the 5th of July 1815 he took part in the declaration 
protesting against any tampering with the immutable rights of 
the nation. He was a member of the Chambre introwiable, where 
he became one of the orators of the democratic party. He was 
one of the founders of the journal Le censeur europien and of 
the Club de la liberie de la presse, and was an uncompromising 
opponent of reaction. Not re-elected in 1824 on account of his 
liberal ideas, he returned to the chamber under the Martignac 
ministry (1828), and resolutely persisted in his championship 
of the liberty of the press and of public worship. On the death 
of his wife he voluntarily renounced his mandate (July 1829), 
and hailed the revolution of 1830 with great satisfaction. On 
the 3rd of November 1830 he was elected to the chamber as 
deputy from Chatellerault, and took the oath, adding, however, 
the reservation " subject to the progress of the public reason." 
His independent attitude resulted in his defeat in the following 
year at the Chatellerault election, but he was returned for 
Strassburg. He wished the incidence of the taxes to be arranged 
according to social condition, and advocated a single tax pro- 
portionate to income like the English income tax. He harped 
incessantly on this idea in his speeches and articles (see his letters 
in La Tribune of June 20, 1832). Although he was a proprietor 
of ironworks he opposed the protectionist laws, which he con- 
sidered injurious to the workmen. He became the mouthpiece 
of the advanced ideas; subsidized the opposition newspapers, 
especially the National; received into his house F. M. Buonar- 
roti, who in 1796 had been implicated in the conspiracy of 
"Gracchus" Babeuf (?.».); and became a member of the 
committee of the Society of the Rights of Man. He was even 
sued in the courts for a pamphlet called Boutade d'un hemme 
riche A sentiments populaires, and delivered a speech to the 
jury in which he displayed very daring social theories. But 
he gradually grew discouraged and retired from public affairs, 
refusing even municipal office, and living in seclusion at La 
Grange in the forest of Guerche, where he devoted his inventive 
faculty to devising agricultural improvements. He subsequently 
returned to Paris, where he died on the 1st of August 1842. 

Charles Marc Rene de Voyer, marquis d'Argenson 
(1 796-1862), son of the preceding, was born at Boulogne-sur- 
Spine on the 20th of April 1796. He concerned himself little 
with politics. He was, however, a member of the council- 
general of Vienne for six years, but was expelled from it in 1840 
in consequence of his advanced ideas and his relations with the 
Opposition. In 1848 he was elected deputy from Vienne to the 
Constituent Assembly by 12,000 votes. He was an active 
member of the Archaeological Society of Touraine and the 
Society of Antiquaries of the West, and wrote learned works 
for these bodies. He collaborated in preparing the archives 
of the scientific congress at Tours in 1847; brought out two 
editions of the MSS. of his great-grand-uncle, the minister of 
foreign affairs under Louis XV., under the title Mimoires du 
marquis d'Argenson, one in 1825, and the other, in 5 vols., in 1857- 
1858; and published Discours et opinions de mon pere, M. Voyer 
d'Argenson (2 vols., 1845). He died on the 31st of Juy 1862. 

ARGENTAN, a town of north-western France, capital of an 
arrondissement in the department of Orne, 27 m. N.N.W. of 
Alencon on the railway from Le Mans to Caen. Pop. (1906) 
507 2. It is situated on the slope of a hill on the right bank of the 
Orne at its confluence with the Ure. The town has remains of 



old fortifications, among them the Tour Marguerite, and a 
chateau, now used as a law-court, dating from the 15th century. 
The church of St Germain (15th, 16th and 17th centuries) has 
several features of architectural beauty, notably the sculptured 
northern portal, and the central and western towers. The 
church of St Martin, dating from the 15th century, has good 
stained glass. The handsome modern town-hall contains among 
other institutions the tribunal of commerce, the museum and 
the library. Argentan is the seat of a sub-prefect, has a tribunal 
of first instance and a communal college. Leather-working and 
the manufacture of stained glass are leading industries. There are 
quarries of limestone in the vicinity. Argentan was a viscounty 
from the nth century onwards; it was often taken and pillaged. 
During the Religious Wars it remained attached to the Catholic 
party. Frangois Eudes de Mezeray, the historian, was born near 
the town, and a monument has been erected to his memory. 

ARGENTEUIL, a town of northern France in the department 
of Seine-et-Oise, on the Seine, 5 m. N.W. of the fortifications 
of Paris by the railway from Paris to Mantes. Pop. (1906) 
17,330. Argenteuil grew up round a monastery, which, dating 
from a.d. 656, was by Charlemagne changed into a nunnery; it 
was afterwards famous for its connexion with Heloise (see 
Abelard), and on her expulsion in n 29 was again turned into 
a monastery. Asparagus, figs, and wine of medium quality 
are grown in the district; and heavy iron goods, chemical 
products, clocks and plaster are among the manufactures. 

ARGENTINA, or the Argentine Republic (officially, Re- 
publica Argentina) , a country occupying the greater part of the 
southern extremity of South America. It is of wedge shape, 
extending from 21 55' S. to the most southerly point of the 
island of Tierra del Fuego in 55 2' 30" S., while its extremes of 
longitude are 53 40' on the Brazilian frontier and 73° 17' 30" W. 
on the Chilean frontier. Its length from north to south is 2285 
statute miles, and its greatest width about 930 m. It is the 
second largest political division of the continent, having an area of 
1,083,596 sq. m. (Gotha measurement). It is bounded N. by 
Bolivia and Paraguay, E. by Paraguay, Brazil, Uruguay and the 
Atlantic, W. by Chile, and S. by the converging lines of the 
Atlantic and Chile. 

Boundaries. — At different times Argentina has been engaged 
in disputes over boundary lines with every one of her neighbours, 
that with Chile being only settled in 1902. Beginning at the 
estuary of the Rio de la Plata, the boundary line ascends the 
Uruguay river, on the eastern side of the strategically important 
island of Martin Garcia, to the mouth of the. Pequiry, thence 
under the award of President Grover Cleveland in 1894 up that 
small river to its source and in a direct line to the source of the 
Santo Antonio, a small tributary of the Iguassu, thence down 
the Santo Antonio and Iguassu to the upper Parana, which forms 
the southern boundary of Paraguay. From the confluence of the 
upper Parana and Paraguay the line ascends the latter to the 
mouth of the Pilcomayo, which river, under the award of Presi- 
dent R. B. Hayes in 1878, forms the boundary between Argentina 
and Paraguay from the Paraguay river north-west to the 
Bolivian frontier. In accordance with the Argentine-Bolivian 
treaty of 1889 the boundary line between these republics con- 
tinues up the Pilcomayo to the 22nd parallel, thence west to the 
Tarija river, which it follows down to the Bermejo, thence up 
the latter to its source, and westerly through the Quiaca ravine 
and across to a point on the San Juan river opposite Esmoraca. 
From this point it ascends the San Juan south and west to the 
Cerro de Granadas, and thence south-west to Cerro Incahuasi 
and Cerro Zapalegui on the Chilean frontier. The boundary 
with Chile, extending across more than 32 lat, had been 
the cause of disputes for many years, which at times led /to 
costly preparations for war. The debts of the two nations 
resulted largely from this one cause. In 1881 a treaty was 
signed which provided that the boundary line should follow 
the highest crests of the Andes forming the watershed as far 
south as the 52nd parallel, thence east to the 70th meridian and 
south-east to Cape Dungeness at the eastern entrance to the 
Straits of Magellan. Crossing the Straits the line should follow 



ARGENTINA 



461 



the meridian of 68° 44', south to Beagle Channel, and thence east to 
the Atlantic, giving Argentina the eastern part of the Tierra del 
Fuego and Staten Island. By this agreement Argentina was 
confirmed in the possession of the greater part of Patagonia, 
while Chile gained control of the Straits of Magellan, much 
adjacent territory on the north, the larger part of Tierra del 
Fuego and all the neighbouring islands south and west. 

When the attempt was made to mark this boundary the 
commissioners were unable to agree on a line across the Puna de 
Atacama in the north, where parallel ranges enclosing a high arid 
plateau without any clearly defined drainage to the Atlantic or 
Pacific, gave an opportunity for conflicting claims. In the south 
the broken character of the Cordillera, pierced in places by large 
rivers flowing into the Pacific and having their upper drainage 
basins on the eastern side of the line of highest crests, gave rise to 
unforeseen and very difficult questions. Finally, under a con- 
vention of the 17th of April 1896, these conflicting claims were 
submitted to arbitration. In 1899 a mixed commission with 
Hon. W. I. Buchanan, United States minister at Buenos Aires, 
serving as arbitrator, reached a decision on the Atacama line 
north of 26 52' 45" S. lat., which was a compromise though it 
gave the greater part of the territory to Argentina. The line 
starts at the intersection of the 23rd parallel with the 67th 
meridian and runs south-westerly and southerly to the 
mountain and volcano summits of Rincon, Socompa, Llullaillaco, 
Azufre, Aguas Blancas and Sierra Nevada, thence to the 
initial point of the British award. (See Geogr. Jour., 1899, xiv. 
322-323.) The line south of 26 5 2' 45" S. lat. had been located by 
the commissioners of the two republics with the exception of 
four sections. These were referred to the arbitration of Queen 
Victoria, and, after a careful survey under the direction of Sir 
Thomas H. Holdich, the award was rendered by King Edward 
VII. in 1902. {See Geogr. Jour., 1903, xxi. 45-50.) In the first 
section the line starts from a pillar erected in the San Francisco 
pass, about 26 50' S. lat., and follows the water-parting south- 
ward to the highest peak of the Tres Cruces mountains in 
J7 o'45"S.lat.,68°49'5"W.long. In the second, the line runs 
from 40 2' S. lat., 71 40' 36" W. long., along the wdter-parting to 
the southern termination of the Cerro Perihueico in the valley 
of the Huahum river, thence across that river, 71 40' 36" W. 
long., and along the water-parting around the upper basin of the 
Huahum to a junction with the line previously determined. In 
the third and longest section, the line starts from a pillar erected 
in the Perez Rosales pass, near Lake Nahuel-Huapi, and follows 
the water-parting southward to the highest point of Mt. Tronador, 
and thence in a very tortuous course along local water-partings 
and across the Chilean rivers Manso, Puelo, Fetaleufu, Palena, 
Pico and Aisen, and the lakes Buenos Aires, Pueyrred6n and San 
Martin, to avoid the inclusion of Argentine settlements within 
Chilean territory, to the Cerro Fitzroy and continental water- 
parting north-west of Lake Viedma, between 49 and 50 S. lat. 
The northern half of this line does not run far from the 72nd 
meridian, except in 44 30' S. where it turns eastward nearly a 
degree to include the upper valley of the Frias river in Chilean 
territory, but south of the 49th parallel it curves westward to 
give Argentina sole possession of lakes Viedma and Argentino. 
The fourth section, which was made particularly difficult of 
solution by the extension inland of the Pacific coast inlets and 
sounds and by the Chilean colonies located there, was adjusted 
by running the line eastward from the point of divergence in 
50 50' S. lat. along the Sierra Baguales, thence south and south- 
east to the 52nd parallel, crossing several streams and following 
the crests of the Cerro Cazador. The Chilean settlement of 
Ultima Esperanza (Last Hope), over which there had been much 
controversy, remains under Chilean jurisdiction. 

Physical Geography. — For purposes of surface description, Argen- 
tina may be divided primarily into three great divisions — the 
mountainous zone and tablelands of the west, extending the full 
length of the republic; the great plains of the east, extending from 
the Pilcomayo to the Rio Negro; and the desolate, arid steppes of 
Patagonia. The first covers from one-third to one-fourth of the 
width of the country between the Bolivian frontier and the Rio 
Negro, and comprises the elevated Cordilleras and their plateaus, 
with flanking ranges and spurs toward the east. In the extreme 



north, extending southward from the great Bolivian highlands, 
there are several parallel ranges, the most prominent of which are : 
the Sierra de Santa Catalina, from which the detached Cachi, 
Gulumpaji and Famatina ranges project southward ; and the Sierra 
de Santa Victoria, south of which are the Zenta, Aconquija, Ambato 
and Ancaste ranges. These minor ranges, excepting the Zenta, are 
separated from the Andean masses by comparatively low depressions 
and are usually described as distinct ranges; topographically, how- 
ever, they seem to form a continuation of the ranges running south- 
ward from the Santa Victoria and forming the eastern rampart of 
the great central plateau of which the Puna de Atacama covers a 
large part. The elevated plateaus between these ranges are semi- 
arid and inhospitable, and are covered with extensive saline basins, 
which become lagoons in the wet season and morasses or dry salt- 
pans in the dry season. These saline basins extend down to the 
lower terraces of C6rdoba, Mendoza and La Pampa. Flanking this 
great widening of the Andes on the south-east are the three short 
parallel ranges of C6rdoba, belonging to another and older formation. 
North of them is the great saline depression, known as the " salinas 
grandes," 6^3 ft. above sea-level, where it is crossed by a railway; 
north-east is another extensive saline basin enclosing the " Mar 
Chiquita " (of Cordoba) and the morasses into which the waters of 
the Rio Saladillo disappear ; and on the north are the more elevated 
plains, partly saline, of western Cordoba, which separate this isolated 
group of mountains from the Andean spurs of Rioia and San Luis. 
The eastern ranges parallel to the Andes are here broken into detached 
extensions and spurs, which soon disappear in the elevated western 
pampas, and the Andes contract south of Aconcagua to a single 
range, which descends gradually to the great plains of La Pampa 
and Neuquen. The lower terrace of this great mountainous region, 
with elevations ranging from 1000 to 1500 ft., is in reality the western 
margin of the great Argentine plain, and may be traced from Oran 
(1017 ft.) near the Bolivian frontier southward through Tucuman 
(1476 ft.), Frias (1 129 ft.), C6rdoba (1279 ft.), Rio Cuarto (1358 ft.), 
Paunero (1250 ft.), and thence westward and southward through 
still unsettled regions to the Rio Negro at the confluence of the 
Neuquen and Limay. 

The Argentine part of the great La Plata plain extends from the 
Pilcomayo south to the Rio Negro, and from the lower terraces of 
the Andes eastward to the Uruguay and Atlantic. In the north 
the plain is known as the Gran Chaco, and includes the country 
between the Pilcomayo and Salado del Norte and an extensive 
depression immediately north of the latter river, believed to be the 
undisturbed bottom of the ancient Pampean sea. The northern 
part of the Gran Chaco is partly wooded and swampy, and as the 
slope eastward is very gentle and the rivers much obstructed by 
sand bars, floating trees and vegetation, large areas are regularly 
flooded during rainy seasons. South of the Bermejo the land is 
more elevated and drier, though large depressions covered with 
marshy lagoons are to be found, similar to those farther north. 
The forests here are heavier. Still farther south and south-west 
there are open grassy plains and large areas covered with salt-pans. 
The general elevation of the Chaco varies from 600 to 800 ft. above 
sea-level. The Argentine " mesopotamia," between the Parana and 
Uruguay rivers, belongs in great measure to this same region, being 
partly wooded, flat and swampy in the north (Corrientes), but 
higher and undulating in the south (Entre Rios). The Misiones 
territory of the extreme north-east belongs to the older highlands 
of Brazil, is densely wooded, and has ranges of hills sometimes rising 
to a height of 1000 to 1300 ft. 

The remainder of the great Argentine plain is the treeless, grassy 
pampa _ (Quichua for " level spaces "), apparently a dead level, but 
in reality rising gradually from the Atlantic westward toward the 
Andes. Evidence of this is to be found in the altitudes of the 
stations on the Buenos Aires and Pacific railway running a littla 
north of west across the pampas to Mendoza. The average elevation 
of Buenos Aires is about 65 ft.; of Mercedes, 70 m. westward, 
132 ft.; of Junin (160 m.), 267 ft.; and of Paunero (400 m.) it is 
1250 ft., showing an average rise of about 3 ft. in a mile. The 
apparently uniform level of the pampas is much broken along its 
southern margin by the Tandil and Ventana sierras, and by ranges 
of hills and low mountains in the southern and western parts of the 
territory of La Pampa. Extensive depressions also are found, some 
of which are subject to inundations, as along the lower Salado in 
Buenos Aires and along the lower courses of the Colorado and Negro. 
In the extreme west, which is as yet but slightly explored and settled, 
there is an extensive depressed area, largely saline in character, 
which drains into lakes and morasses, having no outlet to the ocean. 
The rainfall is under 6 in. annually, but the drainage from the 
eastern slopes of the Andes is large enough to meet the loss from 
evaporation and keep these inland lakes from drying up. At an 
early period this depressed area drained southward to the Colorado, 
and the bed of the old outlet can still be traced. The rivers belonging 
to this inland drainage system are the Vermejo, San Juan and 
Desaguadero, with their affluents, and their southward flow can be 
traced from about 28 ° S. lat. to the great lagoons and morasses 
between 36 and 37° S. lat. in the western'part of La Pampa territory. 
Some of the principal affluents are the Vinchina and Jachal, oj 
Zanjon, which flow into the Vermejo, the Patos, which* flows into 
the San Juan, and the Mendoza, Tunuyan and Diamante which 



462 



ARGENTINA 



flow into the Desaguadero, all of these being Andean snow-fed 
rivers. The Desaguadero also receives the outflow of the Laguna 
Bebedero, an intensely saline lake of western San Luis. The lower 
course of the Desaguadero is known as the Salado because of the 
brackish character of its water. Another considerable river flowing 
into the same great morass is the Atuel, which rises in the Andes 
not far south of the Diamante. (A description of the Patagonian 
part of Argentina will be found under Patagonia.) 

Rivers and Lakes. — The hydrography of Argentina is of the 
simplest character. The three great rivers that form the La Plata 
system — the Paraguay, Parana and Uruguay — have their sources 
in the highlands of Brazil and flow southward through a great 
continental depression, two of them forming eastern boundary lines, 
and one of them, the Parana, flowing across the eastern part of the 
republic. The northern part of Argentina, therefore, drains eastward 
from the mountains to these rivers, except where some great inland 
depression gives rise to a drainage having no outlet to the sea, and 
except, also, in the " mesopotamia " region, where small streams 
flow westward into the Parana and eastward into the Uruguay. 
The largest of the rivers through which Argentina drains into the 
Plata system are the Pilcomayo, which rises in Bolivia and flows 
south-east along the Argentine frontier for about 400 m. ; the 
Bermejo, which rises on the northern frontier and flows south-east 
into the Paraguay; and the Salado del Norte (called Rio del Jura- 
mento in its upper course), which rises on the high mountain slopes 
of western Salta and flows south-east into the Parana. Another 
river of this class is the Carcarafial, about 300 m. long, formed by 
the confluence of the Tercero and Cuarto, whose sources are in the 
Sierra de Cordoba; it flows eastward across the pampas, and dis- 
charges into the Parana at Gaboto, about 40 m. above Rosario. 
Other small rivers rising in the Cordoba sierras are the Primero and 
Segundo, which flow into the lagoons of north-east Cordoba, and the 
Quinto, which flows south-easterly into the lagoons and morasses 
of southern Cordoba. The Lujan rises near Mercedes, province of 
Buenos Aires, is about 150 m. long, and flows north-easterly into 
the Parana delta. Many smaller streams discharge into the Paraguay 
and Parana from the west, some of them wholly dependent upon the 
rains, and drying up during long droughts. The Argentine " mesopo- 
tamia " is well watered by a large number of small streams flowing 
north and west into the Parana, and east into the Uruguay. The 
largest of these are the Corrientes, Feliciano and Gualeguay of the 
western slope, and the Aguapey and Mirifiay of the eastern. None 
of the tributaries of the La Plata system thus far mentioned is 
navigable except the lower Pilcomayo and Bermejo for a few miles. 
These Chaco rivers are obstructed by sand bars and snags, which 
could be removed only by an expenditure of money unwarranted 
by the present population and traffic. In the southern pampa 
region there are many small streams, flowing into the La Plata 
estuary and the Atlantic; most of these are unknown by name 
outside the republic. The largest and only important river is the 
Salado del Sua, which rises in the north-west corner of the province 
of Buenos Aires and flows south-east for a distance of 360 m. into 
the bay of Samborombon. On the southern margin of the pampas 
are the Colorado and Negro, both large, navigable rivers flowing 
entirely across the republic from the Andes to the Atlantic. Many 
of the rivers of Argentina, as implied by their names (Salado and 
Saladillo), are saline or brackish in character, and are of slight use 
in the pastoral and agricultural industries of the country. The lakes 
of Argentina are exceptionally numerous, although comparatively 
few are large enough to merit a name on the ordinary general map. 
They vary from shallow, saline lagoons in the north-western plateaus, 
to great, picturesque, snow-fed lakes in the Andean foothills of 
Patagonia. The province of Buenos Aires has more than 600 lakes, 
the great majority small, and some brackish. The La Pampa 
territory also is dotted with small lakes. The Bebedero, in San 
Luis, and Porongos, in C6rdoba, and others, are shallow, saline lakes 
which receive the drainage of a considerable area and have no outlet. 
The large saline Mar Chiquita, of Cordoba, is fed from the Sierra de 
C6rdoba and has no outlet. In the northern part of Corrientes 
there is a large area of swamps and shallow lagoons which are 
believed to be slowly drying up. 

Harbours. — Although having a great extent of coast-line, Argen- 
tina has but few really good harbours. The two most frequented 
by ocean-going vessels are Buenos Aires and Ensenada (La Plata), 
both of which have been constructed at great expense to overcome 
natural disadvantages. Perhaps the best natural harbour of the 
republic is that of Bahia Blanca, a large bay of good depth, sheltered 
by islands, and 534 m. by sea south of Buenos Aires; here the 
government is building a naval station and port called Puerto 
Militar or Puerto Belgrano, and little dredging is needed to render 
the harbour accessible to the largest ocean-going vessels. About 
100 m. south of Bahia Blanca is the sheltered bay of San Bias, 
which may become of commercial importance, and between the 
42nd and 43rd parallels are the land-locked bays of San Jose 
and Nueva (Golfo Nuevo) — the first as yet unused; on the latter 
is Puerto Madryn, 838 m. from Buenos Aires, the outlet for 
the Welsh colony of Chubut. Other small harbours on the lower 
Patagonian, coast are not prominent, owing to lack of population. 
An occasional Argentine steamer visits these ports in the interests 
of colonists. The be6t-known among them are Puerto Deseado 



(Port Desire) at the mouth of the Deseado river (1253 m.), Santa 
Cruz, at the mouth of the Santa Cruz river (1481 m.), and Ushuaia, 
on Beagle Channel, Tierra del Fuego. North of Buenos Aires, on 
the Parana river, is the port of Rosario, the outlet for a rich agri- 
cultural district, ranking next to the federal capital in importance. 
Other river ports, of less importance, are Concordia on the Uruguay 
river, San Nicolas and Campana on the Parana river, Santa Fe on 
the Salado, a few miles from the Parana, the city of Parana on the 
Parana river, and Gualeguay on the Gualeguay river. 

Geology. — The Pampas of Argentina are generally covered by 
loess. The Cordillera, which bounds them on the west, is formed of 
folded beds, while the Sierras which rise in their midst, consist mainly 
of gneiss, granite and schist. In the western Sierras, which are 
more or less closely attached to the main chain of the Cordillera, 
Cambrian and Silurian fossils have been found at ceveral places. 
These older beds are overlaid, especially in the western part of the 
country, by a sandstone series which contains thin seams of coal 
and many remains of plants. At Bajo de Velis, in San Luis, the 
plants belong to the *' Glossopteris flora," which is so widely spread 
in South Africa, India and Australia, and the beds are correlated 
with the Karharbari series of India (Permian or Permo-Carboni- 
ferous). Elsewhere the plants generally indicate a higher horizon 
and are considered to correspond with the Rhaetic of Europe. 
Jurassic beds are known only in the Cordillera itself, and the Cre- 
taceous beds, which occur in the west of the country, are of freshwater 
origin. As far west, therefore, as the Cordillera, there is no evidence 
that any part of the region was ever beneath the sea in Mesozoic 
times, and the plant-remains indicate a land connexion with Africa. 
This view is supported by Neumayr's comparison of Jurassic faunas 
throughout the world. The Lower Tertiary consists largely of 
reddish sandstones resting upon the old rocks of the Cordillera and 
of the Sierras. Towards the east they lie at a lower level ; but in 
the Andes they reach a height of nearly 10,000 ft., and are strongly 
folded, showing that the elevation of the chain was not completed 
until after their deposition. The marine facies of the later Tertiaries 
is confined to the neighbourhood of the coast, and was probably 
formed after the elevation of the Andes; but inland, freshwater 
deposits of this period are met with, especially in Patagonia. Con- 
temporaneous volcanic rocks are associated with the Ordovician 
beds and with the Rhaetic sandstones in several places. During the 
Tertiary period the great volcanoes of the Andes were formed, and 
there were smaller eruptions in the Sierras. The principal rocks are 
andesites, but trachytes and basalts are also common. Great masses 
of granite, syenite and diorite were intruded at this period, and send 
tongues even into the andesitic tuffs. 

Silver, gold, lead and copper ores occur in many localities. 
They are found chiefly in the neighbourhood of the eruptive masses 
of the hilly regions. (See also Andes.) 1 

Climate. — The great extent of Argentina in latitude — about 33° — 
and its range in altitude from sea-level westward to the permanently 
snow-covered peaks of the Andes, give it a highly diversified climate, 
which is further modified by prevailing winds and mountain barriers. 
The temperature and rainfall are governed by conditions different 
from those in corresponding latitudes of the northern hemisphere. 
Southern Patagonia and Tierra del Fuego, for instance, although 
they correspond in latitude to Labrador, are made habitable and an 
excellent sheep-grazing country by the southerly equatorial current 
along the continental coast. The climate, however, is colder than 
the corresponding latitudes of western Europe, because of the pre- 
vailing westerly winds, chilled in crossing the Andes. In the extreme 
north-west an elevated region, whose aridity is caused by the 
" blanketing " influence of the eastern Andean ranges, extends 
southward to Mendoza. The northern part of the republic, east 
of the mountains, is subject to the oscillatory movements of the 
south-east trade winds, which cause a division of the year into wet 
and dry seasons. Farther south, in Patagonia, the prevailing wind 
is westerly, in which case the Andes again " blanket "an extensive 
region and deprive it of rain, turning it into an arid desolate steppe. 
Below this region, where the Andean barrier is low and broken, the 
moist westerly winds sweep over the land freely and give it a large 
rainfall, good pastures and a vigorous forest growth. If the republic 
be divided into sections by east and west lines, diversities of climate 
in the same latitude appear. In the extreme north a little over a 
degree and a half of territory lies within the torrid zone, extending 
from the Pilcomayo about 500 m. westward to the Chilean frontier; 
its eastern end is in the low, wooded plain of the Gran Chaco, where 
the mean annual temperature is 73 F., and the annual rainfall is 
63 in.; but on the arid, elevated plateau at its western extremity 
the temperature falls below 57° F., and the rainfall has diminished 
to 2 in. The character of the soil changes from the alluvial lowlands 
of the Gran Chaco, covered with forests of palms and other tropical 
vegetation, to the sandy, saline wastes of the Puna de Atacama, 
almost barren of vegetation and overshadowed by permanently 

1 For the geology of Argentina, see Stelzner, Beitrage zur geologie 
der argentinischen Republik (Cassel and Berlin, 1885); Brackebusch, 
Mapa geologico del Interiore de la Republica Argentina (Gotha, 1892) ; 
Valentin, Bosquejo geologico de la Argentina (Buenos Aires, 1897); 
Hauthal, " Beitrage zur Geologie der argentinischen Provinz Buenos 
Aires," Peterm. Mitt. vol. 1., 1904, pp. 83-92, 112-117, pi. vi. 




t. Artigas 

2. Salto 

3. Rivera 

4. Paysandu 

5. Tacdaremfco 

6. £10 tfegm 

7. Duwtno 

B. Gen-Q Largo 
9, Treinta-y-Tre: 
ic. Soriano 
1 j,, Flares 

12. Florida. 

13. Colonia 

14. San i/ose 

15. Montevideo 

16. Caneiones 

17. M'nas 

18. Matdanado 

19. Rochet 



Longitude W. of Greenwich So* 1 



EmeryW&ifcer se. 



ARGENTINA 



463 



snow-crowned peaks. Between the 30th and 31st parallels, a region 
essentially sub-tropical in character, the temperature ranges from 
66° on the eastern plains to 62-5° in Cordoba and 64° F. on the 
higher, arid, sun-parched tablelands of San Juan. The rainfall, 
which varies between 39 and 47 in. in Entre Rios, decreases to 27 in. 
in Cordoba and 2 in. in San Juan. The republic has a width of about 
745 m. at this point, three-fourths of which is a comparatively level 
alluvial plain, and the remainder an arid plateau broken by mountain 
ranges. In the vicinity of Buenos Aires the climatic conditions vary 
very little from those of the pampa region ; the mean annual tempera- 
ture is about 63 " (maximum 104 ; minimum 32°), and the annual 
rainfall is 34 in. ; snow is rarely seen. South of the pampa region, 
on the 40th parallel, the mean temperature varies only slightly 
in the 370 m. from the mouth of the Colorado to the Andes, ranging 
from 57 to 55 ; but the rainfall increases from 8 in. on the coast 
to 16 in. on the east slope of the Cordillera. This section is near the 
northern border of the arid Patagonian steppes. In Tierra del 
Fuego (lat. 53° to 55 ), the climatic conditions are in strong contrast 
to those of the north. Here the mean temperature is between 46 
and 48 in summer and 36 and 38 in winter, rains are frequent, 
and snow falls every month in the year. The central and southern 
parts of the island and the neighbouring Staten Island are excep- 
tionally rainy, the latter having 251 j rainy days in the year. The 
precipitation of rain, snow and hail is about 55 in. 

The prevailing winds through this southern region are westerly, 
being moist below the 52nd parallel, and dry between it and the 
40th parallel. In the north and on the pampas the north wind is 
hot and depressing, while the south wind is cool and refreshing. 
The north wind usually terminates with a thunderstorm or with a 
pampero, a cold south-west wind from the Andes which blows with 
great violence, causes a fall in temperature of 15 to 20°, and is most 
frequent from June to November — the southern winter and spring. 
In the Andean region, a dry, hot wind from the north or north-west, 
called the Zonda, blows with great intensity, especially in September- 
October, and causes much discomfort and suffering. It is followed 
by a cold south wind which often lowers the temperature 25 . The 
climate of the pampas is temperate and healthy, and is admirably 
suited to agricultural and pastoral pursuits. Its greatest defect is 
the cold southerly and westerly storms, which cause great losses in 
cattle and sheep. The Patagonian coast-line and mountainous region 
are also healthy, having a dry and bracingclimate. In the north, how- 
ever, the hot lowlands are malarial and unsuited to north European 
settlement, while the dry, elevated plateaus are celebrated for their 
healthiness, those of Catamarca having an excellent reputation as a 
sanatorium for sufferers from pulmonary and bronchial diseases. 

Flora. — The flora of Argentina should be studied according to 
natural zones corresponding to the physical divisions of the country 
— the rich tropical and sub-tropical regions of the north, the treeless 
pampas of the centre, the desert steppes of the south,, and the arid 
plateaus of the north-west. The vegetation of each region has its 
distinctive character, modified here and there by elevation, irrigation 
from mountain streams, and by the saline character of the soil. 
In the extreme south, where an Arctic vegetation is found, the 
pastures are rich, and the forests, largely of the Antarctic beech 
(Fagus antarctica), are vigorous wherever the rainfall is %eavy. 
The greater part of Patagonia is comparatively barren and has no 
arboreal growth, except in the well-watered valleys of the Andean 
foothills. The water-courses and depressions of the shingly steppes 
afford pasturage sufficient for the guanaco, and in places support a 
thorny vegetation of low growth and starved appearance. The 
Antarctic beech and Winter's bark (Drimys Winteri) are found at 
intervals along the Andes to the northern limits of this zone. The 
pampas, which cover so large a part of the republic, have no native 
trees whatever, and no woods except the scrubby growth of the delta 
islands of the Parana, and a fringe of low thorn-bushes along the 
Atlantic coast south to Mar Chiquita and south of the Tandil sierra, 
which, strictly speaking, does not belong to this region. The great 
plains are covered with edible grasses, divided into two classes, 
pasto duro (hard grass) and pasto blando, or tierno (soft grass) — the 
former tall, coarse, nutritious and suitable for horses and cattle, 
and the latter tender grasses and herbs, including clovers, suitable 
for sheep and cattle. The so-called " pampas-grass " (Gynerium 
argenteum) is not found at all on the dry lands, but in the wet grounds 
of the south and south-west. The pasto duro is largely composed 
of the genera Stipa and Melica. In the dry, saline regions of the 
west and north-west, where the rainfall is slight, there are large 
thickets of low-growing, thorny bushes, poor in foliage. The pre- 
dominating species is the chanar (Gurliaca decorticans) , which pro- 
duces an edible berry, and occurs from the Rio Negro to the northern 
limits of the republic. Huge cacti are also characteristic of this 
region. On the lower slopes of the Andes are found oak, beech, 
cedar, Winter's bark, pine (Araucaria imbricata), laurel and calden 
(Prosopis algarobilla) . The provinces of Santa Fe, Cordoba and 
Santiago del Estero are only partially wooded ; large areas of plains 
are intermingled with scrubby forests of algarrobo (Prosopis), 
quebracho-bianco (Aspido-sperma quebracho), tala (Celtis tola, 
Sellowiana, acuminata), acacias and other genera. T n Tucuman 
and eastern Salta the same division into forests and open plains 
exists, but the former are of denser growth and contain walnut, 
cedar, laurel, tripa (Machaerium fertile) and quebracho-colorado 



{Loxopterygium Lorentzii). The territories of 'the Gran Chaco, 
however, are covered with a characteristic tropical vegetation, in 
which the palm predominates, but intermingled south of the Bermejo 
with heavy growths of algarrobo, quebracho-colorado, urunday 
(A stronium fraxinifolium) , lapacho (Tecoma curialis) and palosanto 
(Guayacum officinalis), all esteemed for hardness and fineness of 
grain. Other palms abound, such as the pindo (Cocos australis), 
mbocaya (Cocos sclerocarpa) and the yatai (Cocos yatai), but the 
predominating species north of the Bermejo is the caranday or 
Brazilian wax-palm (Copernicia cerifera), which has varied uses. 
The forest habit in this region is close association of species, and 
there are " palmares," " algarrobales," " chanarales," &c, and 
among these open pasture lands, giving to a distant landscape a 
park-like appearance. In the " mesopotamia " region the flora is 
similar to that of the southern Chaco, but in the Misiones it approxi- 
mates more to that of the neighbouring Brazilian highlands. Among 
the marvellous changes wrought in Argentina by the advent of 
European civilization, is the creation of a new flora by the intro- 
duction of useful trees and plants from every part of the world. 
Indian corn, quinoa, mandioca, possibly the potato, cotton and 
various fruits, including the strawberry, were already known to 
the aborigines, but with the conqueror came wheat, barley, oats, 
flax, many kinds of vegetables, apples, peaches, apricots, pears, 
grapes, figs, oranges and lemons, together with alfalfa and new 
grasses for the plains. The Australian eucalyptus is now grown 
in many places, and there are groves of the paradise or paraiso tree 
(Melia azedarach) on the formerly treeless pampa. The cereals of 
Europe are a source of increasing wealth to the nation, and alfalfa 
promises new prosperity for pastoral industries. 

Fauna. — The Argentine fauna, like its flora, has been greatly 
influenced by the character and position of the pampas. Whatever 
it may have been in remote geological periods, it is now extremely 
limited both in size and numbers. Of the indigenous fauna, the 
tapir of the north and the guanaco of the west and south are the 
largest of the animals. The pampas were almost destitute of animal 
life before the horses and cattle of the Spanish invaders were there 
turned out to graze, and the puma and jaguar never came there until 
the herds of European cattle attracted them. The timid viscacha 
(Lagostomus trichodactylus) , living in colonies, often with the burrow- 
ing owl, and digging deep under ground like the American prairie 
dog, was almost the only quadruped to be seen upon these immense 
open plains. The fox, of which several species exist, probably never 
ventured far into the plain, for it afforded him no shelter. Immense 
flocks of gulls were probably attracted to it then as now by its insect 
life, and its lagoons and streams teemed with aquatic birds. The 
occupation of this region by Europeans, and the introduction of 
horses, asses, cattle, sheep, goats and swine, have completely changed 
its aspect and character. On the Patagonian steppes there are 
comparatively few species of animals. Among them are the puma 
(Felis concolor), a smaller variety of the jaguar (Felts onca), the 
wolf, the fox, the Patagonian hare (Dolichotis patagonica) and two 
species of wild cat. The huge glyptodon once inhabited this region, 
which now possesses the smallest armadillo known, the " quir- 
quincho " or Dasypus minutus. The guanaco (Auchenia), which 
ranges from Tierra del Fuego to the Bolivian highlands, finds com- 
parative safety in these uninhabitable solitudes, and is still numerous. 
The " nandu " or American ostrich (Rhea americana), inhabiting the 
pampas and open plains of the Chaco, has in Patagonia a smaller 
counterpart (Rhea Darwinii), which is never seen north of the Rio 
Negro. On the arid plateaus of the north-west, the guanaco and 
vicuna are still to be found, though less frequently, together with a 
smaller "species of viscacha (Lagidium cuvieri) . The greatest develop- 
ment of the Argentine fauna, however, is in the warm, wooded 
regions of the north and north-east, where many animals are of the 
same species as those in the neighbouring territories of Brazil. 
Several species of monkeys inhabit the forests from the Parana to 
the Bolivian frontier. Pumas, jaguars and one or two species of 
wild cat are numerous, as also the Argentine wolf and two of three 
species of fox. The coati, marten, skunk and otter (Lutra para- 
nensis) are widely distributed. Three species of deer are common. 
In the Chaco the tapir or anta (Tapir americanus) still finds a safe 
retreat, and the peccary (Dycotyles torquatus) ranges from C6rdoba 
north to the Bolivian frontier. The capybara (Hydrochoerus capy< 
bara) is also numerous in this region. Of birds the number of species 
greatly exceeds that of the mammals, including the rhea of the 
pampas and condor of the Andes, and the tiny, brilliant-hued 
humming-birds of the tropical North. Vultures and hawks are well 
represented, but perhaps the most numerous of all are the parrots, 
of which there are six or seven species. The reptilians are represented 
in the Parana by the jacare (Alligator sclerops), and on land by the 
" iguana " (Teius teguexim, Podinema teguixin), and some species of' 
lizard. Serpents are numerous, but only two are described as 
poisonous, the cascavel (rattlesnake) and the " vibora de la cruz " 
(Trigonocephalus alternatus) . l 

1 Interesting details 1 of the Argentine fauna may be found in 
Darwin's Voyage of the Beagle; W. H. Hudson's Idle Days in Pata- 
gonia, and Naturalist in the La Plata; G. Pelleschi's Eight Months 
on the Gran Chaco; R. Napp's Argentine Republic; and de Moussy's 
Confederation argentine. 



464 



ARGENTINA 



Population. — In population Argentina ranks second among 
the republics of South America, having outstripped, during the 
last quarter of the 19th century, the once more populous states 
of Colombia and Peru. During the first half of the 19th century 
civil war and despotic government seriously restricted the natural 
growth of the country, but since the definite organization of the 
republic in i860 and the settlement of disturbing political 
controversies, the population had increased rapidly. Climate 
and a fertile soil have been important elements in this growth. 
According to the first national census of 1869 the population 
was 1,830,214. The census of 1895 increased this total to 
3,954,9 1 1 , exclusive of wild Indians and a percentage for omissions 
customarily used in South American census returns. In 1904 
official estimates, based on immigration and emigration returns 
and upon registered births and deaths, both of which are ad- 
mittedly defective, showed a population increased to 5,410,028, 
and a small diminution in the rate of annual increase from 1895 
to 1904 as compared with 1869-1895. The birth-rate is excep- 
tionally high, largely because of the immigrant population, 
the greater part of which is concentrated in or near the large 
cities. In the rural districts of the northern provinces, the 
increase in population is much less than in the central provinces, 
the conditions of fife being less favourable. According to the 
official returns, 1 the over-sea immigration for the forty-seven 
years 1857-1903 aggregated 2,872,588, while the departure of 
emigrants during the same period was 1,066,480, showing a net 
addition to the population of 1,806,108. A considerable per- 
centage of these arrivals and departures represents seasonal 
labourers, who come out from Europe solely for the Argentine 
wheat harvest and should not be classed as immigrants. Un- 
favourable political and economic conditions of a temporary 
character influence the emigration movement. During the years 
1880-1889, when the country enjoyed exceptional prosperity, 
the arrivals numbered 1,020,907 and the departures only 175,038, 
but in 1890-1899, a period of financial depression following the 
extravagant Celman administration, the arrivals were 928,865 
and the departures 552,175. Another disturbing influence has 
been the high protective tariffs, adopted during the closing years 
of the century, which increased the costs of living more rapidly 
than the wages for labour, and compelled thousands of immigrants 
to seek employment elsewhere. The influence of such legislation 
on unsettled immigrant labourers may be seen in the number 
of Italians who periodically migrate from Argentina to Brazil, 
and vice versa, seeking to better their condition. Of the immigrant 
arrivals for the forty-seven years given, 1,331,536 were Italians, 
414,973 Spaniards, 170,293 French, 37,953 Austrians, 35,435 
British, 30,699 Germans, 25,775 Swiss, 19,521 Belgians, and the 
others of diverse nationalities, so that Argentina is in no danger 
of losing her Latin character through immigration. This large 
influx of Europeans, however, is modifying the population by 
reducing the Indian and mestizo elements to a minority, although 
they are still numerous in the mesopotamian, northern and 
north-western provinces. The language is Spanish. 

Science and Literature. — Though the university of Cordoba 
is the oldest but one in South America, it has made no con- 
spicuous contribution to Argentine literature beyond the his- 
torical works of its famous rector, Gregorio Funes (1 749-1830). 
This university was founded in 1621 and the university of 
Buenos Aires in 1821, but although Bonpland and some other 
European scientists were members of the faculty of Buenos Aires 
in its early years, neither there nor at Cordoba was any marked 
attention given to the natural sciences until President Sarmiento 
(official term, 1868-1874) initiated scientific instruction at the 
university of Cordoba under the eminent German naturalist, 
Dr Hermann Burmeister (1807-1892), and founded the National 
Observatory at Cordoba and placed it under the direction of 

1 There are two distinct statistical offices compiling immigration 
returns and their totals do not agree, owing in part to the traffic 
between Buenos Aires and Montevideo. Another report gives the 
arrivals in 1904 as 125,567 and the departures 38,923. Of the 
arrivals 67,598 were Italians and 39,851 Spaniards. The total for 
the years 1859-1904 was 3,166,073 and the departures 1,239,064, 
showing a net gain of 1,927,009. 



the noted American astronomer, Benjamin Apthorp Gould 
(1824-1896). Both of these men made important contributions 
to science, and rendered an inestimable service to the country) 
not only through their publications but also through the interest 
they aroused in scientific research. A bureau of meteorology 
was afterwards created at Cordoba which has rendered valuable 
service. Dr Burmeister was afterwards placed in charge of the 
provincial museum of Buenos Aires, and devoted himself to the 
acquisition of a collection of fossil remains, now in the La Plata 
museum, which ranks among the best of the world. Not only has 
scientific study advanced at the university of Buenos Aires, 
but scientific research is promoting the development of the 
country; examples are the geographical explorations of the 
Andean frontier, and especially of the Patagonian Andes, by 
Francisco P. Moreno. In literature Argentina is still under the 
spell of Bohemianism and dilettanteism. Exceptions are the 
admirable biographies of Manuel Belgrano (d. 1820) and San 
Martin, important contributions to the history of the country 
and of the war of independence, by ex-President Bartolome 
Mitre (1821-1906). Buenos Aires has some excellent daily 
journals, but the tone of the press in general is sensational. 
The number of newspapers published is large, especially in 
Buenos Aires, where in 1902 the total, including sundry periodi- 
cals, was 183. 

Political Divisions and Towns. — The chief political divisions 
of the republic consist of one federal district, 14 provinces and 
10 territories, the last in great part dating from the settlement 
of the territorial controversies with Chile. For purposes of local 
administration the provinces are divided into departments. 
The names, area and population of the provinces and territories 
are as follows: — 



Administrative Divisions. 



Provinces — 
Federal Capital 
Buenos Aires . 
Santa Fe . 
Entre Rios 
Corrientes. 
Cofdoba . 
San Luis . 
Santiago del Estero 
Mendoza . 
San Juan . 
Rioja 

Catamarca 
Tucuman . 
Salta . 
Jujuy. 

Territories — 
Misiones . 
Formosa . 
Chaco 
Pampa 
Neuquen . 
Rio Negro 
Chubut 
Santa Cruz 
Tierra del Fuego 
Los Andes 



Total .... 
Gotha computations of 1902 
with corrections for boun- 
dary changes . 



Area, 
sq. m. 



72 
H7,778 
50,916 
28,784 
32,580 
62,160 
28,535 
39,764 
56,502 
33,715 
34,546 
47,531 
8,926 
62,184 
18,977 

11,282 
41,402 

52,741 
56,320 
42,345 
75,924 
93,427 
109,142 
8,299 
21,989 



1,135,840 



1,083,596 



Pop. 
1895- 



663,854 
921,168 
397,188 
292,019 
239,618 
351,223 
81,450 
161,502 
116,136 

84,251 

69,502 

90,161 

215,742 

118,015 

49,713 

33,163 

4,829 

10,422 

25,914 

14-517 

9,241 

3,748 

1,058 

477 



3,954-9H 



Pop. est. 
for 1904. 



979,235 

1,312,953 

640,755 

367,006 

299,479 
465,464 

97,458 
186,206 
159,780 

99,955 

82,099 

103,082 

263,079 

136,059 

55,450 

38,755 
6,094 

13,937 
52,150 
18,022 
18,648 
9,060 

1,793 
1,411 
2,095 



5,410,028 



The principal towns, with estimated population for 1905, 
are as follows: Buenos Aires (1,025,653), Rosario (129,121), 
La Plata (85,000), Tucuman (55,000), Cordoba (43,000), Sante F6 
(33,200), Mendoza (32,000), Parana (27,000), Salta (18,000), 
Corrientes (18,000), Chivilcoy (15,000), GualeguaycM (13,300), 
San Nicolas (13,000), Concordia (11,700), San Juan (11,500), 
Rio Cuarto (10,800), San Luis (10,500), Barracas al Sud (10,200). 

Communications. — The development of railways in Argentina, 
which dates from 1857 when the construction of the Buenos Aires 
Western was begun, was at first slow and hesitating, but after 1880 
it went forward rapidly. Official corruption and speculation have 
led to some unsound ventures, but in the great majority of cases the 



ARGENTINA 



465. 



lines constructed have been beneficial and productive. The principal 
centres of the system are Buenos Aires, Rosario and Bahia Blanca, 
with La Plata as a secondary centre to the former, and from these the 
lines radiate westward and northward. The creation of a com- 
mercial port at Bahia Blanca and the development of the territories 
of La Pampa, Rio Negro and Neuquen, have given an impetus to 
railway construction in that region, and new lines are being extended 
toward the promising districts among the Andean foothills. Begin- 
ning with 6 m. in 1857, the railway mileage of the republic increased 
to 1563 m. in 1880, 5865 m. in 1890, 7752 m. in 1891, 10,304 m. in 
1901, and 12,274 m. in 1906, with 1794 m. under construction. 
The greater development of railway construction between 1885 and 
1891 was due, principally, to the dubious concessions of interest 
guarantees by the Celman administration, and also to the fever 
of speculation. Some of these lines resulted disastrously. The 
Transandine tine, designed to open railway communication between 
Buenos Aires and Valparaiso, was so far completed early in 1909 
that on the Argentine side only the summit tunnel, 2 m. 127 yds. 
long, remained to be finished. The piercing was completed in Nov. 
1909, but in the meantime passengers were conveyed by road over 
the pass. The gauge is broken at Mendoza, the Buenos Aires and 
Pacific having a gauge of 5 ft. 6 in. and the Transandine of one metre. 

Tramway lines, which date from 1870, are to be found in all 
important towns. Those of Buenos Aires, Rosario and La Plata 
are owned by public companies. According to the census returns of 
1895, the total mileage was 496 m., representing a capital expenditure 
of $84,044,581 paper. Electric traction was first used in Buenos 
Aires in 1897, since when nearly all the lines of that city have been 
reconstructed to meet its requirements, and subways are contem- 
plated to relieve the congested street traffic of the central districts ; 
the companies contribute 6 % of their gross receipts to the munici- 
pality, besides paying $50 per annum per square on each single track 
in paved streets, 5 per thousand on the value of their property, and 
33 % °f the cost of street repaving and renewals. 

The telegraph lines of Argentina are subject to the national 
telegraph law of 1875, the international telegraph conventions, and 
special conventions with Brazil and Uruguay. In 1902 the total 
length of wires strung was 28,125 m. ; in 1906 it had been increased 
to 34,080 m. The national lines extend from Buenos Aires north to 
La Quiaca on the Bolivian frontier (1180 m.), and south to Cape 
Virgenes (1926 m.), at the entrance to the Straits of Magellan. 
Telegraphic communication with Europe is effected by cables laid 
along the Uruguayan and Brazilian coasts, and by the Brazilian 
land lines to connect with transatlantic cables from Pernambuco. 
Communication with the United States is effected by land lines to 
Valparaiso, and thence by a cable along the west coast. The service 
is governed by the international telegraph regulations, but is subject 
to local inspection and interruption in times of political disorder. 

The postal and telegraph services are administered by the national 
government, and are under the immediate supervision of the minister 
of the interior. Argentina has been a member of the Postal Union 
since 1878. Owing to the great distances which must be covered, 
and also to the defective means of communication in sparsely settled 
districts, the costs of the postal service in Argentina are unavoidably 
high in relation to the receipts. 

Shipping. — Although Argentina has an extensive coast-line, and 
one of the great fluvial systems of the world, the tonnage of steamers 
and sailing vessels flying her flag is comparatively small. In 1898 
the list comprised only 1416 sailing vessels of all classes, from 10 tons 
up, with a total tonnage of 118,894 tons, and 222 steamships, of 
36,323 tons. There has been but slight improvement since that date. 
There are excellent fishing grounds on the coast, but they have had 
no appreciable influence in developing a commerical marine. The 
steamships under the national flag are almost wholly engaged in 
the traffic between Buenos Aires and Montevideo, the river traffic, 
and port services. 

Agriculture. — In 1878 the production of wheat was insufficient 
for home consumption, the amount of Indian corn grown barely 
Live stock covered local necessities, and the only market for live stock 
4Ci ' was in the slaughtering establishments, where the meat 

was cut into strips and cured, making the so-called 
" jerked beef " for the Brazilian and Cuban markets. But three 
years later a new economic development began. In 1881 President 
Roca offered for public purchase by auction the lands in the south- 
west of the province of Buenos Aires, the Pampa Central, and the 
Neuquen district, these lands having been rendered habitable after 
the campaign of 1878 against the Indians. The upset (reserve) price 
was £80 sterling per square league of 6669 acres, and, as the lands 
were quickly sold, an expansion of the pastoral industry immediately 
ensued. The demand for animals for stock-breeding purposes sent 
up prices, and this acted as a stimulus to other branches of trade, 
so that, as peace under the Roca regime seemed assured, a steady 
flow of immigration from Italy set in. The development of the 
pastoral industry of Argentina from that time to the end of the 
century was remarkable. In 1878 the number of cattle was 
12,000,000; of sheep, 65,000,000; and of horses, 4,000,000; in 
1899 the numbers were — cattle, 25,000,000; sheep, 89,000,000; 
and horses, about 4,500,000. Originally the cattle were nearly all 
of the long-horned Spanish breed and of little value for their meat, 
except to the saladero establishments. Gradually Durham, Short- 



horn, Hereford and other stock were introduced to improve the 
native breeds, with results so satisfactory that now herds of three- 
quarters-bred cattle are to be found in all parts of the country. 
Holstein, Jersey and other well-known dairy breeds were imported 
for the new industries of butter- and cheese-making. Not only has 
the breed of cattle been improved, but the system of grazing has 
completely altered. Vast areas of land have been ploughed and 
sown with lucerne (alfalfa) ; magnificent permanent pasturage has 
been created where there were coarse and hard grasses in former 
days, and Argentina has been able to add baled hay to her list of 
exports. In 1889 the first shipment of Argentine cattle, consisting 
altogether of 1930 steers, was sent to England. The results of these 
first experiments were not encouraging, owing mainly to the poor 
class of animals, but the exporters persevered, and the business 
steadily grew in value and importance, until in 1898 the number of 
live cattle shipped was 359,296, which then decreased to 119,189 
in 1901, because of the foot-and-mouth disease. In 1906 the export 
of live stock was prohibited for that reason. Large quantities of 
frozen and preserved meat are exported, profitable prices being 
realized. Dairy-farming is making rapid strides, and the develop- 
ment of sheep-farming has been remarkable. In 1878, 65,000,000 
sheep yielded 230,000,000 lb weight of wool, or an average per sheep 
o£ .about 2,2 ft- In the season of 1 899-1900 the wool exports weighed 
420,000,000 lb, and averaged more than 5 lb per sheep. The extra 
weight of fleece was owing to the large importation of better breeds. 
The export, moreover, of live sheep and of frozen mutton to Europe 
has become an important factor in the trade of Argentina. In 1892 
the number of live sheep shipped for foreign ports was 40,000; in 

1898 the export reached a total of 577,813, which in 1901 fell off 
to 25,746. In 1892 the frozen mutton exported was 25,500 tons, 
and this had increased in 1901 to 63,013 tons. 

The advance made in agricultural industry also is of very great 
importance. In 1872 the cultivated area was about 1,430,000 acres; 
in 1895, 12,083,000 acres; in 1901, 17,465,973 acres. In Crops. 

1899 the wheat exports exceeded 50,000,000 bushels, and ' 
the Indian corn 40,000,000 bushels. The area under wheat in 
1901 was 8,351,843 acres; Indian corn, 3,102,140 acres; linseed, 
1,512,340 acres; alfalfa, 3,088,929 acres. The farming industry is 
not, however, on a satisfactory basis. No national lands in accessible 
districts are available for the application of a homestead law, and 
the farmer too often has no interest in the land beyond the growing 
crops, a percentage of the harvest being the rent charged by the 
owner of the property. This system is mischievous, since, if a few, 
consecutive bad seasons occur, the farmer moves to some more 
favoured spot ; while, on the other hand, a succession of good years 
tends to increase rents. The principal wheat and Indian corn pro- 
ducing districts lie in the provinces of Santa Fe, Buenos Aires, 
Cordoba and Entre Rios, and the average yield of wheat throughout 
the country is about 12 bushels to the acre. Little attention is paid 
to methods of cultivation, and the farmer has no resources to help 
him if the cereal crops fail. In the Andean provinces of Mendoza, 
San Juan, Catamarca and Rioja viticulture attracts much attention, 
and the area in vineyards in 1901 was 109,546 acres, only 18 % of 
which was outside the four provinces named. Wine is manufactured 
in large quantities, but the output is not sufficient to meet the home 
demand. In the provinces of Tucuman, Salta and Jujuy the main 
industry is sugar growing and manufacture. In 190 1 the production 
of sugar was 151,639 tons, of which 58,000 tons were exported. 
The sugar manufacture, however, is a protected and bounty-fed 
industry, and the 51 sugar mills in operation in 1901 are a 
heavy tax upon consumers and taxpayers. Other products are 
tobacco, olives, castor-oil, peanuts, canary-seed, barley, rye, fruit 
and vegetables. 

The pastoral and agricultural industries have been hampered by 
fluctuations in the value of the currency, farm products being sold 
at a gold value for the equivalent in paper, while labourers are paid 
in currency. The existing system of taxation also presses heavily 
upon the provinces, as may be seen from the fact that the national, 
provincial and municipal exactions together amount to £"j per head 
of population, while the total value of the exports in 1898 was only 
£6 in round numbers. The guia tax on the transport of stock from 
one province to another, which has been declared unconstitutional 
in the courts, is still enforced, and is a vexatious tax upon the 
stock-raiser, while the consumption, or octroi, tax in Buenos Aires 
and other cities is a heavy burden upon small producers. 

Manufactures. — Manufacturing enterprise in Argentina, favoured 
by the protection of a high tariff, made noticeable progress in the 
national capital during the closing years of the last century, espe- 
cially in those small industries which commanded a secure market. 
The principal classes of products affected are foods, wearing apparel, 
building materials, furniture, &c, chemical products, printing and 
allied trades, and sundry others, such as cigars, matches, tanning, 
paints, &c. In some manufactures the raw material is imported 
partly manufactured, such as thread for weaving. The lack of coal 
in Argentina greatly increases the difficulty and cost of maintaining 
these industries, and high prices of the products result. Electric 
power generated by steam is now commonly used in Buenos Aires 
and other large cities for driving light machinery. 

Commerce. — The rapid development of the foreign trade of the 
republic since 1881 is due to settled internal conditions and to the 



4-66 



ARGENTINA 



prime necessity to the commercial world of many Argentine products, 
such as beef, mutton, hides, wool, wheat and Indian corn. Efforts 
to hasten this development have created some serious financial 
and industrial crises, and have burdened the country with heavy 
debts and taxes. During the decade 1881-1890 great sums of 
European capital were invested in railways and other undertakings, 
encouraged by the grant of interest guarantees and by state mortgage 
bank loans in the form of cedulas, nominally secured on landed 
property. In 1890 the crisis came, the mortgage banks failed, credits 
were contracted, the value of property declined, defaults were 
common, imports decreased, and the losses to the country were 
enormous. The constant fluctuations in the value of the currency, 
then much depreciated, intensified the distress and complicated the 
situation. Recovery required years, although made easier by the 
sound and steady development of the pastoral and agricultural 
industries, which were slightly affected by the crisis; and the steadily 
increasing volume of exports, mainly foodstuffs and other staples, 
saved the situation. There have been some changes in commercial 
methods since 1890, the retailer, and sometimes the consumer, 
importing direct to save intermediate commission charges. Such 
transactions are made easy by the foreign banks established in all 
the large cities of the republic. The conversion law of 1899, which 
gave a fixed gold value to the currency (44 centavos gold for each 190 
centavos paper), has had beneficial influence on commercial trans- 
actions, through the elimination of daily fluctuations in the value of 
the currency, and the commercial and financial situation has been 
steadily improved, notwithstanding heavy taxation and tariff re- 
strictions. The import trade shows the largest totals in foodstuffs, 
wines and liquors, textiles and raw materials for their manufacture, 
wood and its manufactures, iron and its manufactures, paper and 
cardboard, glass and ceramic wares. The official valuation of 
imports, which is arbitrary and incorrect, was $164,569,884 gold in 
1889, fell off to $67,207,780 in 1891, but gradually increased to 
$205,154,420 in 1905. The exports, which are almost wholly of 
agricultural and pastoral products, increased from $103,219,000 in 
1891 to $322,843,841 in 1905. 

Government. — The present constitution of Argentina dates 
from the 25th of September i860. The legislative power is 
vested in a congress of two chambers — the senate, composed of 
30 members (two from each province and two from the capital) , 
elected by the provincial legislatures and by a special body of 
electors in the capital for a term of nine years; and the chamber 
of deputies, of 120 members (1906), elected for four years by 
direct vote of the people, one deputy for every 33,000 inhabitants. 
To the chamber of deputies exclusively belongs the initiation 
of all laws relating to the raising of money and the conscription 
of troops. It has also the exclusive right to impeach the 
president, vice-president, cabinet ministers, and federal judges 
before the senate. The executive power is exercised by the 
president, elected by presidential electors from each province 
chosen by direct vote of the people. The president and vice- 
president are voted for by separate tickets. The system closely 
resembles that followed in the United States. The president 
must be a native citizen of Argentina, a Roman Catholic, not 
under thirty years of age, and must have an annual income of at 
least $2000. His term of office is six years, and neither he nor 
the vice-president is eligible for the next presidential term. 
All laws are sanctioned and promulgated by the president, who 
is invested with the veto power, which can be overruled only by 
a two-thirds vote. The president, with the advice and consent 
of the senate, appoints judges, diplomatic agents, governors of 
territories, and officers of the army and navy above the rank 
of colonel. All other officers and officials he appoints and pro- 
motes without the consent of the senate. The cabinet is com- 
posed of eight ministers— the heads of the government depart- 
ments of the interior, foreign affairs, finance, war, marine, 
justice, agriculture, and public works. They are appointed by 
and may be removed by the president. 

Justice is administered by a supreme federal court of five 
judges and an attorney-general, which is also a court of appeal, 
four courts of appeal, with three judges each, located in Buenos 
Aires, La Plata, Parana and C6rdoba, arid by a number of 
inferior and local courts. Each province has also its own 
judicial system. Trial by jury is established by the constitution, 
but never practised. Civil and criminal courts are both corrupt 
and dilatory. In May 1899 the minister of justice stated in the 
chamber of deputies that the machinery of the courts in the 
country was antiquated, unwieldy and incapable of performing 
its duties; that 50,000 cases were then waiting decision in the 



minor courts, and 10,000 in the federal division; and that a 
reconstruction of the judiciary and the judicial system had 
become necessary. In June 1899 he sent his project for the 
reorganization of the legal procedure to congress, but no action 
was then taken beyond referring the bill to a committee for 
examination and report. The proceedings are, with but few 
exceptions, written, and the procedure is a survival of the anti- 
quated Spanish system. 

Under the constitution, the provinces retain all the powers not 
delegated to the federal government. Each province has its 
own constitution, which must be republican in form and in 
harmony with that of the nation. Each elects its governor, 
legislators and provincial functionaries of all classes, without 
the intervention of the federal government. Each has its own 
judicial system, and enacts laws relating to the administration 
of justice, the distribution and imposition of taxes, and all 
matters affecting the province. All the public acts and judicial 
decisions of one province have full legal effect and authority 
in all the others. In cases of armed resistance to a provincial 
government, the national government exercises the right to 
intervene by the appointment of an interventor, who becomes the 
executive head of the province until order is restored. The terri- 
tories are under the direct control of the national government . 

Army. — The military service of the republic was reorganized 
in 1901, and is compulsory for all citizens between the ages of 
20 and 45. The army consists of: (1) The Line, comprising 
the Active and Reserve, in which all citizens 20 to 28 years 
of age are obliged to serve; (2) the National Guard, comprising 
citizens of 28 to 40 years; (3) the Territorial Guard, comprising 
those 40 to 45 years. Conscripts of 20 years of age have to 
serve two years, three months each year. The active or stand- 
ing army comprises 18 battalions of infantry, 12 regiments of 
cavalry, 8 regiments of artillery, and 4 battalions of engineers. 
A military school, with 125 cadets, is maintained at San Martin, 
near the national capital, and a training school for non-com- 
missioned officers in the capital itself. Compulsory attendance 
of young men at national guard drills is enforced for at least 
two months of the year, under penalty of enforced service in the 
Line. In 1906 the president announced that permission had 
been given by the German emperor for 30 Argentine officers to 
enter the German army each year and to serve eighteen months, 
and also for five officers to attend the Berlin Military Academy. 
The equipment of the standing army is thoroughly modern, the 
infantry being provided with Mauser rifles and the artillery with 
Krupp batteries. 

Navy. — The disputes with Chile during the closing years of 
the 19th century led to a large increase in the navy, but in 1902 
a treaty between the two countries provided for the restriction 
of further armaments for the next four years. The naval vessels 
then under construction were accordingly sold, but in 1906 both 
countries, influenced apparently by the action of Brazil, gave 
large orders in Europe for new vessels. At the time when further 
armaments were suspended, the effective strength of the 
Argentine navy consisted of 3 ironclads, 6 first-class armoured 
cruisers, 2 monitors (old), 4 second-class cruisers, 2 torpedo 
cruisers, 3 destroyers, 3 high-sea torpedo boats, 14 river torpedo 
boats, 1 training ship, 5 transports, and various auxiliary 
vessels. Two of these first-class cruisers were sold to Japan. 
The armament included 394 guns of all calibres, 6 of which were 
of 250 millimetres, 4 of 240, and 12 of 200. There are about 
320 officers in active service, and the total personnel ranges 
from 5000 to 6000 men. The service is not popular, and it is 
recruited by means of conscription from the national guard, the 
term of service being two years. These conscripts number 
about 2000 a year. In addition, there is a corps of coast artillery 
numbering 450 men, from which garrisons are drawn for the 
military port, Zarate arsenal and naval prison. The govern- 
ment maintains a naval school at Flores, a school of mechanics 
in Buenos Aires, an artillery school on the cruiser " Pata- 
gonia," and a school for torpedo practice at La Plata. The 
naval arsenal is situated on the " north basin " of the Buenos 
Aires port, and the military port at Bahia Blanca is provided 



ARGENTINA 



467 



with a dry dock of the largest size, and extensive repair shops. 
There is also a dockyard arid torpedo arsenal at La Plata, 
an artillery depot at Zarate, above Buenos Aires, and naval 
depots on the island of Martin Garcia and at Tigre, on the 
Lujan river. 

Education. — Primary education is free and secular, and is 
compulsory for children of 6 to 14 years. In the national 
capital and territories it is supervised by a national council 
of education with the assistance of local school boards; in the 
14 provinces it is under provincial control. Secondary in- 
struction is also free, but is not compulsory. It is under the 
control of the national government, which in 1902 maintained 
19 colleges. Of these colleges four are in Buenos Aires, one in 
each province, and one in Conception del Uruguay. For the 
instruction of teachers the republic has 28 normal schools, as 
follows: three in the national capital; one in Parana, three 
(regional) in Corrientes, San Luis and Catamarca; 14 for 
female teachers in the provincial capitals; and seven for either 
sex in the larger towns of the provinces of Buenos Aires, Santa 
Fe, Cordoba and San Luis. The normal schools, maintained by 
the state on a secular basis, were founded by President Sarmiento, 
who engaged experienced teachers in the United States to direct 
them; their work is excellent; notably, their model primary 
schools. For higher and professional education there are two 
national universities at Buenos Aires and Cordoba, and three 
provincial universities, at La Plata, Santa Fe and Parana, which 
comprise faculties of law, medicine and engineering, in addition 
to the usual courses in arts and science. To meet the needs 
of technical and industrial education there are a school of mines 
at San Juan, a school of viticulture at Mendoza, an agronomic 
and veterinary school at La Plata, several agricultural and 
pastoral schools, and commercial schools in Buenos Aires, 
Rosario, Bahia Blanca and Concordia. Schools of art and 
conservatories of music are also maintained in the large cities, 
where there are, besides, many private schools. Secular educa- 
tion has been vigorously opposed by strict churchmen, and 
efforts have been made to maintain separate schools under 
church control. The national government has founded several 
scholarships (some in art) for study abroad. The total school 
population of Argentina in 1900 (6 to 14 years) was 994,089, of 
which 45 % attended school, and 13 % of those not attending 
were able to read and write. The illiterate school population 
was about 41 %, and of those of 15 years and over 54 % were 
illiterate. Of the whole population over 6 years, 50-5 % were 
illiterate. 

Religion. — The Argentine constitution recognizes the Roman 
Catholic religion as that of the state, but tolerates all others. 
The state controls all ecclesiastical appointments, decides on 
the passing or rejection of all decrees of the Holy See, and 
provides an annual subsidy for maintenance of the churches and 
clergy. Churches and chapels are founded and maintained by 
religious orders and private gift as well. At the head of the 
Argentine hierarchy are one archbishop and five suffragan 
bishops, who have five seminaries for the education of the 
priesthood. From statistics of 1895 it appears that in each 
1000 of population 991 are Roman Catholics, 7 Protestants, and 
2 Jews, the Jews being entirely of Russian origin, sent into the 
republic since 1891 by the Jewish Colonization Association 
under the provisions of the Hirsch legacy; from 1895 to 1908 
the number of Jews in Argentina increased from 6085 to about 
30,000. 

Finance. — The revenue of the republic is derived mainly from 
customs and excise, and the largest item of expenditure is the service 
of the public debt. Since 189 1 the national budgets have been 
calculated in both gold and currency, and both receipts and ex- 
penditures have been carried out in this dual system. The collection 
of a part of the import duties in gold has served to give the govern- 
ment the gold it requires for certain expenditures, but it has compli- 
cated returns and accounts and increased the burden of taxation. 
According to a compilation of statistical returns published by Dr 
Francisco Latzina in 1901, the national revenues and expenditures 
for the 37 years from 1864 to 1900, inclusive, reduced to a 
common standard, show a total deficit for that period of $408,260,795 
gold, which has been met by external and internal loans, and by a 



continued increase in the scope and rate of taxation. The growth 
of the annual budget is shown by a comparison of the following 
years : — 

Total Revenue. Total Expenditure. 

1864 . . . $7,005,328 gold. $7,119,931 gold. 

1880 . . . 19,594,306 ,, 26,919,295 „ 

1890 . . 73,150,856 „ 95,363,854 » 

\ 62,045,458 paper. I 104,501,614 paper. 

( 37,998,704 gold. ( 23,644,543 gold. 

,439,000 paper. ( 105,581,680 paper. 

h " " " 



1900 
1905 



1 j/, 

63, 

( 43, 



461,324 gold. 



24,865,016 gold. 



The bane of Argentine finance has been the extravagant and un- 
scrupulous use of national credit for the promotion of schemes 
calculated to benefit individuals rather than the public. The large 
increase in military expenditures during the disputes with Chile 
also proved a heavy burden, and in the continued strife with Brazil 
for naval superiority this burden could not fail to be increased greatly. 
A very considerable percentage of Argentina's population of five 
to six millions is hopelessly poor and unprogressive, and cannot be 
expected to bear its share of the burden. To meet these expenditures 
there are a high tariff on imported merchandise, and excise and stamp 
taxes of a far-reaching and often vexatious character. Nothing is 
permitted to escape taxation, and duplicated taxes on the same thing 
are frequent. In Argentina these burdens bear heavily upon the 
labouring classes, and in years of depression they send away by 
thousands immigrants unable to meet the high costs of living. 
For the year 1900 the total expenditures of the national government, 
14 provincial governments, and 16 principal cities, were estimated 
to have been $208,811,925 paper, which is equivalent to $91,877,247 
gold, or (at $5.04 per pound stg.) to £18,229,612, 10s. The popu- 
lation that year was estimated to be 4,794,149, from which it is 
seen that the annual costs of government were no less than £3,1 6s. 
for each man, woman, and child in the republic. About 71 %'of 
this charge was on account of national expenditures, and 29 % 
provincial and municipal expenditures. Had the expenses of all 
the small towns and rural communities been included, the total would 
be in excess of $20 gold, or £4, per capita. 

In 1889 the public debt of the republic amounted to about 
£24,000,000, but the financial difficu'ties which immediately followed 
that year, and the continuance of excessive expenditures, forced 
the debt up to approximately £128,000,000 during the next ten 
years. In the year 1905 the outstanding and authorized debt of the 
republic was as follows : — 



External debt (July 31, 1905): 

National loans 

Provincial loans and others, assumed . 

National cedulas 

Total 

Consolidated Internal debt (Dec. 31, 1904): 

Gold $16,544,000 

Paper 79,174,400 



£42,297 
30,395: 
11,763. 



,050 
916 
923 



£84,456,889 



£10,178,718 
669 



Total service on funded debt, i905,$24,375,o67 gold 

and $15,914,335 paper £6,225 

Floating debt £259,170 

Treasury bills (Apr. 30, 1905) . 275,220 

Unpaid bills, $3,332,594, paper . 288,560 

£822 



950 



The paper currency forms an important part of the internal debt, 
and has been a fruitful source of trouble to the country. Few 
countries have suffered more from a depreciated currency than 
Argentina. During the era of so-called " prosperity " between 
1881 and 1890 an enormous amount of bank notes were issued under 
various authorizations, especially that of the " free banking law " 
of 1887. During this period the bank-note circulation was increased 
to $161,700,000, and two mortgage banks — the National Hypothec- 
ary Bank and the Provincial Mortgage Bank (of Buenos Aires) — 
flooded the country with $509,000,000 of cedulas (hypothecary 
bonds). When the crash came and the national treasury was found 
to be without resources to meet current expenses, further issues of 
$110,000,000 in currency were made. The free-banking law which 
permitted the issue of notes by provincial banks was primarily 
responsible for this situation. Under the provisions of this law the 
provinces were authorized to borrow specie abroad and deposit the 
same with the national government as security for their issues. 
These loans aggregated £27,000,000. The Celman administration, 
in violation of the trust, then sold the specie and squandered the 
proceeds, leaving the provincial bank notes without guarantee and 
value. The national government has since assumed responsibility 
for all these provincial loans abroad. As on previous occasions, the 
great depreciation in the value of the currency has led to a repudia- 
tion of part of its nominal value. This depreciation reached its 
maximum in October 1891 ($460.82 paper for $100 gold), and 
remained between that figure and $264 during the next six years. 
To check these prejudicial fluctuations and to prevent too great 
a fall in the price of gold (to repeat a popular misconception), a 



468 



ARGENTINA 



Cabot. 



conversion law was adopted on the 3 1 st of October 1 899, which provided 
that the outstanding circulation should be redeemed at the rate of 
44 centavos gold for each 100 centavos paper, the official rate for 
gold being 227-27. Provisions were also made for the creation of 
a special conversion fund in specie to guarantee the circulation, 
which fund reached a total of $100,000,000 in March 1906. These 
measures have served to give greater stability to the value of the 
circulating medium, and to prevent the ruinous losses caused by a 
constant fluctuation in value, but the rate established prevents the 
further appreciation of the currency. On the 18th of January 1906 
the currency in circulation amounted to $502,420,485, which is 
more than $95 per capita. (A. J. L.) 

History 

The first Europeans who visited the' river Plate were a party 
of Spanish explorers in search of a south-west passage to the 
East Indies. Their leader, Juan Diaz de Solis, landing in- 
cautiously in 1 5 16 on the north coast with a few attendants to 
parley with a body of Charrua Indians, was suddenly attacked 
by them and was killed, together with a number of his followers. 
This untoward disaster led to the abandonment of the expedition, 
which forthwith returned to Spain, bringing with them the news 
of the discovery of a fresh-water sea. Four years later (1520) 
the Portuguese seaman, Ferdinand Magellan, entered the 
estuary in his celebrated voyage round the world, undertaken 
in the service of the king of Spain (Charles I., better known as 
the emperor Charles V.). Magellan, as soon as he had satisfied 
himself that there was no passage to the west, left the river 
without landing. 

The first attempt to penetrate by way of the river Plate and 
its affluents inland, with a view to effecting settlements in the 
interior, was made in 1526 by Sebastian Cabot. This 
great navigator had already won renown in the service 
of Henry VII. of England by his voyage to the coast of North 
America in company with his father, Giovanni. Caboto or Cabot 
(see Cabot, John). Sebastian Cabot had in 1519 deserted 
England for Spain, and had received from King Charles the post 
of pilot-major formerly held by Juan de Solis. In 1526 he was 
sent out in command of an expedition fitted out for the purpose 
of determining by astronomical observations the exact line of 
demarcation, under the treaty of Tordesillas, between the coloniz- 
ing spheres of Spain and Portugal, and of conveying settlers 
to the Moluccas. Arrived in the river Plate in 1527, rumours 
reached Cabot of mineral wealth and a rich and civilized empire 
in the far interior, and he resolved to abandon surveying for 
exploration. He built a fort a short distance up the river 
Uruguay, and despatched one of his lieutenants, Juan Alvarez 
Ramon, with a separate party upon an expedition up stream. 
This expedition was assailed by the Gharruas and forced to 
return on foot, their leader himself being killed. Cabot, with 
a large following, entered the Parana and established a settle- 
ment just above the mouth of the river Carcarafial, to which 
he gave the name of San Espiritu, among the Timbu Indians, with 
whom he formed friendly relations. He continued the ascent 
of the Parana as far as the rapids of Apipe, and finding his course 
barred in this direction, he afterwards explored the river Para- 
guay, which he mounted as far as the mouth of the affluent 
called by the Indians Lepeti, now the river Bermejo. His party 
was here fiercely attacked by the Agaces or Payagu& Indians, 
and suffered severely. Cabot in his voyage had seen many 
silver ornaments in the possession of the Timbu and Guarani 
Indians. Some specimens of these trinkets he sent back to 
Spain with a report of his discoveries. The arrival of these 
first-fruits of the mineral wealth of the southern continent 
gained for the estuary of the Paranfi. the name which it has since 
borne, that of Rio de la Plata, the silver river. As Cabot was 
descending the stream to his settlement of San Espiritu, he 
encountered an expedition which had been despatched from 
Spain for the express purpose of exploring the river discovered 
by Solis, under the command of Diego Garcia. Finding that 
he had been forestalled, Garcia resolved to return home. Cabot 
himself, after an absence of more than three years, came back 
in 1530, and applied to Charles V. for means to open up com- 
munications with Peru by way of the river Bermejo. The 



emperor's resources were, however, absorbed by his struggle 
for European supremacy with Francis I. of France, and he was 
obliged to leave the enterprise of South American discoveries 
to his wealthy nobles. Cabot's colony at San Espiritu did not 
long survive his departure; an attempt of the chief of the Timbus 
to gain possession of one of the Spanish ladies of the settlement 
led to a treacherous massacre of the garrison. 

Two years after the return of Cabot, the news of Francisco 
Pizarro's marvellous conquest of Peru reached Europe (1532), 
and stirred many an adventurous spirit to strive to 
emulate his good fortune. Among these was Pedro 
de Mendoza, a Basque nobleman. He obtained from Charles V. 
a grant (asiento) of two hundred leagues of the coast from the 
boundary of the Portuguese possessions southward towards 
the Straits of Magellan, and the inland country which lay behind 
it. Mendoza undertook to conquer and settle the territory at 
his own charges, certain profits being reserved to the crown. 
In August 1534 the adelantado, or governor, sailed from San 
Lucar, at the head of the largest and wealthiest expedition that 
had ever left Europe for the New World. In January 1535 he 
entered the river Plate, where he followed the northern shore to 
the island of San Gabriel, and then crossing over he landed by 
a little stream, still called Riachuelo. The name of 
Buenos Aires was given to the country by Sancho del Aires™ 
Campo, brother-in-law of the adelantado, who first 
stepped ashore. Here, on the 2nd of February, Mendoza laid 
the' foundations of a settlement which in honour of the day 
he named Santa Maria de Buenos Aires. Mendoza, after some 
fierce encounters with the Indians, now proceeded up the Parana, 
and built a fort, which he called Corpus Christi, near the site of 
Cabot's former settlement of San Espiritu. The expedition, 
which originally numbered 2500 men, was reduced by deaths at 
the hands of the Indians, by disease and privation, within a year 
to less than 500 men. From Corpus Christi, Mendoza sent 
out various bodies to explore the interior in the direction of 
Peru, but without much success, and at length, thoroughly 
discouraged and broken in health, he abandoned his enterprise, 
and returned to Spain in 1537. 

A portion of one of the expeditions he despatched, under Juan 
de Ayolas, pushing up the Paraguay, is said to have reached 
the south-east districts of Peru, but while returning laden with 
booty, was attacked by the Payagua, Indians, and every man 
perished. The other portion, which had stayed behind as a reserve 
under Domingos Irala, had better fortunes. Finding their 
comrades did not return, Irala and his companions determined 
to descend the river, and on their downward journey 
opposite the mouth of the river Pilcomayo, finding 
a suitable site for colonizing, they founded (1536) 
what pKpved to be the first permanent Spanish settlement 
in the interior of South America, 'the future city of Asuncion 
(15th August 1536). 

In the meantime the colony at Buenos Aires had been dragging 
on a miserable existence, and after terrible sufferings from 
famine and from the ceaseless attacks of the Indians, the re- 
maining settlers abandoned the place and made their way up 
the river first to Corpus Christi, then to Asuncion. Here, by 
the emperor's orders, the assembled Spaniards proceeded to 
the election of a captain-general, and their choice fell almost 
unanimously on Domingos Martinez de Irala, who 
was proclaimed captain-general of the Rio de la Plata 
(August 1538). In 1542 the settlement of Buenos Aires was 
re-established by an expedition sent for the purpose from 
Spain, under a tried adelantado, Cabeza de Vaca. This able 
leader, eager to reach Asuncion as quickly as possible, sent on 
his ships to the river Plate, but himself with a small following 
marched overland from Santa Catherina on the coast of Brazil 
to join Irala. His doings at Asuncion belong, however, not to 
the history of Argentina, but of Paraguay. Suffice it to say 
that differences with Iisdk eventually led to his arrest, and to his 
being sent back to Spain to answer to the charges brought against 
him for maladministration. The second settlement made by 
his expedition at Buenos Aires was even less successful and 



Irala. 



ARGENTINA 



469 



long-lived than the first. Exposed to the incessant attacks of 
the savages, the piace was a second time abandoned, February 

1543- 

Forty years were now to elapse before any further efforts 
were made by the Spaniards to colonize any part of the territory 
of the river Plate and lower Parana. In 1573 Juan 
aaray" ^ e Garay, at the head of an expedition despatched 
from Asuncion, founded the city of Santa Fe near 
the abandoned settlements of San Espiritu and Corpus Christi. 
Seven years later (1580), when the new colony had been firmly 
established, Juan de Garay proceeded southwards, and made 
the third attempt to build a city on the site of Buenos Aires; 
and despite the determined hostility of the Querendi Indians 
he succeeded in finally gaining a complete mastery over them. 
In a desperate battle, the natives were defeated with great 
slaughter, and the territory surrounding the town was divided 
into ranches, in which the conquered natives had to labour. 
The new town received from Garay the name of Ciudod de la 
Sanlissima Trinidad, while its port retained the old appellation 
of Santa Maria de Buenos Aires. It was endowed by its founder 
with a cabildo (corporation) and full Spanish municipal privileges. 
Garay, when on his way to Santa Fe, was unfortunately murdered 
by a party of Indians, Minuas (Mimas), three years later, while 
incautiously sleeping on the river bank near the ruins of San 
Espiritu. The new settlement, however, continued to prosper, 
and the cattle and horses brought from Europe multiplied and 
spread over the plains of the Pampas. 

In the meantime the Spaniards had penetrated into the 
interior of what is now the Argentine Republic, and established 
themselves on the eastern slopes of the Andes. la 1553 an ex- 
pedition from Peru made their way through the mountain region 
and founded the city of Santiago del Estero, that of Tucuman 
in 1565, and that of Cordoba in 1573. Another expedition from 
Chile, under Garcia Hurtado de Mendoza, crossed the Cordillera 
in 1559, and having defeated the Araucanian Indians, made 
a settlement which from the name of the leader was called 
Mendoza. In 1620 Buenos Aires was separated from the 
authority of the government established at Asuncion, and was 
made the seat of a government extending over Mendoza, Santa 
Fe, Entre Rios and Corrientes, but at the same time remained 
like the government of Paraguay at Asuncion, and that of the 
province of Tucuman, which had Cordoba as its capital, subject 
to the authority of the viceroyalty of Peru. 

Thus at the opening of the 17th century, after many adven- 
turous efforts, and the expenditure of many lives and much 
E // 0/ treasure, the Spaniards found themselves securely 
Spanish established on the river Plate, and had planted a 
colonial number of centres of trade and colonization in the 
system. interior. Unfortunately, in no part of the Spanish 
oversea possessions did the restrictive legislation of the home 
government operate more harshly or disadvantageously to the 
interests of the colony; it was a more effective hindrance to 
the development of its resources and the spread of civilization 
over the country, than the hostility of the Indians. Cabot had 
urged the feasibility of opening an easier channel for trade with 
the interior of Peru through the river Plate and its tributaries, 
than that by way of the West Indies and Panama; and now 
that his views were able to be realized, the interests of the 
merchants of Seville and of Lima, who had secured a monopoly 
of the trade by the route of the isthmus, were allowed to destroy 
the threatened rivalry of that by the river Plate. Never in the 
history of colonization has a mother country pursued so relent- 
lessly a policy more selfish and short-sighted. Spanish legis- 
lation was not satisfied with endeavouring to exclude all Euro- 
pean nations except Spain from trading with the West Indies, 
but it sought to limit all commerce to one particular route, and 
it forbade any trade being transacted by way of the river Plate, 
thus enacting the most flagrant injustice towards the people 
it had encouraged to settle in the latter country. The strongest 
protests were raised, but the utmost they could effect was that, 
in 1618, permission was granted to export from Buenos Aires 
two shiploads of produce a year. But the Spanish government 



was not content with the prohibition of sea-borne commerce. 
To prevent internal trade with Peru a custom-house was set up 
at Cordoba to levy a duty of 50 % on everything in transit to 
and from the river Plate. In 1665 the relaxation of this system 
was brought about by the continual remonstrances of the people, 
but for more than a century afterwards (until 1776) 
the policy of exclusion was enforced. This naturally question. 
led to a contraband trade of considerable dimensions. 
The English, after the treaty of Utrecht (1715) held the contract 
(asiento) for supplying the Spanish-American colonies with negro 
slaves. Among other places the slave ships regularly visited 
Buenos Aires, and despite the efforts of the Spanish authorities, 
contrived both to smuggle in and carry away a quantity of 
goods. This illicit commerce went on steadily till 1739, when 
it led to an outbreak of war between England and Spain, which 
put an end to the asiento. The Portuguese were even worse 
offenders, for in 1680 they made a settlement on the north of the 
river Plate, right opposite to Buenos Aires, named Colohia, 
which with one or two short intervals, remained in their hands 
till 1777. From this port foreign merchandise found its way 
duty free into the Spanish provinces of Buenos Aires, Tucuman 
and Paraguay, and even into the interior of Peru. The con- 
tinual encroachments of the Portuguese at length led the Spanish 
government to take the important step of making Buenos Aires 
the seat of a viceroyalty with jurisdiction over the territories 
of the present republics of Bolivia, Paraguay, Uruguay and the 
Argentine Confederation (1776). At the same time all this 
country was opened to Spanish trade even with Peru, and the 
development of its resources, so long thwarted, was allowed 
comparatively free play. Pedro de Zeballos, the first viceroy, 
took with him from Spain a large military force with which he 
finally expelled the Portuguese from the banks of the river Plate. 

The wars of the French Revolution, in which Spain was allied 
with France against Great Britain, interrupted the growing 
prosperity of Buenos Aires. On the 1 7 th of June 1 806 
General William Beresford landed with a body of Effects of 
troops from a British fleet under the command of Sir wan 
Home Popham, and obtained possession of Buenos 
Aires. But a French officer, Jacques de Liniers, gathered 
together a large force with which he enclosed the British within 
the walls, and finally, on the 12th of August, by a successful 
assault, forced Beresford and his troops to surrender. In July 
1807 another British force of eight thousand men under General 
Whitelock endeavoured to regain possession of Buenos Aires, 
but strenuous preparations had been made for resistance, and 
after fierce street fighting the invading army, after suffering 
severe losses, was compelled to capitulate. The colonists, 
who had achieved their two great successes without any aid from 
the home government, were naturally elated, and began to feel 
a new sense of self-reliance and confidence in their own resources. 
The successful defence of Buenos Aires accentuated the growing 
feeling of dissatisfaction with the Spanish connexion, which was 
soon to lead to open insurrection. The establishment of the 
Napoleonic dynasty at Madrid was the actual cause which 
brought about the disturbances which were to end in separation. 
Liniers was viceroy on the arrival of the news of the crowning of 
Joseph Bonaparte as king of Spain, but as a Frenchman he was 
distrusted and was deposed by the adherents of Ferdinand VII. 
The central junta at Seville, acting in the name of Ferdinand, 
appointed Balthasar de Cisneros to be viceroy in his place. He 
entered upon the duties of his office on the 19th of July 1809, 
and at first he gained popularity by acceding to the urgent 
appeals of the people and throwing open the trade of the country 
to all nations. But his measures speedily gave dissatisfaction 
to the Argentine or Creole party, who had long chafed under the 
disabilities of Spanish rule, and who now felt themselves no longer 
bound by ties of loyalty to a country which was in the possession 
of the French armies. 

On the 25th of May 1810 a great armed assembly met at 
Buenos Aires and a provisional junta was formed to supersede 
the authority of the viceroy and carry on the government. The 
acts of the new government ran in the name of Ferdinand VII., 



47° 



ARGENTINA 



but the step taken was a revolutionary one, and the 25th 
of May has ever since been regarded as the birthday of Argen- 
tine independence. The most prominent leader of 
for/iKfc- t ^ le J unta was ' ts secretary Mariano Moreno (1778- 
pcndence. 181 1), who with a number of other active supporters 
of the patriot cause succeeded in raising a considerable 
force of Buenos Aireans to maintain, arms in hand, their nation- 
alist and anti-Spanish doctrines. An attempt of the Spanish 
party to make Balthasar de Cisneros president of the junta 
failed, and the ex-viceroy retired to Montevideo. A sanguinary 
struggle between the party of independence and the adherents 
of Spain spread over the whole country, and was carried on with 
varying fortune. Foremost among the leaders of the revolutionary 
armies were Manuel Belgrano, and after March 181 2 General 
Jose de San Martin, an officer who had gained experience against 
the French in the Peninsular War. A state of disorder, almost 
of anarchy, reigned in the provinces, but on the 25th of March 
1816 a congress of deputies was assembled at Tucuman, who 
named Don Martin Pueyrredon supreme director, and on the 9th 
of July the separation of the united provinces of the Rio de la 
Plata was formally proclaimed, and comparative order was 
re-established in the country; Buenos Aires was declared the 
seat of the government. The jealousy of the provinces, however, 
against the capital led to a series of disturbances, and for many 
years continual civil war devastated every part of the country. 
Bolivia, Paraguay and Uruguay rose in armed revolt, and 
finally established themselves as separate republics, whilst the 
city of Buenos Aires itself was torn with faction and the scene 
of many a sanguinary fight. 

From 1816, however, the independence of the Argentine 
Republic was assured, and success attended the South Americans 
in their contest with the royal armies. The combined 
*T "b-" C f° rces of Buenos Aires and Chile defeated the Spaniards 
Ushed. at Chacabuco in 1817, and at Maipii in 1818; and 
from Chile the victorious general Jose de San Martin 
led his troops into Peru, where on the 9th of July 1821, he made 
a triumphal entry into Lima, which had been the chief stronghold 
of the Spanish power, having from the time of its foundation 
by Pizarro been the seat of government of a viceroyalty which 
at one time extended to the river Plate. A general congress 
was assembled at Buenos Aires on the 1st of March 1822, of 
representatives from all the liberated provinces, and a general 
amnesty was decreed, though the war was not over until the 9th 
of December 1824, when the republican forces gained the final, 
victory of Ayacucho, in the Peruvian border-land. The Spanish 
government did not, however, formally acknowledge the in- 
dependence of the country until the year 1842. On the 23rd of 
January 1825, a national constitution for the federal states, which 
formed the Argentine Republic, was decreed; and on the 2nd of 
February of the same year Sir Woodbine Parish, acting under 
the instructions of George Canning, signed a commercial treaty 
in Buenos Aires, by which the British government acknowledged 
the independence of the country. It had already been recognized 
by the United States of America two years previously. 

In 1826 Bernardo Rivadavia was elected president of the 
confederation. His policy was to establish a strong central 
Unitarians government, and he became the head of a party known 
and as Unitarians in contradistinction to their opponents, 

Federal- w jj were styled Federalists, their aim being to main- 
tain to the utmost the local autonomy of the various 
provinces. Under the government of Rivadavia the people of 
Buenos Aires became involved, practically single-handed, in a 
war with Brazil in defence of the Banda Oriental, which had 
been seized by the imperial forces (see Uruguay). The Brazilians 
were defeated, notably at Ituzaingo, and in 1827 the war issued 
in the independence of Uruguay. Rivadavia's term of office was 
likewise memorable for the constitution of the 24th of December 
1826, passed by the constituent congress of all the provinces, 
by which the bonds which united the confederated states of the 
Argentine Republic were strengthened. This project of closer 
union met, however, with much opposition both at Buenos Aires 
and the provinces. Rivadavia resigned, and Vicente Lopez, 



a Federalist, was elected to succeed him, but was speedily dis- 
placed by Manuel Dorrego (1827), another representative of the 
same party. The carrying out of Federalist principles led, 
however, to the formation in the republic of a number of quasi- 
independent military states, and Dorrego only ruled in Buenos 
Aires. After the conclusion of the peace with Brazil, the Uni- 
tarians placed themselves under the leadership of General 
Juan de Lavalle, the victor of Ituzaingo. Lavalle, at the head of 
a division of troops, drove Dorrego from Buenos Aires, pursued 
him into the interior, and captured him. He was shot (December 
9, 1828), by the order of Lavalle, and during the year 1828 the 
country was given up to the horrors of civil war. 

On the death of Dorrego, a remarkable man, Juan Manuel de 
Rosas, became the Federalist chief. In 1829 he defeated Lavalle, 
made himself master of Buenos Aires, and in the course 
of the next three years made his authority recognized dictator. 
after much fighting throughout the provinces. The 
Unitarians were relentlessly hunted down and a veritable reign 
of terror ensued. Rosas gradually concentrated all power in 
his own hands, and was hailed by the populace as a saviour of 
the state. In 1835, with the title of governor and captain- 
general, he acquired dictatorial powers, and all public authority 
passed into his hands. This dictatorship of Rosas continued 
until 1852. In every department of administration and of 
government he was supreme. He was exceedingly jealous of 
foreign interference, and quarrelled with France on questions 
connected with the rights of foreign residents. Buenos Aires was 
in 1838 blockaded by a French fleet; but Rosas stood firm. 
A formidable revolt took place in 1839 under General Lavalle, 
who had returned to the country accompanied by a number 
of banished Unitarians. In 1840 he invaded Buenos Aires at 
the head of troops raised chiefly in the province of Entre Rios; 
but he was defeated at Santa Fe, then at Lujan, and finally was 
captured in Jujuy and shot, 1841. The rule of Rosas was now 
one of tyranny and almost incessant bloodshed in Buenos Aires, 
while his partisans, foremost amongst whom was General Ignacio 
Oribe, endeavoured to exterminate the Unitarians throughout 
the provinces. The scene of slaughter was extended to the 
Banda Oriental by the attempt of Oribe, with the support of 
Rosas, and of Justo Jose de Urquiza, governor of Entre Rios, 
to establish himself as president of that republic (see Uruguay), 
where the existing government was hostile to Rosas and sheltered 
all political refugees from the country under his despotic rule. 
The siege of Montevideo led to a joint intervention of England 
and France. Buenos Aires was blockaded by the combined 
English and French fleets, September 1845, which landed a force 
to open the passage up the Parana to Paraguay, which had been 
declared closed to foreigners by Rosas. A convention was signed 
in 1849, which secured the free navigation of the Parana and 
the independence of the Banda Oriental. The downfall of Rosas 
was at last brought about by the instrumentality of Justo Jose de 
Urquiza, who as governor of Entre Rios, had for many years 
been one of his strongest supporters. The breach between the 
two men which led to open collision took place in 1846. The 
first efforts of Urquiza to rouse the country against the oppressor 
were unsuccessful, but in 1851 he concluded an alliance with 
Brazil, to which Uruguay afterwards adhered. A large army 
of twenty-four thousand men was collected at Montevideo, and 
on the 8th of January 1852 the allied forces crossed the Parana 
and the road to Buenos Aires lay open before them. Rosas met 
the allies at the head of a body of troops fully equal in numbers 
to their own, but was crushingly routed, February 3rd, at Monte 
Caseros, about 10 m. from the capital. The dictator fled for 
refuge to the British legation, from whence he was conveyed on 
board H.B.M.S. " Locust," which carried him into exile. 

A provisional government was formed under Urquiza, and the 
Brazilian and Uruguayan troops withdrew. He summoned all 
the provincial governors at San Nicolas in the province 
of Buenos Aires, and on the 31st of May they pro- president. 
claimed a new constitution, with Urquiza as provi- 
sional director of the Argentine nation. A constituent congress, 
in which each province had equal representation, was duly 



ARGENTINA 



4-71 



elected, and in order to provide against the predominance of 
Buenos Aires, it was determined that Sante Fe should be the 
place of session. But this did not suit the portenos, as the 
people of Buenos Aires were called, and the province refused 
to take any part in the congressional proceedings. But Urquiza 

was a man of different temperament from Rosas, and 
Aires when he found that Buenos Aires refused to submit 

to his authority, he declined to use force. The con- 



aad the 
provinces. 



gress had (May i, 1853) appointed Urquiza president 
of the confederation, and he established the seat of government 
at Parana. The province of Buenos Aires was recognized as an 
independent state, and under the enlightened administration 
of Doctor Obligado made rapid strides in commercial prosperity. 
The two sections of the Argentine nation contrived to exist as 
separate governments without an open breach of the peace until 
1859, when the long-continued tension led to the outbreak of 
hostilities. The army of the portenos, commanded by Colonel 
Bartolome Mitre, was defeated at Cepeda by the confederate 
forces under Urquiza, and Buenos Aires agreed to re-enter the 
confederation (November n, 1859). Urquiza at this juncture 
resigned the presidency, and Doctor Santiago Derqui was elected 
president of the fourteen provinces with the seat of government 
at Parana; while Urquiza became once more governor of Entre 
Rios, and Mitre was appointed governor of Buenos Aires. 

The struggle for supremacy between Buenos Aires and the 
provinces had, however, to be fought out, and hostilities once 

more broke out in 1861. The armies of the opposing 
president parties, under Generals Mitre and Urquiza respectively, 

met at Pavon in the province of Santa Fe (September 
17). The battle ended in the disastrous defeat of the provincial 
forces; General Mitre used his victory in a spirit of modera- 
tion and sincere patriotism. He was elected president of the 
Argentine confederation and did his utmost to settle the questions 
which had led to so many civil wars, on a permanent and sound 
basis. The constitution of 1853 was maintained, but Buenos 
Aires became the seat of federal government without ceasing 
to be a provincial capital. Causes of friction still remained, 
but they did not develop into open quarrels, for Mitre was content 
to leave Urquiza in his province of Entre Rios, and the other 
administrators (caudillos) in their several governments, a large 
measure of autonomy, trusting that the position and growing 
commercial importance of Buenos Aires would inevitably tend 
to make the federal capital the real centre of power of the republic. 
In 1865 the Argentines were forced into war with Paraguay 
through the overbearing attitude of the president Francisco 
Solano Lopez. The dictator of Paraguay had quarrelled with 
Brazil for its intervention m the internal affairs of Uruguay, 

and he demanded free passage for his troops across 

the Argentine province of Corrientes. This Mitre 

refused, and alliance was formed between Argentina, 
Brazil and Uruguay, for joint action against Lopez. General 
Mitre became commander-in-chief of the combined armies for 
the invasion of Paraguay and was absent for several years in 
the field. The struggle was severe and attended by heavy losses, 
and it was not until 1870 that the Paraguayans were conquered, 
Lopez killed, and peace concluded (see Paraguay). Meanwhile, 
disturbances had broken out in the interior of Argentina (1867), 
which compelled Mitre to relinquish his command in Paraguay, 
and to call back a large part of the Argentine forces to suppress 
the insurrection. The rebels had hoped for assistance from 
Urquiza, but the powerful governor of Entre Rios maintained the 
peace in his province, which under his firm and beneficent rule 
had greatly prospered, and the revolutionary movement was 
quickly subdued. 

In 1868 the term of General Mitre came to an end, and Doctor 
Domingo Faustino Sarmiento, a native of San Juan, was quietly 

elected to succeed him. His conduct of affairs was 
president, broad-minded and upright, and was characterized 

by earnest efforts to promote education and to develop 
the resources of the country. His period of office was marked 
by the rapid advance of Buenos Aires in population and pros- 
perity, and by an expansion of trade that was unfortunately 



Paraguay 
war. 



accompanied by financial extravagance. The war with Paraguay 
left a legacy of disputes concerning boundaries which almost 
led to war between the two victorious allies, Argentina and 
Brazil, but by the exertions of Mitre, who was sent at the close 
of 1872 as special envoy to Rio, a settlement was arrived at and 
friendly relations restored. The month of April 1870 saw an 
insurrection in Entre Rios headed by the caudillo, Lopez Jordan. 
Urquiza was assassinated, and the provincial legislature, through 
fear, at once proclaimed Lopez Jordan governor. The federal 
government refused to acknowledge the new governor, and 
troops were despatched by Sarmiento against Entre Rios. The 
contest lasted with varying success for more than a year, but 
finally Lopez Jordan was completely defeated and driven into 
exile. 

The presidential election of 1874 resolved itself, as so often 
before, into a struggle between the provincials and the portenos 
(Buenos Aires). The candidate of the former, Dr 
Nicolas Avellaneda, triumphed over General Mitre, pres u e „t, 
not without suspicions of tampering with the returns; 
and the unsuccessful party appealed to arms. The new 
president, however, who was installed in office on the 12th 
of October, took active steps to suppress the revolution, which 
never assumed a really serious character. The government 
troops gained two decisive victories over the insurgents under 
Generals Mitre and Arredondo, and they were compelled to 
surrender at discretion. But though peace was for a time 
restored, the old causes of soreness and dissension remained 
unappeased, and as the time for the next presidential election 
began to draw near, it became more and more evident that a 
critical struggle was at hand, and that the people of Buenos 
Aires, supported by the province of Corrientes, were determined 
to bring to an issue the question as to what position Buenos 
Aires was to hold for the future with regard to the remaining 
provinces of the confederation. It was evident that the president 
intended to use all the influence which the party in power could 
exercise, to secure the return of General Julio Roca, who had 
distinguished himself in 1878 by a successful campaign against 
the warlike Indian tribes bordering on the Andes. The portenos 
on their part were determined to resist this policy to the utmost. 
Mass meetings were held, and a committee was appointed for 
the purpose of considering what action should be taken to 
defeat the ambitious designs of the provincials. Under the 
direction of this committee, the association known 
as the " Tiro Nacional " was formed, with the avowed TVac/o/jaA 
object of training the able-bodied citizens of Buenos 
Aires in military exercises and creating a volunteer army, ready 
for service if called upon, to withstand by force the pretensions 
of their opponents. The establishment of the Tiro Nacional 
Was enthusiastically received by all classes in Buenos Aires, the 
men turning out regularly to drill, and the women aiding the 
movement by collecting subscriptions for the purpose of arma- 
ment and other necessaries. On the 13th of February 1880, the 
minister of war, Dr Carlos Pellegrini, summoned the principal 
officers connected with the Tiro Nacional, General Bartolome' 
Mitre, his brother Emilio, Colonel Julio Campos, Colonel 
Hilario Lagos and others, and warned them that as officers of 
the national army they owed obedience to the national govern- 
ment, and would be severely punished if concerned in any 
revolutionary outbreak against the constituted authorities. The 
reply to this threat was the immediate resignation of their com- 
missions by all the officers connected with the Tiro Nacional. 
Two days later, the national government occupied, with a strong 
force of infantry and artillery, the parade ground at Palermo 
used by the Buenos Aires volunteers for drill purposes. A great 
meeting of citizens was then called and marched through the 
streets. President Avellaneda was frightened at the results of 
his action, and to avoid a collision ordered the troops to be 
withdrawn. Negotiations were now opened by the government 
with the provincial authorities for the disarmament of the city 
and province of Buenos Aires, but they led to nothing. Matters 
became still further strained on account of the outrages com- 
mitted by the national troops, and such was the bitterness of 



472 



ARGENTINA 



feeling developed between the two factions, that an appeal to 
arms became inevitable. 

In the month of June 1880, President Avellaneda and his 
ministers left Buenos Aires, and this act was considered by the 

porteno leaders equivalent to a declaration of war. 
JZOfa. ° The national government and the twelve provinces 

forming the Cordoba League, were ranged on one side; 
the city and province of Buenos Aires and the province of 
Corrientes on the other. The national troops were well armed 
with Remington rifles, provided with abundant ammunition, 
equipped with artillery and supported by the fleet. In the city 
and province of Buenos Aires, plenty of volunteers offered their 
services, and an army of some twenty-five thousand men was 
quickly raised, but they were armed with old-fashioned weapons 
and there was only a limited supply of ammunition. Feverish 
attempts were made to remedy the lack of warlike stores, but 
difficulty was experienced on account of the fleet blockading 
the entrance to the river. After several skirmishes, the national 
army commanded by General Roca, containing many troops 
seasoned in Indian campaigns, assaulted the portenos posted 

before Buenos Aires, and after two days' hard fighting 
Fallot (20th and 21st July) forced its way into the town. 
4j^ fc On 23rd July the surrender of the city was demanded 

and obtained. The terms of the surrender were that 
all the leaders of the revolution should be removed from posi- 
tions of authority, all government employees implicated in the 
movement dismissed, and the force in the province and city 
of Buenos Aires at once disarmed and disbanded. The power 
of Buenos Aires was thus completely broken and at the mercy 
of the Cordoba League. The portenos were no longer in a position 
to nominate a candidate in opposition to General Julio Roca, 
who was duly elected. He assumed office in October 1880. 

Hitherto General Roca had been regarded only in his capacity 
as a soldier, and not from the point of view of an administrator. 

In the campaigns against the Indians in the south- 
presldeat west °f t ^ e province of Buenos Aires and the valley of 

the Rio Negro he had gained much prestige; the victory 
over Buenos Aires added to his fame, and secured his authority 
in the outlying provincial centres. One of the first notable acts 
of the Roca administration was to declare the city of Buenos 
Aires the property of the national government. This separation 
of the city from the province, and its federalization had been 
one of the chief aims of the Cordoba League, and was the natural 
consequence of the crushing defeat inflicted on the portenos. As 
a sequel to this step, in 1884 the town of La Plata was declared 
to "be the capital of the province of Buenos Aires, and the pro- 
vincial administration was moved to that place. This federal- 
ization of the capital has proved to be a most important factor 
in binding together the different parts of the confederation, and 
in promoting the evolution of an Argentine nation out of a 
loosely cemented union of a number of semi-independent states. 
Considering the circumstances in which General Roca assumed 
office, it must be admitted that he showed great moderation 
and used the practically absolute power that he possessed to 
establish a strong central government, and to initiate a national 
policy, which aimed at furthering the prosperity and develop- 
ment of the whole country. He was able by the influence he 
exerted to keep down the internal dissensions and insurrectionary 
outbreaks which had so greatly impeded for many years the 
development of the vast natural resources of the republic. 
With this object he had promoted the extension of railways so 
as to link the provinces with the great port of Buenos Aires, 
and to provide at the same time facilities for the rapid despatch 
of military forces to disturbed districts. Unfortunately the last 
two years of Roca's term of office were marked by two grave 
errors, which subsequently caused widespread suffering and 
distress throughout the country. The first of these mistakes 
was a measure making (January 1885) the currency inconvertible 
for a period of two years. This act, which was only decided 
upon after much hesitation, had a most deleterious effect upon 
the national credit. The second was the nomination of Dr Miguel 
Juarez Celman for the presidential term commencing in October 



1886. The nomination was brought about by the Cordoba 
clique, and Roca lacked the moral courage to oppose the decision 
of this group, though he was well aware that Celman, who was 
his brother-in-law, was neither intellectually nor morally fitted 
for the post. 

No sooner had President Juarez Celman come into power 
towards the close of 1886, than the respectable portion of the 
community began to feel alarmed at the methods 
practised by the new president in his conduct of 



Celman 
president. 



public affairs. At first it was hoped that the influence 
of General Roca would serve to check any serious extravagance 
on the part of Celman. This hope, however, was doomed to 
disappointment, and before many months had elapsed it was 
clear that the president would listen to no prudent counsels 
from Roca or from any one else. The men of the old Cordoba 
League became dominant in all branches of the government, 
and carpet-bagging politicians occupied every official post. In 
their hurry to obtain wealth, this crowd of office-mongers from 
the provinces lent themselves to all kinds of bribery and corrup- 
tion. The public credit was pledged at home and abroad to fill 
the pockets of the adventurers, and the wildest excesses were 
committed under the guise of administrative acts. What followed 
in the second and third years of the Celman administration can 
only adequately be described as a debauchery of the national 
honour, of the national resources, of the rights of Argentines 
as citizens of the republic. Buenos Aires was still prostrate 
under the crushing blow of the misfortunes of 1880, and lacked 
strength and power of organization necessary to raise any 
effective protest against the proceedings of Celman and his 
friends when the true character of these proceedings was first 
understood. The conduct of public affairs, however, at length 
became so scandalous, that action on the part of the more sober- 
minded and conservative sections was seen to be absolutely 
imperative if the country was to be saved from speedy and 
certain ruin. In 1889 the association of the " Union Civica " 
was founded, and the organization undertaken hy 
Dr Leandro Alem, Dr Aristobulo del Valle, Dr Ber- C i vlca . 
nardo Irigoyen, Dr Vicente Lopez, Dr Lucio Lopez, 
Dr Oscar Lilliedale and other leading citizens. The un- 
tiring energy and zeal of Leandro Alem fitted him for being 
the chief organizer of a movement into which he threw himself 
heart and soul. Mass meetings were held in Buenos Aires, and 
it fell specially to the lot of Dr del Valle, who was an able orator 
as well as a sincere patriot, to expose the irresponsible and 
corrupt character of the administration, and the terrible dangers 
that threatened the republic through its reckless extravagance 
and financial improvidence. Subsidiary clubs affiliated to the 
central administration were formed throughout the length and 
breadth of the country, and millions of leaflets and pamphlets 
were distributed broadcast to explain the importance of the 
movement. President Celman underrated the strength of the 
new opposition, and relied upon his armed forces promptly to 
suppress any signs of open hostility. No change was made in 
official methods, and the condition of affairs drifted from bad 
to worse, until the temper of the people, so long and so sorely 
tried, showed plainly that the situation had become insufferable. 
The Union Civica then decided to make a bold bid for freedom 
by attempting forcibly to eject Celman and his clique from office. 
On the night of the 26th of July 1890 the Union Civica called 
its members to arms. It was joined by some regiments of the 
regular army and received the support of the fleet. Barricades 
were thrown up in the principal streets, and the surrounding 
houses were occupied by the insurgents. Two days of desultory 
street fighting ensued, during which the fleet began to bombard 
the city, but was compelled to desist by the interference of 
foreign men-of-war, on the ground that the bombardment was 
causing unnecessary damage to the life and property of non- 
combatants. A suspension of hostilities then took place, and 
negotiations were opened between the contending parties. 
Celman, acting upon the advice of General Roca, who recognized 
' the strength of public opinion in the outbreak, placed his resig- 
nation in the hands of congress on the 31st of. July. A scene of 



ARGENTINA 



473 



intense enthusiasm followed, and Buenos Aires was en fete for 
the following three days. The vice-president of the confedera- 
tion, Carlos Pellegrini, who had been minister of war under 
presidents Avellaneda and Roca and had had much adminis- 
trative experience, succeeded without opposition to the vacant 
post. 

Much satisfaction was shown in Europe at the fall of President 
Celman, for investors had suffered heavily by the way in which 

the resources of Argentina had been dissipated by 
oresfcfenl a corru Pt government, and hopes were entertained 

that the uprising of public opinion against his finan- 
cial methods signified a more honest conduct of the national 
affairs in the future. Great expectations were entertained 
of the ability of President Pellegrini to establish a sound 
administration, and he succeeded in forming a ministry which 
gave general satisfaction throughout the country. General 
Roca was induced to undertake the duties of minister of the 
interior, and his influence in the provinces was sufficient to 
check any attempts to stir up disturbances at Cordoba or else- 
where. The most onerous post of all, that of minister of finance, 
was confided to Dr Vicente Lopez, who, though he was not of 
marked financial ability, was at least a man of untiring industry 
and of a personal integrity that was above suspicion. But the 
economic and financial situation was one of almost hopeless 
embarrassment and confusion, and Pellegrini proved himself 
incapable of grappling with it. Instead of facing the difficulties, 
the president preferred to put off the day of reckoning by 
flooding the country with inconvertible notes, with the result 
that the financial crisis became more and more aggravated. 
Through the rapid depreciation of Argentine credit, the great 
firm of Baring Brothers, the financial agents of the government 
in London, became so heavily involved that they were forced 
into liquidation, November 1890. The consequences of this 
catastrophe were felt far and wide, and in the spring of 1891 
both the Banco Nacional and the Banco de la provincia de 
Buenos Aires were unable to meet their obligations. Amidst 
this sea of financial troubles the government drifted helplessly 
on, without showing any inclination or capacity to initiate a 
strong policy of reform in the methods of administration which 
had done so much to ruin the country. 

It is little wonder that, in these circumstances, the choice 
of a successor to Pellegrini, whose term of office expired in 1892, 
should have been felt to possess peculiar importance. General 
Bartolome Mitre was proposed by the portenos as their candi- 
date. He had been absent from Argentina on a journey to 
Europe, and on his return in April 1891, a popular reception 
was given to him at which 50,000 persons attended. A petition 
was presented to him begging him to be a candidate for the 
presidency, and with some reluctance the veteran leader gave 
his consent. His partisans, however, found themselves con- 
fronted by a compact provincial party, who proposed to put 
forward the other strong man of the republic, General Roca, 
to oppose him. But the two generals were equally averse to a 
contest d outrance, which could only end in civil war. They 
met accordingly at a conference known as El Acuerdo, and it 
was arranged that both should withdraw, and that a non-party 
candidate should be selected who should receive the support 
of them both. The choice fell upon Dr Saenz Pena, a judge of 
the supreme court, and a man universally respected, who had 
never taken any part in political life. This compact aroused 
the bitter enmity of Dr Leandro Alem, who did his utmost to 
stir up the Union Civica to a campaign against the neutral 
candidate. Finding that the more conservative section of the 
union would not follow him, Alem formed a new association to 
which he gave the name of Union Civica Radical. Such was his 
energy, that soon a network of branches of the Union Civica 
Radical was organized throughout the republic, and Dr Ber- 
nardo Irigoyen was put forward as a rival candidate to Dr Saenz 
Pena. But Alem was not content with constitutional opposition 
to the Acuerdo, and his movement soon assumed the character 
of a revolutionary propaganda against the national government. 
His violence gave Pellegrini the opportunity of taking active 



steps to preserve the peace. In April 1892 Alem and his chief 
colleagues were arrested and sent into exile. 

In the following month (May), the presidential elections were 
held; Dr Saenz Pena was declared duly elected, and Dr Jose 
Uriburu, the minister in Chile, was chosen as vice-president. 

The idea of Dr Saenz Pena was to conduct the government 
on common sense and non-partisan lines, in fact to translate 
into practical politics the principles which underlay 
the compromise of the Acuerdo. He was a straight- ■ Sa *°* 
forward and honourable man, who tried his best to do president. 
his duty in a position that had been forced upon him, 
and was in no sense of the word his own seeking. No sooner, 
however, was he installed in office than difficulties began to crop 
up on all sides, and he quickly discovered that to attempt to 
govern without the aid of a majority in congress was practically 
impossible. He had had no experience of political life, and he 
refused to create the support he needed by using his presidential 
prerogative to build up a political majority. Obstruction met 
his well-meant efforts to promote the general good, and before 
twelve months of the presidential term had run public affairs 
were at a deadlock. Dr Alem, who had been permitted to return 
from exile, was not slow to profit by the occasion. Embittered 
by his treatment in 1892, he openly preached the advisability 
of an armed rising to overthrow the existing administration. 
Public opinion had been outraged by the immunity with which 
the governors of certain provinces, and more particularly Dr 
Julio Costa, the governor of the province of Buenos Aires, 
had been allowed to maintain local forces, by the aid of which 
they exacted the payment of illegal taxes and exercised other 
acts of injustice and oppression. A number of officers of the army 
and navy agreed to lend assistance to a revolutionary outbreak, 
and towards the end of July 1893 matters came to a head. 
The population of Buenos Aires assembled in armed bodies with 
the avowed intention of ejecting the governor from office, and 
electing in his stead a man who would give them a just adminis- 
tration. The president was for some time in doubt whether he 
had any right to intervene in provincial affairs, but eventually 
troops were despatched to La Plata. There was no serious 
fighting. Negotiations were soon opened which quickly led to 
the resignation of Costa, and the return of the insurgents to 
their homes. While these disturbances were taking place in 
the province of Buenos Aires, another revolutionary rising was 
in progress in Santa Fe. Here the efforts of Dr Alem succeeded 
in supplying a large body of rebels with arms and ammuni- 
tion, and he was able, by a bold attack, to seize the town of 
Rosario and there establish the revolutionary headquarters. This 
capture so alarmed the national government that a force was 
sent under the command of Roca to put down the insurrection. 
The revolt speedily collapsed before this redoubtable commander, 
and Alem and the other leaders surrendered. They were sen- 
tenced to banishment in Staten Island at the pleasure of the 
federal government. 

But the suppression of disorder did not relieve the tension 
between the congress and the executive. During the whole 
of the 1894 session, the attitude of senators and deputies alike 
was one of pronounced hostility to the president. All his acts 
were opposed, legislation was at a standstill and every effort 
was made to force Dr Saenz Pena to resign. But although he ex- 
perienced the utmost difficulty in forming a cabinet, the president 
was obstinate in his determination to retain office without 
identifying himself with any party. A definite issue was therefore 
sought by the congress on which to join battle, and it arose out 
of the death sentences which had been pronounced on certain 
naval and military officers who had been implicated in the 
Santa Fe outbreak. The president had made up his mind that 
the sentence must be carried out; the congress by a great 
majority were resolved not to permit the death penalty to be 
inflicted. It was a one-sided struggle, for without the consent 
of the congress the president could not raise any money for 
supplies, and congress refused to vote the budget. But heavy 
expenses had been incurred in putting down revolutionary 
movements in various parts of the provinces, and war with Chile 



474 



ARGENTINA 



was threatened upon the question of a dispute concerning the 
boundaries between the two republics. In January 1895 a 
special session of congress was summoned to take into con- 
sideration the financial proposals of the government, which 
included an increase in the naval and military estimates. Con- 
gress, however, had now got their opportunity, and they used 
the time of national stress to bring increased pressure to bear 
upon the president. On the 21st of January Dr Saenz Pefia 
at last perceived that his position was untenable, and he handed 
in his resignation. It was accepted at once by the chambers, 
and the vice-president, Dr Jose Uriburu, became president of 
the republic for the three years and nine months of Pefia's term 
which remained unexpired. 

Uriburu was neither a politician nor a statesman, but had 
spent the greater portion of his life abroad in the diplomatic 
service. His knowledge of foreign affairs was, however, 
I™ , peculiarly useful at a juncture when boundary ques- 
tions were the subjects that chiefly attracted public 
attention. After disputes with Brazil, extending over fifteen 
years, about the territory of " Misiones," the matter had 
been submitted to the arbitration of the president of the 
United States. In March 1895 President Cleveland gave his 
decision, which was wholly favourable to the contention of 
Brazil. The Argentine government, though disappointed at 
the result, accepted the award loyally. The boundary dispute 
with Chile, to which reference has already been made, was of 
a more serious character. The dispute was of old standing. 
Already in 1884 a protocol had been signed between the con- 
tending parties, by which it was agreed that the frontier 
should follow the line where " the highest peaks of the Andine 
ranges divide the watershed." This definition unfortunately 
ignored the fact that the Andes do not run from north to south 
in one continuous line, but are separated into cordilleras with 
valleys between them, and covering in their total breadth a 
considerable extent of country. Difference of opinion, therefore, 
arose as to the interpretation of the protocol, the Argentines 
insisting that the boundary should run from highest peak to 
highest peak, the Chileans that it should follow the highest 
points of the watershed. The quarrel at length became acute, 
and on both sides the populace clamoured from time to time 
for an appeal to arms, and the resources of both countries were 
squandered in military and naval preparations for a struggle. 
Nevertheless despite these obstacles, President Uriburu did some- 
thing during his term of office to relieve the nation's financial 
difficulties. In 1896 a bill was passed by congress, which 
authorized the state by the issue of national bonds to assume 
the provincial external indebtedness. This proof of the desire 
of the Argentine government to meet honestly all its obligations 
did much to restore its credit abroad. Uriburu found in 1897 
the financial position so far improved that he was able to resume 
cash payments on the entire foreign debt. 

In 1898 there was another presidential election. Public 
opinion, excited by the prospect of a war with Chile, naturally 
supported the candidature of General Roca, and he 
* oc " was elected without opposition (12th October 1898). 

The first question which he had to handle was the 
Chilean boundary dispute. During the last months of President 
Uriburu's administration, matters had reached a climax, especi- 
ally in connexion with the delimitation in a district known as 
the Puna de Atacama. In August an ultimatum was received 
from Chile demanding arbitration. After some hesitation, on 
the advice of Roca the Argentines agreed to the demand, and 
peace was maintained. The principle of arbitration being 
accepted, the conditions were quickly arranged. The question 
of the Puna de Atacama was referred to a tribunal composed 
of the United States minister to Argentina and of one Argentine 
and one Chilean delegate; that of the southern frontier in 
Patagonia to the British crown. One of the first steps of Presi- 
dent Roca, after his accession to office, was to arrange a meeting 
with the president of Chile at the Straits of Magellan. At their 
conference all difficulties were discussed and settled, and an 
undertaking was given on both sides to put a stop to warlike 



preparations. The decision of the representative of the United 
States was given in April 1899. Although the Chileans pro- 
fessed dissatisfaction, no active opposition was raised, and the 
terms were duly ratified. In his message to congress, on the 
1st of May 1899, General Roca spoke strongly of the immediate 
necessity of a reform in the methods of administering justice, 
the expediency of a revision of the electoral law, and the im- 
perative need of a reconstruction of the department of public 
instruction. The administration of justice, he declared, had 
fallen to so low an ebb as to be practically non-existent. By 
the powerful influence of the president, government measures 
were sanctioned by the legislature dealing with the abuses 
which had been condemned. On the 31st of August of the same 
year a series of proposals upon the currency question was 
submitted to congress by the president, whose real object was to 
counteract the too rapid appreciation of the inconvertible paper 
money. The official value of the dollar was fixed at 44 cents 
gold for all government purposes. The violent fluctuations 
in the value of the paper dollar, which caused so much damage 
to trade and industry, were thus checked. In October 1900 
Dr Manuel Campos Salles, president of Brazil, paid a visit to 
Buenos Aires, and was received with great demonstrations 
of friendliness. The aggressive attitude of Chile towards Bolivia 
was causing considerable anxiety, and Argentina and Brazil 
wished to show that they were united in opposing a policy which 
aimed at acquiring an extension of territory by force of arms. 
The feeling of enmity between Chile and Argentina was indeed 
anything but extinct. The delay of the arbitration tribunal 
in London in giving its decision in the matter of the disputed 
boundary in Patagonia led to a crop of wild rumours being 
disseminated, and to a revival of animosity between the two 
peoples. In December 1901 warlike preparations were being 
carried on in both states, and the outbreak of active hostilities 
appeared to be imminent. At the critical moment the British 
government, urged to move in the matter by the British residents 
in both countries, who feared that war would mean the financial 
ruin of both Chile and Argentina, used its utmost influence 
both at Santiago and Buenos Aires to allay the misunder- 
standings; and negotiations were set on foot which ended in 
a treaty for the cessation of further armaments being signed, 
June 1902. The award of King Edward VII. upon the de- 
limitation of the boundary was given a few months later, 
and was received without controversy and ratified by both 
governments. 

To the calm resourcefulness and level-headedness of President 
Roca at a very difficult and critical juncture must be largely 
ascribed the preservation of peace, and the permanent removal 
of a dispute that had aroused so much irritation. His term 
of office came to an end in 1904, when Dr Manuel Quintana 
was elected president and Dr Jose Figueroa Alcorta n alatana 
vice-president, both having Roca's support. Dr and 
Quintana at the time of his election was sixty-four Alcorta 
years of age. He proved a hard-working progressive P resldents - 
president, who did much for the development of communications 
and the opening up of the interior of the country. He died 
amidst general regret in March 1906, and was succeeded by 
Dr Alcorta for the remaining years of his term. (G. E.) 

Authorities. — C. E. Akers, Argentine, Patagonian and Chilian 
Sketches (London, 1893), and A History Of South America 1854-1904 
(New York, 1905) ; Theodore Child, The Spanish-American Republics 
(London, 1891) ; Sir T. H. Holdich, The Countries of the King's Award 
(London, 1904) ; W. H. Hudson, The Naturalist in La Plata (London, 
1892), and Idle Days in Patagonia (London, 1893); A. H. Keane 
and C. R. Markham, Central and South America, in Stanford's 
"Compendium of Geography and Travel" (London, 1901); G. 
E. Church, " Argentine Geography and the Ancient Pampean 
Sea " (Geogr. Journal, xii. p. 386); " South America: an Outline of 
its Physical Geography " {Geogr. Journal, xvii. p. 333) ; Dr Karl 
Karger, Landwirtschaft und Kolonisation im spanischen Amerika 
(2 vols., Leipzig, 1901) ; F. P. Moreno, " Explorations in Patagonia " 
(Geogr. Journal, xiv. pp. 241, 354); Carlos Lix Klett, Estudios sobre 
produccion, comercio, finanzas e interesses generales de la Republica 
Argentina (2 vols., Buenos Aires, 1900); G. Carrasco, El crecimiento 
de la poblacion de la Republica Argentina comparado con el de las 
principales naciones 1890-1903 (Buenos Aires, 1904) ; C. M. Urien 



ARGENTINE— ARGON 



475 



and C. Colombo, Geografia Argentina (Buenos Aires, 1905); E. von 
Rosen, Archaeological Researches on the Frontier of Argentina and 
Bolivia 1901-1902 (Stockholm, 1904) ; Arturo B. Carranza, Con- 
stitution National y Constituciones Provinciates Vigentes .(Buenos 
Aires, 1898); Angelo de Gubernatis, L' Argentina (Firenze, 1898); 
Meliton Gonzales, El Gran Chaco Argentino (Buenos Aires, 1890); 
John Grant & Sons, The Argentine Year Book (Buenos Aires, 1902 
et seq.); Francis Latzina, Diccionario Geografico Argentino (Buenos 
Aires, 1891); Geographie de la Republique Argentine (Buenos Aires, 
1890); V Agriculture et I'Elevage dans la Republique Argentine 
(Paris, 1889) ; Bartolome Mitre, Historia de San Martin y de la 
Emancipation Sud-Americana, segun nuevos documentos (3 vols., 
Buenos Aires, 1887); Historia de Belgrano y de la Independencia 
Argentina (3 vols., Buenos Aires, 1883); Felipe Soldan, Diccionario 
Geografico Estadislico National Argentino (Buenos Aires, 1885); 
Thomas A. Turner, Argentina and the Argentines (New York and 
London, 1892); Estanislao S. Zeballos, Description Amena de la 
Republica Argentina (3 vols., Buenos Aires, 1881); Anuario de la 
Direcion General de Estadistica 1898 (Buenos Aires, 1899); Charles 
Wiener, La Republique Argentine (Paris, 1899); Segundo Censo 
Republica Argentina (3 vols., Buenos Aires, 1898); Handbook of the 
Argentine Republic (Bureau of the American Republics, Washington, 
1892-1903). (A. J. L.) 

ARGENTINE, a former city of Wyandotte county, Kansa*, 
U. S. A., since igio a part of Kansas City, on the S. bank 
of the Kansas river, just above its mouth. Pop. (1890) 4732; 
(1900) 5878, of whom 623 were foreign-born and 603 of negro 
descent; (1905, state census) 6053. It is served by the 
Atchison, Topeka & Santa Fe railway, which maintains here 
yards and machine shops. The streets of the city run irregularly 
up the steep face of the river bluffs. Its chief industrial estab- 
lishment is that of the United Zinc and Chemical Company, 
which has here one of the largest plants of its kind in the country. 
There are large grain interests. The site was platted in 1880, 
and the city was first incorporated in 1882 and again, as a city 
of the second class, in 1889. 

ARGENTITE, a mineral which belongs to the galena group, 
and is cubic silver sulphide (Ag 2 S) . It is occasionally found as un- 
even cubes and octahedra, but more often as dendritic or earthy 
masses, with a blackish lead-grey colour and metallic lustre. 
The cubic cleavage, which is so prominent a feature in galena, 
is here present only in traces. The mineral is perfectly sectile 
and has a shining streak; hardness 2-5, specific gravity 7-3. It 
occurs in mineral veins, and when found in large masses, as in 
Mexico and in the Comstock lode in Nevada, it forms an im- 
portant ore of silver. The mineral was mentioned so long ago 
as 1529 by G. Agricola, but the name argentite (from the Lat. 
argentum, " silver ") was not used till 1845 and is due to W. 
von Haidinger. Old names for the species are Glaserz, silver- 
glance and vitreous silver. A cupriferous variety, from Jalpa in 
Tabasco, Mexico, is known as jalpaite. Acanthite is a supposed 
dimorphous form, crystallizing in the orthorhombic system, 
but it is probable that the crystals are really distorted crystals 
of argentite. (L. J. S.) 

ARGENTON, a town of western France, in the department of 
Indre, on the Creuse, 19 m. S.S.W. of Chateauroux on the Orleans 
railway. Pop. (1906) 5638. The river is crossed by two bridges, 
and its banks are bordered by picturesque old houses. There 
are numerous tanneries, and the manufacture of boots and shoes 
and linen goods is carried on. The site of the ancient Argento- 
magus lies a little to the north. 

ARGHANDAB, a river of Afghanistan, about 250 m. in 
length. It rises in the Hazara country north-west of Ghazni, 
and flowing south-west falls into the Helmund 20 m. below 
Girishk. Very little is known about its upper course. It is said 
to be shallow, and to run nearly dry in height of summer; but 
when its depth exceeds 3 ft. its great rapidity makes it a serious 
obstacle to travellers. In its lower course it is much used for 
irrigation, and the valley is cultivated and populous; yet the 
water is said to be somewhat brackish. It is doubtful whether 
the ancient Arachotus is to be identified with the Arghandab or 
with its chief confluent the Tarnak, which joins it on the left 
about 30 m. S. \V. of Kandahar. The two rivers run nearly 
parallel, inclosing the backbone of the Ghilzai plateau. The 
Tarnak is much the shorter (length about 200 m.) and less copious. 
The ruins at Ulan Robat, supposed to represent the city Arach- 
osia, are in its basin: and the lake known as Ab-i-Istada, the 



most probable representative of Lake Arachotus, is near the 
head of the Tarnak, though not communicating with it. The 
Tarnak is dammed for irrigation at intervals, and in the hot 
season almost exhausted. There is a good deal of cultivation 
along the river, but few villages. The high road from Kabul 
to Kandahar passes this way (another reason for supposing the 
Tarnak to be Arachotus), and the people live off the road to 
avoid the onerous duties of hospitality. 

ARGHOUL, Arghool, or Arghul (in the Egyptian hiero- 
glyphs, As or As-it), 1 an ancient and modern Egyptian and Arab 
wood-wind instrument, with cylindrical bore and single reed 
mouthpiece of the clarinet type. The arghoul consists of two 
reed pipes of unequal lengths bound together by means of waxed 
thread, so that the two mouthpieces lie side by side, and can be 
taken by the performer into his mouth at the same time. The 
mouthpiece consists of a reed having a small tongue detached 
by means of a longitudinal slit which forms the beating reed, 
as in the clarinet mouthpiece. The shorter pipe has six holes 
on which the melody is played; the three upper holes being 
covered by the fingers of the right hand, and the lower by those 
of the left hand. The longer pipe has no lateral holes; it is a 



■irt yry 



■^a^rWg 



W3 



(From Edward William Lane's An Account oj the Manners and Customs of the 
Modern Egyptians.) 

Modern Arghoul, 3 ft. 2\ in. long. 

drone pipe with one note only, which, however, can be varied 
by the addition of extra lengths of reed. In the illustration 
all three lengths are shown in use. An arghoftl belonging to the 
collection of the Conservatoire Royal at Brussels, described by 
Victor Mahillbn in his catalogue 2 (No. 113), gives the following 
scale : — 

Short Pipe. Drone Pipe. 







j^Jm- 



=3= 



=3= 



^ 



01234 

Holes uncovered. 



ithout ad- With shortest With short- With long- 
ditional joint, additional est and est addi- 
joint. medium ad- lionai 
ditional joints, joint. 



The total length of the shorter pipe, including the mouthpiece, 
is 0-435 m -! of the longer pipe, without additional joints, 
°'SSS m - An Egyptian arghoul, 8 presented by the khedive 
to the Victoria and Albert Museum, measures 4 ft. 8j in, 

For further information see Victor Loret, L'Egyple au temps des 
Pharaons (Paris, 18S9), 8vo, pp. 139, 143, 144; G. A. Villoteau, 
Description historique technique et litteraire des instruments de 
musique des orientaux {Description de VEgypte, Paris, 1823, tome X "L 
pp. 456-473)- (K. S.) 

ARGOL, the commercial name of crude tartar (q.v.). It is 
a semi-crystalline deposit which forms on wine vats, and is 
generally grey or red in colour. 

ARGON (from the Gr. &-, privative, and epyov, work; hence 
meaning " inert "), a gaseous constituent of atmospheric air. 
For more than a hundred years before 1894 it had been supposed 
that the composition of the atmosphere was thoroughly known. 
Beyond variable quantities of moisture and traces of carbonic 
acid, hydrogen, ammonia, &c, the only constituents recognized 
were nitrogen and oxygen. The analysis of air was conducted 
by determining the amount of oxygen present and assum- 
ing the remainder to be nitrogen. Since the time of Henry 
Cavendish no one seemed even to have asked the question 
whether the residue was, in truth, all capable of conversion 
into nitric acid. 

The manner in which this condition of complacent ignorance 
came to be disturbed is instructive. Observations undertaken 
mainly in the interest of Prout's law, and extending over many 
years, had been conducted to determine afresh the densities 
of the principal gases—hydrogen, oxygen and nitrogen. In 
the latter case, the first preparations were according to the 

1 See Victor Loret, " Les fMtes egyptiennes antiques," Journal 
Asiatique, 8eme serie, tome xiv., Paris, 1889, pp. 129, 130 and 132. 

2 Catalogue descriptif et analytique du musee du Conservatoire 
Royal de Bruxelles (Ghent, 1880), p. 141. 

3 A Descriptive Catalogue of the Musical Instruments in the South 
Kensington Museum. l>y Carl Engel (London, 1874), p. 143. 



476 



ARGON 



convenient method devised by Vernon Harcourt, in which air 
charged with ammonia is passed over red-hot copper. Under 
the influence of the heat the atmospheric oxygen, unites with 
the hydrogen of the ammonia, and when the excess of the latter 
is removed with sulphuric acid, the gas properly desiccated 
should be pure nitrogen, derived in part from the ammonia, but 
principally from the air. A few concordant determinations of 
density having been effected, the question was at first regarded 
as disposed of, until the thought occurred that it might be desir- 
able to try also the more usual method of preparation in which 
the oxygen is removed by actual oxidation of copper without 
the aid of ammonia. Determinations made thus were equally 
concordant among themselves, but the resulting density was 
about ToVff P art greater than that found by Harcourt's method 
(Rayleigh, Nature, vol. xlvi. p. 512, 1892). Subsequently when 
oxygen was substituted for air in the first method, so that all 
(instead of about one-seventh part) of the nitrogen was derived 
from ammonia, the difference rose to 5 %. Further experiment 
only brought out more clearly the diversity of the gases hitherto 
assumed to be identical. Whatever were the means employed 
to rid air of accompanying oxygen, a uniform value of the density 
was arrived at, and this value was 5 % greater than that apper- 
taining to nitrogen extracted from compounds such as nitrous 
oxide, ammonia and ammonium nitrite. No impurity, consist- 
ing of any known substance, could be discovered capable of 
explaining an excessive weight in the one case, or a deficiency 
in the other. Storage for eight months did not disturb the 
density of the chemically extracted gas, nor had the silent 
electric discharge'any influence upon either quality. (" On an 
Anomaly encountered in determining the Density of Nitrogen 
Gas," Proc. Roy. Soc, April 1894.) 

At this stage it became clear that the complication depended 
upon some hitherto unknown body, and probability inclined 
to the existence of a gas in the atmosphere heavier than nitrogen, 
and remaining unacted upon during the removal of the oxygen 
—a conclusion afterwards fully established by Lord Rayleigh 
and Sir William Ramsay. The question which now pressed 
was as to the character of the evidence for the universally 
accepted view that the so-called nitrogen of the atmosphere 
was all of one kind, that the nitrogen of the air was the same 
as the nitrogen of nitre. Reference to Cavendish showed that 
he had already raised this question in the most distinct manner, 
and indeed, to a certain extent, resolved it. In his memoir of 
1785 he writes: — 

" As far as the experiments hitherto published extend, we scarcely 
know more of the phlogisticated part of our atmosphere than that 
it is not diminished by lime-water, caustic alkalies, or nitrous air; 
that it is unfit to support fire or maintain life in animals; and that 
its specific gravity is not much less than that of common air; so 
that, though the nitrous acid, by being united to phlogiston, is con- 
verted into air possessed of these properties, and consequently, 
though it was reasonable to suppose, that part at least of the phlo- 
gisticated air of the atmosphere consists of this acid united to 
phlogiston, yet it may fairly be doubted whether the whole is of this 
kind, or whether there are not in reality many different substances 
confounded together by us under the name of phlogisticated air. I 
therefore made an experiment to determine whether the whole of a 
given portion of the phlogisticated air of the atmosphere could be 
reduced to nitrous acid, or whether there was not a part of a different 
nature to the rest which would refuse to undergo that change. The 
foregoing experiments indeed, in some measure, decided this point, 
as much the greatest part of air let up into the tube lost its elasticity; 
yet, as some remained unabsorbed, it did not appear for certain 
whether that was of the same nature as the rest or not. For this 
purpose I diminished a similar mixture of dephlogisticated [oxygen] 
and common air, in the same manner as before [by sparks over 
alkali] , till it was reduced to a small part of its original bulk. I then, 
in order to decompound as much as I could of the phlogisticated air 
[nitrogen] which remained in the tube, added some dephlogisticated 
air to it and continued the spark until no further diminution took 
place. Having by these means condensed as much as I could of the 
phlogisticated air, I let up some solution of liver of sulphur to absorb 
the dephlogisticated air; after which only a small bubble of air 
remained unabsorbed, which certainly was not more than T ??s of 
the bulk of the dephlogisticated air let up into the tube; so that, 
if there be any part of the dephlogisticated air of our atmosphere 
which differs from the rest, and cannot be reduced to nitrous acid, 
we may safely conclude that it is not more than ,J, part of the 
whole." 



Although, as was natural, Cavendish was satisfied with his 
result, and does not decide whether the small residue was genuine, 
it is probable that his residue was really of a different kind from 
the main bulk of the " phlogisticated air," and contained the 
gas afterwards named argon. 

The announcement to the British Association in 1894 by 
Rayleigh and Ramsay of a new gas in the atmosphere was 
received with a good deal of scepticism. Some doubted the 
discovery of a new gas altogether, while others denied that it 
was present in the atmosphere. Yet there was nothing incon- 
sistent with any previously ascertained fact in the asserted 
presence of 1 % of a non-oxidizable gas about half as heavy again 
as nitrogen. The nearest approach to a difficulty lay in the 
behaviour of liquid air, from which it was supposed, as the event 
proved erroneously, that such a constituent would separate 
itself in the solid form. The evidence of the existence of a new 
gas (named Argon on account of its chemical inertness), and a 
statement of many of its properties, were communicated to the 
Royal Society (see Phil. Trans, clxxxvi. p. 187) by the dis- 
coverers in January 1895. The isolation of 
the new substance by removal of nitrogen 
from air was effected by two distinct 
methods. Of these the first is merely a 
development of that of Cavendish. The 
gases were contained in a test-tube A 
(fig. 1) standing oyer a large .quantity of 
weak alkali B, and the current was con- 
veyed in wires insulated by U-shaped glass 
tubes CC passing through the liquid and 
round the mouth of the test-tube. The 
inner platinum ends DD of the wire may 
be sealed into the glass insulating tubes, 
but reliance should not be placed upon 
these sealings. In order to secure tight- 
ness in spite of cracks, mercury was placed 
in the bends. With a battery of five 
Grove cells and a Ruhmkorff coil of 
medium size, a somewhat short spark, or 
arc, of about 5 mm. was found to be more 
favourable than a longer one. When the 
mixed gases were in the right propor- 
tion, the rate of absorption was about 30 c.c. per hour, about 
thirty times as fast as Cavendish could work with the elec- 
trical machine of his day. Where it is available, an alternat- 
ing electric current is much superior to a battery and break. 
This combination, introduced by W. Spottiswoode, allows the 
absorption in the apparatus of fig. 1 to be raised to about 80 c.c. 
per hour, and the method is very convenient for the purification 
of small quantities of argon and for determinations of the amount 
present in various samples of gas, e.g. in the gases expelled from 
solution in water. A convenient adjunct to this apparatus 
is a small voltameter, with the aid of which oxygen or hydrogen 
can be introduced at pleasure. The gradual elimination of the 
nitrogen is tested at a moment's notice with a miniature spectro- 
scope. For this purpose a small Leyden jar is connected as usual 
to the secondary terminals, and if necessary the force of the 
discharge is moderated by the insertion of resistance in the 
primary circuit. When with a fairly wide slit the yellow line is 
no longer visible, the residual nitrogen may be considered to have 
fallen below 2 or 3 %. During this stage the oxygen should be 
in considerable excess. When the yellow line of nitrogen has 
disappeared, and no further contraction seems to be in progress, 
theoxygen maybe removed by cautious introduction of hydrogen. 
The spectrum may now be further examined with a more powerful 
instrument. The most conspicuous group in the argon spectrum 
at atmospheric pressure is that first recorded by A. Schuster 
(fig. 2). Water vapour and excess of oxygen in moderation do 
not interfere seriously with its visibility^ It is of interest to 
note that the argon spectrum may be fully developed by operating 
upon a miniature scale, starting with only 5 c.c. of air (Phil. 
Mag. vol. i. p. 103, 1901). 

The development of Cavendish's method upon a large scale 




Fig. 1. 



ARGON 



41-1 f 
1 1 



involves arrangements different from what would at first be 
expected. The transformer working from a public supply should 
give about 6000 volts on open circuit, although when the electric 
flame is established the voltage on the platinums is only from 
1600 to 2000. No sufficient advantage is attained by raising 
the pressure of the gases above atmosphere, but a capacious 
vessel is necessary. This may consist of a glass sphere of 50 litres' 
capacity, into the neck of which, presented downwards, the 
necessary tubes are fitted. The whole of the interior surface is 
washed with a fountain of alkali, kept in circulation by means 
of a small centrifugal pump. In this apparatus, and with about 
one horse-power utilized at the transformer, the absorption of 
gas is 21 litres per hour ("The Oxidation of Nitrogen Gas," 
Trans. Chem. Soc, 1897). 

In one experiment, specially undertaken for the sake of 
measurement, the total air employed was 9250 c.c, and the 
oxygen consumed, manipulated with the aid of partially de- 
aerated water, amounted to 10,820 c.c. The oxygen contained 
in the air would be 1942 c.c; so that the quantities of atmo- 
spheric nitrogen and of total oxygen which enter into combination 
would be 7308 c.c. and 12,762 c.c. respectively. This corresponds 
to N-f-i-75 O, the oxygen being decidedly in excess of the pro- 
portion required to form nitrous acid. The argon ultimately 
found was 75-0 c.c, or a little more than 1 % of the atmospheric 
nitrogen used. A subsequent determination over mercury by 
A. M. Kellas (Proc. Roy. Soc. lix. p. 66, 1895) gave 1-186 c.c. 
as the amount of argon present in 100 c.c. of mixed atmospheric 
nitrogen and argon. In the earlier stages of the inquiry, when 
it was important to meet the doubts which had been expressed 
as to the presence of the new gas in the atmosphere, blank 
experiments were executed in which air was replaced by nitrogen 
from ammonium nitrite. The residual argon, derived doubtless 
from_the water used to manipulate the gases, was but a small 
y 44 4S 4f y 48 49 Sooo 



Argon 



Zinc 



Hydrogren 



H7 



V 



-» Red 



Fig. 2. 



fraction of what would have been obtained from a corresponding 
quantity of air. 

The other method by which nitrogen may be absorbed on a 
considerable scale is by the aid of magnesium. The metal in 
the form of thin turnings is charged into hard glass or iron tubes 
heated to a full red in a combustion furnace. Into this air, 
previously deprived of oxygen by red-hot copper and thoroughly 
dried, is led in a continuous stream. At this temperature the 
nitrogen combines with the magnesium, and thus the argon is 
concentrated. A still more potent absorption is afforded by 
calcium prepared in situ by heating a mixture of magnesium 
dust with thoroughly dehydrated quick-lime. The density of 
argon, prepared and purified by magnesium, was found by 
Sir William Ramsay to be 19-941 on the = i6 scale. The 
volume actually weighed was 163 c.c. Subsequently large-scale 
queries with the same apparatus as had been used for the
principal gases gave an almost identical result (19-940) for argon 
prepared with oxygen. 

Argon is soluble in water at 12 C. to about 4-0%, that is, 
it is about 2^ times more soluble than nitrogen. We should 
thus expect to find it in increased proportion in the dissolved 
gases of rain-water. Experiment has confirmed this anticipation. 
The weight of a mixture of argon and nitrogen prepared from the 
dissolved gases showed an excess of 24 mg. over the weight of true 
nitrogen, the corresponding excess for the atmospheric mixture 
being only n mg. Argon is contained in the gases liberated by 
many thermal springs, but not in special quantity. The gas 
collected from the King's Spring at Bath gave only \ %, i.e. half 
the atmospheric proportion. 

The most remarkable physical property of argon relates to 



the constant known as the ratio of specific heats. When a gas 
is warmed one degree, the heat which must be supplied depends 
upon whether the operation is conducted at a constant volume 
or at a constant pressure, being greater in the latter case. The 
ratio of specific heats of the principal gases is 1-4, which, accord- 
ing to the kinetic theory, is an indication that an important 
fraction of the energy absorbed is devoted to rotation or vibration. 
If, as for Boscovitch points, the whole energy is translatory, 
the ratio of specific heats must be 1-67. This is precisely the 
number found from the velocity of sound in argon as determined 
by Kundt's method, and it leaves no room for any sensible 
energy of rotatory or vibrational motion. The same value had 
previously been found for mercury vapour by Kundt and 
Warburg, and had been regarded as confirmatory of the mon- 
atomic character attributed on chemical grounds to the mercury 
molecule. It may be added that helium has the same character 
as argon in respect of specific heats (Ramsay, Proc. Roy. Soc. 
1. p. 86, 1895). 

The refractivity of argon is -961 of that of air. This low 
refractivity is noteworthy as strongly antagonistic to the view, 
at one time favoured by eminent chemists that argon was a 
condensed form of nitrogen represented by N3. The viscosity of 
argon is 1-21, referred to air, somewhat higher than for oxygen, 
which stands at the head of the list of the principal gases (" Oh 
some Physical Properties of Argon and Helium," Proc. Roy. 
Soc. vol. lix. p. 198, 1896). 

The spectrum shows remarkable peculiarities. According to 
circumstances, the colour of the light obtained from a Plucker 
vacuum tube changes " from red to a rich steel blue," to use the 
words of Crookes, who first described the phenomenon. A third 
spectrum is distinguished by J. M. Eder and Edward Valenta. 
The red spectrum is obtained at moderately low pressures 
(5 mm.) by the use of a Ruhmkorff coil without a jar or air-gap. 
The red lines at 7056 and 6965 (Crookes) are characteristic. The 
blue spectrum is best seen at a somewhat lower pressure (1 mm. 
to 2-5 mm.), and usually requires a Leyden jar to be connected 
to the secondary terminals. In some conditions very small 
causes effect a transition from the one spectrum to the other. 
The course of electrical events attending the operation of a 
Ruhmkorff coil being extremely complicated, special interest 
attaches to some experiments conducted by John Trowbridge 
and T. W. Richards, in which the source of power was a secondary 
battery of 5000 cells. At a pressure of 1 mm. the red glow of 
argon was readily obtained with a voltage of 2000, but not with 
much less. After the discharge was once started, the difference 
of potentials at the terminals of the tube varied from 630 volts 
upwards. 

The introduction of a capacity between the terminals of the 
Geissler tube, for example two plates of metal 1600 sq. cm. in area 
separated by a glass plate I cm*, thick, made no difference in the 
red glow so long as the connexions were good and the condenser was 
quiet. As soon as a spark-gap was introduced, or the condenser 
began to emit the humming sound peculiar to it, the beautiful blue 
glow so characteristic of argon immediately appeared. (Phil. Mag. 
xliii. p. 77. I897-) 

The behaviour of argon at low temperatures was investigated 
by K. S. Olszewski (Phil. Trans., 1895, p. 253). The following 
results are extracted from the table given by him : — ; 



Name. 


Critical 
Tempera- 
ture, Cent. 


Critical 

Pressure, 

Atmos. 


Boiling 
Point, 
Cent. 


Freezing 
Point, 
Cent. 


Nitrogen. 
Argon 
Oxygen . 


— 146-0 

— I2I-0 

-H8-8 


35-o 
50-6 
50-8 


-194.4 
-187-0 
-182-7 


— 214-0 
-189-6 

? 



The smallness of the interval between the boiling and freezing 
points is noteworthy. 

From the manner of its preparation it was clear at an early 
stage that argon would not combine with magnesium or calcium 
at a red heat, nor under the influence of the electric discharge 
with oxygen, hydrogen or nitrogen. Numerous other, attempts 
to induce combination also failed. Nor does it appear that any 
well-defined compound of argon has yet been prepared. It was 



47» 



ARGONAUTS 



found, however, by M. P. E. Berthelot that under the influence 
of the silent electric discharge, a mixture of benzene vapour 
and argon underwent contraction, with formation of a gummy 
product from which the argon could be recovered. 

The facts detailed in the original memoir led to the conclusion 
that argon was an element or a mixture of elements, but the 
question between these alternatives was left open. The behaviour 
on liquefaction, however, seemed to prove that in the latter 
case either the proportion of the subordinate constituents 
was small, or else that the various constituents were but little 
contrasted. An attempt, somewhat later, by Ramsay and 
J. Norman Collie to separate argon by diffusion into two parts, 
which should have different densities or refractivities, led to 
no distinct effect. More recently Ramsay and M. W. Travers 
have obtained evidence of the existence in the atmosphere of 
three new gases, besides helium, to which have been assigned 
the names of neon, krypton and xenon. These gases agree with 
argon in respect of the ratio of the specific heats and in being 
non-oxidizable under the electric spark. As originally denned, 
argon included small proportions of these gases, but it is now 
preferable to limit the name to the principal constituent and to 
regard the newer gases as " companions of argon." The physical 
constants associated with the name will scarcely be changed, 
since the proportion of the " companions " is so small. Sir 
William Ramsay considers that probably the volume of all of 
them taken together does not exceed ^T^h P art OI that of the 
argon. The physical properties of these gases are given in the 
following table (Proc. Roy. Soc. lxvii. p. 331, 1900): — 





Helium. 


Neon. 


Argon. 


Krypton. 


Xenon. 


Refractivities 


•1238 


•2345 


•968 


1-449 


2-364 


(air=i) 












Densities 


1-98 


997 


19-96 


40-88 


64 


(0 = i6) 












Boiling points 


c. 6 C1 


? 


86-9" 


121-33° 


163-9° 


at 760 mm. 


abs. 




abs. 


abs. 


abs. 


Critical tem- 


? 


below 


155-6° 


210-5° 


287-7° 


peratures 




68° abs. 


abs. 


abs. 


abs. 


Critical pres- 




? 


40-2 


41-24 


43-5 


sures 






metres. 


metres. 


metres. 


Weight of ice. 


> 


} 


I-2I2 


2-155 


3-52 


of liquid 






gm. 


gm. 


gm. 



The glow obtained in vacuum tubes is highly characteristic, 
whether as seen directly or as analysed by the spectroscope. 

Now that liquid air is available in many laboratories, it forms 
an advantageous starting-point in the preparation of argon. 
Being less volatile than nitrogen, argon accumulates relatively 
as liquid air evaporates. That the proportion of oxygen in- 
creases at the same time is little or no drawback. The following 
analyses (Rayleigh, Phil. Mag., June 1903) of the vapour arising 
from liquid air at various stages of the evaporation will give 
an idea of the course of events: — 



Percentage of 
Oxygen. 


Percentage of 
Argon. 


Argon as a Percentage 

of the Nitrogen and 

Argon. 


30 
43 
64 

75 
90 


1-3 

2-0 
2-0 
2-1 
2-0 


1-9 

3-5 
5-6 

8-4 

20-0 



(R-) 

ARGONAUTS ('kpyovavrai., the sailors of the"Argo"),in Greek 
legend a band of heroes who took part in the Argonautic ex- 
pedition under the command of Jason, to fetch the golden fleece. 
This task had been imposed on Jason by his uncle Pelias (q.v.), 
who had usurped the throne of Iolcus in Thessaly, which 
rightfully belonged to Jason's father Aeson. The story of the 
fleece was as follows. Jason's uncle Athamas had two children, 
Phrixus and Helle, by his wife Nephele, the cloud goddess. 
But after a time he became enamoured of Ino, the daughter of 
Cadmus, .and neglected Nephele, who disappeared in anger. 
Ino, who hated the children of Nephele, persuaded Athamas, 
1 Sir James Dewar, Compt. Rend. (1904), 139, 261 and 241. 



by means of a false oracle, to offer Phrixus as a sacrifice, as the 
only means of alleviating a famine which she herself had caused 
by ordering the grain to be secretly roasted before it was sown. 
But before the sacrifice the shade of Nephele appeared to Phrixus, 
bringing a ram with a golden fleece on which he and his sister 
Helle endeavoured to escape over the sea. Helle fell off and was 
drowned in the strait, which after her was called the Hellespont. 
Phrixus, however, reached the other side in safety, and proceeding 
by land to Aea in Colchis on the farther shore of the Euxine Sea, 
sacrificed the ram, and hung up its fleece in the grove of Ares, 
where it was guarded by a sleepless dragon. 

Jason, having undertaken the quest of the fleece, called upon 
the noblest heroes of Greece to take part in the expedition. 
According to the original story, the crew consisted of the chief 
members of Jason's own race, the Minyae. But when the legend 
became common property, other and better-known heroes were 
added to their number — Orpheus, Castor and Polydeuees 
(Pollux), Zetes and Calais, the winged sons of Boreas, Meleager, 
Theseus, Heracles. The crew was supposed to consist of fifty, 
agreeing in number with the fifty oars of the " Argo," so called 
from its builder Argos, the son of Phrixus, or from apyos (swift). 
It was a larger vessel than had ever been seen before, built of 
pine- wood that never rotted from Moutit Pelion. The goddess 
Athena herself superintended its construction, and inserted in 
the prow a piece of oak from Dodona, which was endowed with 
the power of speaking and delivering oracles. The outward 
course of the " Argo " was the same as that of the Greek traders, 
whose settlements as early as the 6th century B.C. dotted the 
southern shores of the Euxine. The first landing-place was the 
island of Lemnos, which was occupied only by women, who had 
put to death their fathers, husbands and brothers. Here the 
Argonauts remained some months, until they were persuaded 
by Heracles to leave. It is known from Herodotus (iv. 145) 
that the Minyae had formed settlements at Lemnos at a very 
early date. Proceeding up the Hellespont, they sailed to the 
country of the Doliones, by whose king, Cyzicus, they were 
hospitably received. After their departure, being driven back 
to the same place by a storm, they were attacked by the Doliones, 
who did not recognize them, and in a battle which took place 
Cyzicus was killed by Jason. After Cyzicus had been duly 
mourned and buried, the Argonauts proceeded along the coast 
of Mysia, where occurred the incident of Heracles and Hylas 
(q.v.). On reaching the country of the Bebryces, they again 
landed to get water, and were challenged by the king, Amycus, 
to match him with a boxer. Polydeuees came forward, and in 
the end overpowered his adversary, and bound him to a tree, or 
according to others, slew him. At the entrance to the Euxine, 
at Salmydessus on the coast of Thrace, they met Phineus, the 
blind and aged king whose food was being constantly polluted 
by the Harpies. He knew the course to Colchis, and offered 
to tell it, if the Argonauts would free him from the Harpies. 
This was done by the winged sons of Boreas, and Phineus now 
told them their course, and that the way to pass through the 
Symplegades or Cyanean rocks — two cliffs which moved on their 
bases and crushed whatever sought to pass — was first to fly a 
pigeon through, and when the cliffs, having closed on the pigeon, 
began to retire to each side, to row the " Argo " swiftly through. 
His advice was successfully followed, and the " Argo " made 
the passage unscathed, except for trifling damage to the stern. 
From that time the rocks became fixed and never closed again. 
The next halting-places were the country of the Maryandini, 
where the helmsman Tiphys died, and the land of the Amazons 
on the banks of the Thermodon. At the island of Aretias they 
drove away the Stymphalian birds, who used their feathers of 
brass as arrows. Here they found and took on board the four 
sons of Phrixus who, after their father's death, had been sent 
by Aeetes, king of Colchis, to fetch the treasures of Orchomenus, 
but had been driven by a storm upon the island. Passing near 
Mount Caucasus, they heard the groans of Prometheus and the 
flapping of the wings of the eagle which gnawed his liver. They 
now reached their goal, the river Phasis, and the following 
morning Jason repaired to the palace of Aeetes, and demanded 



ARGONNE— ARGOS 



479 



the golden fleece. Aeetes required of Jason that he should first 
yoke to a plough his bulls, given him by Hephaestus, which 
snorted fire and had hoofs of brass, and with them plough the field 
of Ares. That done, the field was to be sown with the dragons' 
teeth brought by Phrixus, from which armed men were to spring. 
Successful so far by means of the mixture which Medea, daughter 
of Aeetes, had given him as proof against fire and sword, Jason 
was next allowed to approach the dragon which watched the 
fleece ; Medea soothed the monster with another mixture, and 
Jason became master of the fleece. Then the voyage homeward 
began, Medea accompanying Jason, and Aeetes pursuing them. 
To delay him and obtain escape, Medea dismembered her young 
brother Absyrtus, whom she had taken with her, and cast his 
limbs about in the sea for his father to pick up. Her plan suc- 
ceeded, and while Aeetes was burying the remains of his son at 
Tomi, Jason and Medea escaped. In another account Absyrtus 
had grown to manhood then, and met his death in an encounter 
with Jason, in pursuit of whom he had been sent. Of the home- 
ward course various accounts are given. In the oldest (Pindar) 
the " Argo " sailed along the river Phasis into the eastern 
Oceanus, round Asia to the south coast of Libya, thence to the 
mythical lake Tritonis, after being carried twelve days over 
land through Libya, and thence again to Iolcus. Hecataeus 
of Miletus (Schol. Apollon. Rhod. iv. 259) suggested that from 
the Oceanus it may have sailed into the Nile, and so to the 
Mediterranean. Others, like Sophocles, described the return 
voyage as differing from the outward course only in taking the 
northern instead of the southern shore of the Euxine. Some 
(pseudo-Orpheus) supposed that the Argonauts had sailed up 
the river Tanais, passed into another river, and by it reached 
the North Sea, returning to the Mediterranean by the Pillars of 
Hercules. Again, others (Apollonius Rhodius) laid down the 
course as up the Danube (Ister), from it into the Adriatic by a 
supposed mouth of that river, and on to Corcyra, where a storm 
overtook them. Next they sailed up the Eridanus into the 
Rhodanus, passing through the country of the Celts and Ligurians 
to the Stoechades, then to the island of Aethalia (Elba), finally 
reaching the Tyrrhenian Sea and the island cf Circe, who absolved 
them from the murder of Absyrtus. Then they passed safely 
through Scylla and Charybdis, past the Sirens, through the 
Planctae, over the island of the Sun, Trinacria and on to Corcyra 
again, the land of the Phaeacians, where Jason and Medea held 
their nuptials. They had sighted the coast of Peloponnesus when 
a storm overtook them and drove them to the coast of Libya, 
where they were saved from a quicksand by the local nymphs. 
The " Argo " was now carried twelve days and twelve nights to 
the Hesperides, and thence to lake Tritonis (where the seer 
Mopsus died), whence Triton conducted them to the Medi- 
terranean. At Crete the brazen Talos, who would not permit 
them to land, was killed by the Dioscuri. At Anaphe, one of the 
Sporades, they were saved from a storm by Apollo. Finally, 
they reached Iolcus, and the " Argo " was placed in a groove 
sacred to Poseidon on the isthmus of Corinth. Jason's death, 
it is said, was afterwards caused by part of the stern giving 
way and falling upon him. 

The story of the expedition of the Argonauts is very old. 
Homer was acquainted with it and speaks of the "Argo" as 
well known to all men; the wanderings of Odysseus may have 
been partly founded on its voyage. Pindar, in the fourth 
Pythian ode. gives the oldest detailed account of it. In Greek, 
there are also extant the Argonautica of Apollonius Rhodius 
and the pseudo-Orpheus (4th century A.D.), and the account in 
Apollodorus (i. 9), based on the best extant authorities; in Latin, 
the imitation of Apollonius (a free translation or adaptation of 
whose Argonautica was made by Terentius Varro Atacinus in the 
time of Cicero) by Valerius Flaccus. In ancient times the expedi- 
tion was regarded as a historical fact, an incident in the opening 
up of the Euxine to Greek commerce and colonization. Its 
object was the acquisition of gold, which was caught by the 
inhabitants of Colchis in fleeces as it was washed down the rivers. 
Suidas says that the fleece was a book written on parchment, which 
taught how to make gold by chemical processes. The rationalists 



explained the ram on which Phrixus crossed the sea as the name 
or ornament of the ship on which he escaped. Several interpreta- 
tions of the legend have been put forward by modern scholars. 
According to C. O. Miiller, it had its origin in the worship of 
Zeus Laphystius; the fleece is the pledge of reconciliation; 
Jason is a propitiating god of health, Medea a goddess akin to 
Hera; Aeetes is connected with, the Colchian sun-worship. 
Forchhammer saw in it an old nature symbolism; Jason, the 
god of healing and fruitfulness, brought the fleece — the fertilizing 
rain-cloud — to the western land that was parched by the heat 
of the sun. Others treat it as a solar myth; the ram is the light 
of the sun, the flight of Phrixus and the death of Helle signify 
its setting, the recovery of the fleece its rising again. 

There are numerous treatises on the subject: F. Vater, Der 
Argonautenzug (1845); J. Stender, De Argonautarum Expeditione 
(1874); D. Kennerknecht, De Argonautarum Fabula (1886); M. 
Groeger, De Argonautarum Fabularum Ilistoria (1889); see also 
Grote, History of Greece, part i. ch. 13; Preller, Griechische Mytho- 
logie; articles in Pauly-Wissowa's Realencyclopadie, Roscher's 
Lexikon der Mythologie, and Daremberg and Saglio's Dictionnaire 
des Antiquites. 

ARGONNE, a rocky forest-clad plateau in the north-east of 
France, extending along the borders of Lorraine and Cham- 
pagne, and forming part of the departments of Ardennes, Meuse 
and Marne. The Argonne stretches from S.S.E. to N.N.W., a 
distance of 63 m. with an average breadth of 1 9 m. , and an average 
height of 1150 ft. It forms the connecting-link between the 
plateaus of Haute Marne and the Ardennes, and is bounded E. 
by the Meuse and W. by the Ante and the Aisne, which rises in 
its southern plateau. The valleys of the Aire and other rivers 
traverse it longitudinally, a fact to which its importance as a 
bulwark of north-eastern France is largely due. Of the numerous 
forests which clothe both slopes of the plateau, the chief is that 
of Argonne, which extends for 25 m. between the Aire and the 
Aisne. 

For Dumouriez's Argonne campaign in 1792, see French Revolu- 
tionary Wars. r 

ARGOS, the name of several ancient Greek cities or districts, 
but specially appropriated in historic times to the chief town in 
eastern Peloponnese, whence the peninsula of Argolis derives 
its name. The Argeia, or territory of Argos proper, consisted 
of a shelving plain at the head of the Gulf of Argolis, enclosed 
between the eastern wall of the Arcadian plateau and the central 
highlands of Argolis. The waters of this valley (Inachus, Chara- 
drus, Erasinus), when properly regulated, favoured the growth 
of excellent crops, and the capital standing only 3 m. from the 
sea was well placed for Levantine trade; Hence Argos was 
perhaps the earliest town of importance in Greece; the legends 
indicate its high antiquity and its early intercourse with foreign 
countries (Egypt, Lycia, &c). Though eclipsed in the Homeric 
age, when it appears as the seat of Diomedes, by the later 
foundation of Mycenae, it regained its predominance after the 
invasion of the Dorians (q.v.), who seem to have occupied this 
site in considerable force. In accordance with the tradition 
which assigned the portion to the eldest-born of the Heracleid 
conquerors, Argos was for some centuries the leading power in 
Peloponnesus. There is good evidence that its sway extended 
originally over the entire Argolis peninsula, the land east of 
Parnon, Cythera, Aegina and Sicyon. Under King Pheidon 
the Argive empire embraced all eastern Peloponnesus, and its 
influence spread even to the western districts. 

This supremacy was first challenged about the 8th century 
by Sparta. Though organized on similar lines, with a citizen 
population divided into three Dorian tribes (and one containing 
other elements), with a class of Perioeci (neighbouring depend- 
ents) and of serfs, the Argives had no more constant foe than 
their Lacedaemonian kinsmen. In a protracted struggle for the 
possession of the eastern seaboard of Laconia in spite of the 
victory at Hysiae (apparently in 669), they were gradually 
driven back, until by 550 they had lost the whole coast strip 
of Cynuria. A later attempt to retrieve this loss resulted in 
a crushing defeat near Tiryns at the hands of King Cleomenes I. 
(probably in 495) , which so weakened the Argives that they 
had to open the franchise to their Perioeci. By this time they 



480 



ARGOS 



had also lost control over the other cities of Argolis, which they 
never succeeded in recovering. Partly in consequence of its 
defeat, partly out of jealousy against Sparta, Argos -took no part 
in the war against Xerxes. Indeed on this, as on later occasions, 
its relations with Persia seem to have been friendly. About 470 
the conflict with Sparta was renewed in concert with the 
Arcadians, but all that the .Argives could achieve was to destroy 
their revolted dependencies of Mycenae and Tiryns (468 or 464). 
In 461 they contracted an alliance with Athens, thus renewing 
a connexion established by Peisistratus (q.v.). In spite of this 
league Argos made no headway against Sparta, and in 451 con- 
sented to a truce. A more important result of Athenian inter- 
vention was the substitution of the democratic government 
for the oligarchy which had succeeded the early monarchy; at 
any rate forty years later we find that Argos possessed complete 
democratic institutions. 

During the early Peloponnesian War Argos remained neutral ; 
after the break-up of the Spartan confederacy consequent upon 
the peace of Nicias the alliance of this state, with its unimpaired 
resources and flourishing commerce, was courted on all sides. 
By throwing in her lot with the Peloponnesian democracies and 
Athens, Argos seriously endangered Sparta's supremacy, but 
the defeat of Mantineia (418) and a successful rising of the Argive 
oligarchs spoilt this chance. The speedily restored democracy 
put little heart into the conflict, and beyond sending mercenary 
detachments, lent Athens no further help in the war (see 
Peloponnesian War). 

At the outset of the 4th century, Argos, with a population 
and resources equalling those of Athens, took a prominent part 
in the Corinthian League against Sparta. In 394 the Argives 
helped to garrison Corinth, and the latter state seems for a while 
to have been annexed by them. But the peace of Antalcidas 
(q.v.) dissolved this connexion, and barred Argive pretensions 
to control all Argolis. After the battle of Leuctra Argos ex- 
perienced a political crisis; the oligarchs attempted a revo- 
lution, but were put down by their opponents with such vin- 
dictiveness that 1200 of them are said to have been executed 
(370). The democracy consistently supported the victorious 
Thebans against Sparta, figuring with a large contingent on the 
decisive field of Mantineia (362). When pressed in turn by their 
old foes the Argives were among the first to call in Philip of 
Macedon, who reinstated them in Cynuria after becoming 
master of Greece. In the Lamian War Argos was induced to 
side with the patriots against Macedonia; after its capture 
by Cassander from Polyperchon (317) it fell in 303 into the hands 
of Demetrius Poliorcetes. In 272 the Argives joined Sparta in 
resisting the ambition of King Pyrrhus of Epirus, whose death 
ensued in an unsuccessful night attack upon the city. They 
passed instead into the power of Antigonus Gonatas of Macedonia, 
who maintained his control by means of tyrants. After several 
unavailing attempts Aratus (q.v.) contrived to win Argos for the 
Achaean League (229), in which it remained save during a brief 
occupation by the Spartans Cleomenes III. (q.v.) and Nabis 
(224 and 196). 

The Roman conquest of Achaea enhanced the prosperity of 
Argos by removing the trade competition of Corinth. Under 
the Empire, Argos was the headquarters of the Achaean synod, 
and continued to be a resort of Roman merchants. Though 
plundered by the Goths in a.d. 267 and 395 it retained some of 
its commerce and culture in Byzantine days. The town was 
captured by the Franks in 1210; after 1246 it was held in fief 
by the rulers of Athens. In later centuries it became the scene 
of frequent conflicts between the Venetians and the Turks, and 
on two occasions (1397 and 1500) its population was massacred 
by the latter. Repeopled with Albanian settlers, Argos was 
chosen as seat of the Greek national assembly in the wars of 
independence. Its citadel was courageously defended by the 
patriots (1822); in 1825 the city was burnt to the ground by 
Ibrahim Pasha. The present town of 10,000 inhabitants is 
a purely agricultural settlement. The Argive plain, though not 
yet sufficiently reclaimed, yields good crops of corn, rice and 
tobacco. 



In the early days of Greece the Argives enjoyed high repute 
for their musical talent. Their school of bronze sculpture, 
whose first famous exponent was Ageladas (Hagelaidas), the 
reputed master of Pheidias, reached its climax towards the end 
of the 5th century in the atelier of Polyclitus (q.v.) and his 
pupils. To this period also belongs the hew Heraeum (see 
below), one of the most splendid temples of Greece. 

Remains of the early city are still visible on the Larissa 
acropolis, which towers 900 ft. high to the north-west of the 
town. A few courses of the ancient ramparts appear under the 
double enceinte of the surviving medieval fortress. An aque- 
duct of Greek times is represented by some fragments on the 
south-western edge. In the slope above the town was hewn a 
theatre equalling that of Athens in size. The Aspis or smaller 
citadel to the north-east has revealed traces of an earlyMycenaean 
settlement; the Deiras or ridge connecting the two heights 
contains a prehistoric cemetery. 

Authorities. — Herodotus, Thucydides, Xenophon; Plutarch, 
Pyrrhus, 30-34; Strabo pp. 373-374; Pausanias ii. 15-24; W. M. 
Leake, Travels in the Morea (London, 1835), "• cn s. 19-22 ; E. Curtius, 
Peloponnesos (Gotha, 1851), ii. 350-364; H. F. Tozer, Geography 
of Greece (London, 1873), pp. 292-294; J. K. Kophiniotis, 'laropia toO 
"Apyovs (Athens, 1892-1893); W. Vollgraff in Bulletin de Corre- 
spondance Hellenique (1904, pp. 364-399; 1906, pp. I-45; 1907, 
pp. 139-184). (M.O.B.C.) 

The Argive Heraeum. — Since 1892 investigation has added 
considerably to our knowledge concerning the Argive Heraeum 
or Heraion, the temple of Hera, which stood, according to 
Pausanias, " on one of the lower slopes of Euboea." The term 
Euboea did not designate the eminence upon which the Heraeum 
is placed, or the mountain-top behind the Heraeum only, but, 
as Pausanias distinctly indicates, the group of foothills of the 
hilly district adjoining the mountain. When once we admit that 
this designated not only the mountain, which is 1730 ft. high, 
but also the hilly district adjoining it, the general scale of distance 
for this site grows larger. The territory of the Heraeum was 
divided into three parts, namely Euboea, Acraea and Prosymna. 
Pausanias tells us that the Heraeum is 15 stadia from Mycenae. 
Strabo, on the other hand, says that the Heraeum was 40 stadia 
from Argos and 10 from Mycenae. Both authors underestimate 
the distance from Mycenae, which is about 25 stadia, or a little 
more than 3 m., while the distance from Argos is 45 stadia, or a 
little more than 5 m. The distance from the Heraeum to the 
ancient Midea is slightly greater than to Mycenae, while that 
from the Heraeum to Tiryns is about 6 m. The Argive Heraeum 
was the most important centre of Hera and Juno worship in the 
ancient world; it always remained the chief sanctuary of the 
Argive district, and was in all probability the earliest site of 
civilized life in the country inhabited by the Argive people. In 
fact, whereas the site of Hissarlik, the ancient Troy, is not in 
Greece proper, but in Asia Minor, and can thus not furnish the 
most direct evidence for the earliest Hellenic civilization as such; 
and whereas Tiryns, Mycenae, and the city of Argos, each 
represent only one definite period in the successive stages of 
civilization, the Argive Heraeum, holding the central site of 
early civilization in Greece proper, not only retained its import- 
ance during the three periods marked by the supremacy of 
Tiryns, Mycenae and the city of Argos, but in all probability 
antedated them as a centre of civilized Argive life. These con- 
ditions alone account for the extreme archaeological importance 
of this ancient sanctuary. 

According to tradition the Heraeum was founded by Phoro- 
neus at least thirteen generations before Agamemnon and the 
Achaeans ruled. It is highly probable that before it became 
important merely as a temple, it was the fortified centre uniting 
the Argive people dwelling in the plain, the citadel which was 
superseded in this function by Tiryns. There is ample evidence 
to show that it was the chief sanctuary during the Tirynthian 
period. When Mycenae was built under the Perseiids it was 
still the chief sanctuary for that. centre, which superseded Tiryns 
in its dominance over the district, and which this temple clearly 
antedated in construction. According to the Dictys Cretensis, 
it was at this Heraeum that Agamemnon assembled the leaders 



ARGOS 



481 



before setting out for Troy. In the period of Dorian supremacy, 
in spite of the new cults which were introduced by these people, 
the Heraeum maintained its supreme importance: it was here 
that the tablets recording the succession of priestesses were kept 
which served as a chronological standard for the Argive people, 
and even far beyond their borders; 'and it was here that 
Pheidon deposited the 6fie\i<TKoi when he introduced coinage 
into Greece. 

We learn from Strabo that the Heraeum was the joint 
sanctuary for Mycenae and Argos. But in the 5th century the 
city of Argos vanquished the Mycenaeans, and from that time 
onwards the city of Argos becomes the political centre of the 
district, while the Heraeum remains the religious centre. And 
frhen in the year 423 B.C., through the negligence of the priestess 
Chryseis. the old temple was burnt down, the Argives erected a 
splendid new temple, built by Eupolemos, in which was placed the 
great gold and ivory statue of Hera, by the sculptor Polyclitus, 



the Cyclopean wall and below it were found traces of small 
houses of the rudest, earliest masonry which are pre-Mycenaean, 
if not pre-Cyclopean. 

We then descend to the second terrace, in the centre of which 
the' substructure of the great second temple was revealed, 
together with so much of the walls, as well as the several archi- 
tectural members forming the superstructure, that it has been 
possible for E. L. Tilton to design a complete restoration of the 
temple. On the northern side of this terrace, between the second 
temple and the Cyclopean supporting wall, a long stoa or colon- 
nade runs from east to west abutting at the west end in structures 
which evidently contained a well-house and waterworks; while 
at the eastern end of this stoa a number of chambers were erected 
against the hill, in front of which were placed statues and 
inscriptions, the bases for which are still extant. At the eastern- 
most end of this second terrace a large hall with three rows of 
columns in the interior, with a porch and entrance at the west 




Plan of the Heraeum (surveyed and drawn by Edward L. Tilton). 
I. Old Temple. IV. East Building. VII. West Building. X. Lower Stoa. 

II. Stoa. V. 5th-Century Temple. , VIII. North- West Building. XI. Phylakeion. 

Ill- Stoa. VI. South Stoa. IX. Roman Building. A, B, C, D, E, F, Cisterns. 



tue contemporary and rival of Pheidias, which was one of the 
inost perfect works of sculpture in antiquity. Pausanias 
describes the temple and its contents (ii. 17), and in his time 
he still saw the ruins of the older burnt temple above the 
temple of Eupolemos. 

All these facts have been verified and illustrated by the 
jxcavations of the American Archaeological Institute and School 
of Athens, which were carried on from 1892 to 1895. In 1854 
A. R. Rhangabe made tentative excavations on this site, digging 
a trench along the north and east sides of the second temple. 
Of these excavations no trace was to be seen when those of 
1892 were begun. The excavations have shown that the 
sanctuary, instead of consisting of but one temple with the ruins 
of the older one above it, contained at least eleven separate 
buildings, occupying an area of about 975 ft. by 325. 

On the uppermost terrace, defined by the great Cyclopean 
supporting wall, exactly as described by Pausanias, the excava- 
tions revealed a layer of ashes and charred wood, below which 
were found numerous objects of earliest date, together with 
some remains of the walls resting on a polygonal platform— all 
forming part of the earliest temple. Immediately adjoining 
11. 16 



end facing the temple, is built upon elaborate supporting walls 
of good masonry. 

Below the second terrace at the south-west end a large and 
complicated building, with an open courtyard surrounded on three 
sides by a colonnade and with chambers opening out towards the 
north, may have served as a gymnasium or a sanatorium. It is 
of good early Greek architecture, earlier than the second temple. 
A curious, ruder building to the north of this and to the west of 
the second terrace is probably of much earlier date, perhaps of 
the Mycenaean period, and may have served as propylaea. 

Immediately below the second temple at the foot of the eleva- 
tion on which this temple stands, towards the south, and thus 
facing the city of Argos, a splendid stoa or colonnade, to which 
large flights of steps lead, was erected about the time of the 
building of the second temple. It is a part of the great plan to 
give worthy access to the temple from the city of Argos. To the 
east of this large flights of steps lead up to the temple proper. 

At the western extremity of the whole site, immediately beside 
the river-bed, we again have a huge stoa running round two sides 
of a square, which was no doubt connected with the functions of 
this sanctuary as a health resort, especially for women, the goddess 

ir 



482 



ARGOSTOLI— ARGUMENT 



Hera presiding over and protecting married life and childbirth. 
Finally, immediately. to the north of this western stoa there is 
an extensive house of Roman times also connected with baths. 

While the buildings give archaeological evidence for every 
period of Greek life and history from the pre-Mycenaean period 
down to Roman times, the topography itself shows that the 
Heraeum must have been constructed before Mycenae and 
without any regard to it. The foothills which it occupies form 
the western boundary to the Argive plain as it stretches down 
towards the sea in the Gulf of Nauplia. While it was thus 
probably chosen as the earliest site for a citadel facing the sea, 
its second period points towards Tiryns and Midea. It could not 
have been built as the sanctuary of Mycenae, which was placed 
farther up towards the north-west in the hills, and could not 
be seen from the Heraeum, its inhabitants again not being able 
to see their sanctuary. The west building, the traces of bridges 
and roads, show that at one time it did hold some relation to 
Mycenae; but this was long after its foundation or the building 
of the huge Cyclopean supporting wall which is coeval with the 
walls of Tiryns, these again being earlier than those of Mycenae. 
There are, moreover, traces of still more primitive walls, built 
of rude small stones placed one upon the other without mortar, 
which are in character earlier than those of Tiryns, and have 
their parallel in the lowest layers of Hissarlik. 

Bearing out the evidence of tradition as well as architecture, 
the numerous finds of individual objects in terra-cotta figurines, 
vases, bronzes, engraved stones, &c, point to organized civilized 
life on this site many generations before Mycenae was built, 
a fortiori before the life as depicted by Homer flourished— nay, 
before, as tradition has it, under Proetus the walls of Tiryns 
were erected. We are aided in forming some estimate of the 
chronological sequence preceding the Mycenaean age, as suggested 
by the finds of the Heraeum, in the new distribution which 
Dorpfeld has been led to make of the chronological stratifica- 
tion of Hissarlik. For the layer, which he now assigns to the 
Mycenaean period, is the sixth stratum from below. Now, as some 
of the remains at the Heraeum correspond to the two lowest layers 
of Hissarlik, the evidence of the Argive temple leads us far beyond 
the date assigned to the Mycenaean age, and at least into the 
second millennium B.C. (see also Aegean Civilization). As to 
its chronological relation to the Cretan sites — Cnossus, Phaestus, 
&c, and the "Minoan" civilization as determined by Dr A.Evans, 
see the discussion under Crete. 

This sanctuary still holds a position of central importance as 
illustrating the art of the highest period in Greek history, namely, 
the art of the 5th century B.C. under the great sculptor Poly- 
clitus. Though the excavations in the second temple have 
clearly revealed the outlines of the base upon which the great 
gold and ivory statue of Hera stood, it is needless to say that 
no trace of the statue itself has been found. From Pausanias 
we learn that " the image of Hera is seated and is of colossal 
size: it is made of gold and ivory, and is the work of Poly- 
clitus." Based on the computations made by the architect of the 
American excavations, E. L. Tilton, on the ground of the height 
of the nave, the total height of the image, including the base 
and the top of the throne, would be about 26 ft., the seated figure 
of the goddess herself about 18 ft. It is probable that the face, 
neck, arms and feet were of ivory, while the rest of the figure 
was draped in gold. Like the Olympian Zeus of Pheidias, Hera 
was seated on an elaborately decorated throne, holding in her 
left hand the sceptre, surmounted in her case by the cuckoo 
(as that of Zeus had an eagle), and in her right, instead of an 
elaborate figure of Victory (such as the Athena Parthenos and 
the Olympian Zeus held), simply a pomegranate. The crown 
was adorned with figures of Graces and the Seasons. A Roman 
imperial coin of Antoninus Pius shows us on a reduced scale the 
general composition of the figure; while contemporary Argive 
coins of the 5th century give a fairly adequate rendering of the 
head. A further attempt has been made to identify the head 
in a beautiful marble bust in the British Museum hitherto 
known as Bacchus (Waldstein, Journal of Hellenic Studies, 
vol. xxi., 1901, pp. 30 seq.) 



We also learn from Pausanias that the temple was decorated 
with." sculptures over the columns, representing some the birth 
of Zeus and the battle of the gods and giants, others the Trojan 
War and the taking of Ilium." It was formerly supposed that 
the phrase " over the columns" pointed to the existence of sculp- 
tured metopes, but no pedimental groups. Finds made in the 
excavations, however, have shown that the temple also had pedi- 
mental groups. Besides numerous fragments of nude and draped 
figures belonging to pedimental statues, a well-preserved and 
very beautiful head of a female divinity, probably Hera, as well 
as a draped female torso of excellent workmanship, both belong- 
ing to the pediments, have been discovered. Of the metopes 
also a great number of fragments have been found, together 
with two almost complete metopes, the one containing the torso 
of a nude warrior in perfect preservation, as well as ten well- 
preserved heads. These statues bear the same relation to the 
sculptor Polyclitus which the Parthenon marbles hold to 
Pheidias; and the excavations have thus yielded most important 
material for the illustration of the Argive art of Polyclitus in 
the 5th century B.C. 

See Waldstein, The Argive Heraeum (vol. i., Boston and New York, 
1902; vol. ii., the Vases by J. C. Hoppin, the Bronzes by H. F. de 
Cosa, 1905); Excavations of the American School of Athens at the 
Heraion of Argos (1892); and numerous reports and articles in the 
American Archaeological Journal since 1892. (C W. *) 

ARGOSTOLI (anc. Cephallenia) , the capital of Cephalonia 
(one of the Ionian islands), and the seat of a bishop of the Greek 
church. Pop. about 10,000. It possesses an excellent harbour, 
a quay a mile in length, and a fine bridge. Shipbuilding and 
silk-spinning are carried on. Near at hand are the ruins of 
Cranii, which afford fine examples of Greek military architecture; 
and at the west side of the harbour there is a curious stream, 
flowing from the sea, and employed to drive mills before losing 
itself in caverns inland. 

See Sir C. Fellows'g Journal of an Excursion in Asia Minor in 
1838, and Wiebel's Die Insel Kephalonia und die Meermuhlen von 
Argostoli (Hamburg, 1873). 

ARGOSY (a corruption, by transposition of letters, of the 
name of the seaport Ragusa), the term originally for a carrack 
or merchant ship from Ragusa and other Adriatic ports, now used 
poetically of any vessel carrying rich merchandise. In English 
writings of the 16th century the seaport named is variously 
spelt Ragusa, Aragouse or Aragosa, and ships coming thence 
were named Ragusyes, Arguzes and Argosies; the last form 
surviving and passing into literature. The incorrect derivation 
from Jason's ship, the " Argo," is of modern origin. 

ARGUIN, an island, (identified by some writers with Hanno's 
Cerne), off the west coast of Africa, a little south of Cape Blanco, 
in 20 25' N., 16 37' W. It is some 4 m. long by 25 broad, 
produces gum-arabic, and is the seat of a lucrative turtle-fishery. 
Off the island, which was discovered by the Portuguese in the 
15th century, are extensive and very dangerous reefs. Arguin 
was occupied in turn by Portuguese, Dutch, English and French; 
and to France it now belongs. The aridity of the soil and the 
bad anchorage prevent a permanent settlement. The fishery 
is mostly carried on by inhabitants of the Canary Isles. In 
July 1816 the French frigate " Medusa," which carried officers 
on their way to Senegal to take possession of that country for 
France, was wrecked off Arguin, 350 lives being lost. 
. ARGUMENT, a word meaning "proof," "evidence," corre- 
sponding in English to the Latin word argumentum, from which 
it is derived; the originating Latin verb arguere, to make clear, 
from which comes the English " argue," is from a root meaning 
bright, appearing in Greek apyos, white. From its primary 
sense are derived such applications of the word as a chain of 
reasoning, a fact or reason given to support a proposition, a 
discussion of the evidence or reasons for or against some theory 
or proposition and the like. More particularly " argument " 
means a synopsis of the contents of a book, the outline of a novel, 
play, &c. In logic it is used for the middle term in a syllogism, 
and for many species of fallacies, such as the argumentum ad 
hominem, ad baculum, &c. (see Fallacy). In mathematics the 
term has received special meanings ; in mathematical tables 



ARGUS— ARGYLL 



483 



the " argument " is the quantity upon which the other quantities 
in the table are made to depend; in the theory of complex 
variables, e.g. such as a-\-ib where » = V-i, the "argument" 
(or "amplitude") is the angle 8 given by tan 6 =b/a. In 
astronomy, the term is used in connexion with the Ptolemaic 
theory to denote the angular distance on the epicycle of a planet 
from the true apogee of the epicycle; and the " equation to the 
argument " is the angle subtended at the earth by the distance 
of a planet from the centre of the epicycle. 

ARGUS, in ancient Greek mythology, the son of Inachus, 
Agenor or Arestor, or, according to others, an earth-born hero 
(autochthon). He was called Panoptes (all-seeing), from having 
eyes all over his body. After performing several feats of valour, 
he was appointed by Hera to watch the cow into which Io had 
been transformed. While doing this he was slain by Hermes, 
who stoned him to death, or put him to sleep by playing on the 
flute and then cut off his head. His eyes were transferred 
by Hera to the tail of the peacock. Argus with his countless 
eyes originally denoted the starry heavens (Apollodorus ii. 1; 
Aeschylus, P. V. 569; Ovid, Metam. i. 264). 

Another Argus, the old dog of Odysseus, who recognized his 
master on his return to Ithaca, figures in one of the best-known 
incidents in Homer's Odyssey (xvii. 291-326). 

ARGYLL, EARLS AND DUKES OF. The rise of this family 
of Scottish peers, originally the Campbells of Lochow, and first 
ennobled as Barons Campbell, is referred to in the article Argyll- 
shire. 

Archibald Campbell, 5th earl of Argyll (1530-1573), was 
the elder son of Archibald, 4th earl of Argyll (d. 1558), and a 
grandson of Colin, the 3rd earl (d. 1530). His great-grandfather 
was the 2nd earl, Archibald, who was killed at Flodden in 15 13, 
and this nobleman's father was Colin, Lord Campbell (d. 1493), 
the founder of the greatness of the Campbell family, who was 
created earl of Argyll in 1457. With Lord James Stuart, after- 
wards the regent Murray, the 5th earl of Argyll became an 
adherent of John Knox about 1556, and like his father was one 
of the most influential members of the party of religious reform, 
signing what was probably the first " godly band " in December 
1557. As one of the " lords of the congregation " he was one of 
James Stuart's principal lieutenants during the warfare between 
the reformers and the regent, Mary of Lorraine; and later with 
Murray he advised and supported Mary queen of Scots, who 
regarded him with great favour. It was about this time that 
William Cecil, afterwards Lord Burghley, referred to Argyll as 
" a goodly gentleman universally honoured of all Scotland." 
Owing to his friendship with Mary, Argyll was separated from 
the party of Knox, but he forsook the queen when she deter- 
mined to marry Lord Darnley; he was, however, again on 
Mary's side after Queen Elizabeth's refusal to aid Murray in 1565. 
Argyll was probably an accomplice in the murder of Rizzio; 
he was certainly a consenting party to that of Darnley, and then 
separating himself from Murray he commanded Mary's soldiers 
after her escape from Lochleven, and by his want of courage and 
resolution was partly responsible for her defeat at Langside 
in May 1568. Soon afterwards he made his peace with Murray, 
but it is possible that he was accessory to the regent's murder 
in 1570. After this event Argyll became lord high chancellor 
of Scotland, and he died on the 12th of September 1573. His 
first wife was an illegitimate daughter of James V., and he was 
thus half-brother-in-law to Mary and to Murray. His relations 
with her were not harmonious; he was accused of adultery, 
and in 1568 he performed a public penance at Stirling. 

He left no children, and on his death his half-brother Colin 
(d. 1584) became 6th earl of Argyll. This nobleman, whose life 
was partly spent in feuds with the regent Morton, died in October 
I584. He was succeeded as 7 th earl by his young son Archibald 
(1 576-1638), who became a Roman Catholic, fought for Philip III. 
of Spain in Flanders, whither he had gone to avoid his creditors, 
and, having entrusted the care of his estates to his son, died 
in London. 

Archibald Campbell, 1st marquess and 8th earl of Argyll 
(1607-1661), eldest son of Archibald, 7th earl, by his first wife, 



Lady Anne Douglas, daughter of William, 1st earl of Morton, was 
born in 1607 1 and educated at St Andrews University, where he 
matriculated on the 15th of January 1622. He had early in 
life, as Lord Lome, been entrusted with the possession of the 
Argyll estates when his father renounced Protestantism and took 
service with Philip of Spain; and he exercised over his clan an 
authority almost absolute, disposing of a force of 20,00c retainers, 
and being, according to Baillie, " by far the most powerful subject 
in the kingdom." On the outbreak of the religious dispute 
between the king and Scotland in 1637 his support was eagerly 
desired by Charles I. He had been made a privy councillor in 
1628, and in 1638 the king summoned him, together with Tra- 
quair and Roxburgh, to London; but he refused to be won over, 
openly and courageously warned Charles against his despotic 
ecclesiastical policy, and showed great hostility towards Laud. 
In consequence a secret commission was given to the earl of 
Antrim to invade Argyllshire and stir up the Macdonalds against 
the Campbells, a wild and foolish project which completely 
miscarried. Argyll, who inherited the title by the death of his 
father in 1638, had originally no preference for Presbyterianism, 
but now definitely took the side of the Covenanters in defence of 
the national religion and liberties. He continued to attend the 
meetings of the Assembly after its dissolution by the marquess oi 
Hamilton, when Episcopacy was abolished. In 1639 he sent a 
statement to Laud, and subsequently to the king, defending the 
Assembly's action; and raising a body of troops he seized 
Hamilton's castle of Brodick in Arran. After the pacification 
of Berwick he carried a motion, in opposition to Montrose, by 
which the estates secured to themselves the election of the lords 
of the articles, who had formerly been nominated by the king, a 
fundamental change in the Scottish constitution, whereby the 
management of public affairs was entrusted to a representative 
body and withdrawn from the control of the crown. An attempt 
by the king to deprive him of his office as justiciary of Argyll and 
Tarbet failed, and on the prorogation of the parliament by 
Charles, in May 1640, Argyll moved that it should continue its 
sittings and that the government and safety of the kingdom 
should be secured by a committee of the estates, of which, though 
not a member, he was himself the guiding spirit. In June he was 
entrusted with a " commission of fire and sword " against the 
royalists in Atholl and Angus, which, after succeeding in entrap- 
ping the earl of Atholl, he carried out with completeness and 
some cruelty. It was on this occasion that took place the burning 
of " the bonnie house of Airlie." By this time the personal 
rivalry and difference in opinion between Montrose and Argyll 
had led to an open breach. The former arranged that on the 
occasion of Charles's approaching visit to Scotland, Argyll should 
be accused of high treason in the parliament. The plot, how- 
ever, was disclosed, and Montrose with others was imprisoned. 
Accordingly when the king arrived he found himself deprived of 
every remnant of influence and authority. It only remained for 
Charles to make a series of concessions. He transferred the 
control over judicial and political appointments to the parlia- 
ment, created Argyll a marquess (1641) with a pension of £1000 a 
year, and returned home, having in Clarendon's words " made a 
perfect deed of gift of that kingdom." Meanwhile the king's 
policy of peace and concession had, as usual, been rudely and 
treacherously interrupted by a resort to force, an unsuccessful 
attempt, known as the " incident," being made to kidnap 
Argyll, Hamilton and Lanark. Argyll was mainly instrumental 
at this crisis in keeping the national party faithful to what was 
to him evidently the common cause, and in accomplishing the 
alliance with the Long Parliament in 1643. In January 1644 he 
accompanied the Scottish army into England as a member of the 
committee of both kingdoms and in command of a troop of horse, 
but was soon in March compelled to return to suppress royalist 
movements in the north and to defend his own territories. He 
compelled Huntly to retreat in April, and in July advanced to 
meet the Irish troops now landed in Argyllshire, which were 
acting in conjunction with Montrose, who had put himself at the 

1 The date of 1598, previously accepted, is shown by Willcock to 
be incorrect. 



4 8 4 



ARGYLL 



head of the royalist forces in Scotland. A campaign followed in 
the north in which neither general succeeded in obtaining any 
advantage over the other, or even in engaging battle. Argyll 
then returned to Edinburgh, threw up his commission, and 
retired to Inveraray Castle. Thither Montrose unexpectedly 
followed him in December, compelled him to flee to Roseneath, 
and devastated his territories. On the 2nd of February 1645, 
when following Montrose northwards, Argyll was surprised by 
him at Inverlochy and witnessed from his barge on the lake, to 
which he had retired owing to a dislocated arm, a fearful slaughter 
of his troops, which included 1 500 of the Campbells. He arrived 
at Edinburgh on the 12th of February and was again present 
at Montrose's further great victory on the 15th of August at 
Kilsyth, whence he escaped to Newcastle. Argyll was at last 
delivered from his formidable antagonist by Montrose's final 
defeat at Philiphaugh on the 1 2th of September. In 1646 he was 
sent to negotiate with the king at Newcastle after his surrender 
to the Scottish army, when he endeavoured to moderate the 
demands of the parliament and at the same time to persuade the 
king to accept them. On the 7th of July 1646 he was appointed 
a member of the Assembly of Divines. 

Up to this point the statesmanship of Argyll had been highly 
successful. The national liberties and religion of Scotland had 
been defended and guaranteed, and the power of the king in 
Scotland reduced to a mere shadow. In addition, these privi- 
leges had been still further secured by. the alliance with 
the English opposition, and by the subsequent triumph of the 
parliament and Presbyterianism in the neighbouring kingdom. 
The sovereign himself, after vainly contending in arms, was a 
prisoner in their midst. But Argyll's influence could not survive 
the rupture of the alliance between the two nations on which his 
whole policy was constructed. He opposed in vain the secret 
treaty now concluded between the king and the Scots against the 
parliament, and while Hamilton "marched into England and was 
defeated by Cromwell at Preston, Argyll, after a narrow escape 
from a surprise at Stirling, joined the Whiggamores, a body of 
Covenanters at Edinburgh; and, supported by Loudon, Leven 
and Leslie, he established a new government, which welcomed 
Cromwell on his arrival there on the 4th of October. This alliance, 
however, was at once destroyed by the execution of Charles I., 
which excited universal horror in Scotland. In the series of 
tangled incidents which followed, Argyll lost control of the 
national policy. He describes himself at this period as " a 
distracted man . . . in a distracted time " whose " remedies 
. . . had the quite contrary operation." He supported the 
invitation from the Covenanters to Charles II. to land in Scotland, 
gazed upon the captured Montrose, bound on a cart on his way to 
execution at Edinburgh, and subsequently, when Charles II. 
came to Scotland, having signed the Covenant and repudiated 
Montrose, Argyll remained at the head of the administration. 
After the defeat of Dunbar, Charles retained his support by the 
promise of a dukedom and the Garter, and an attempt was made 
by Argyll to marry the king to his daughter. On the 1st of 
January 1651 he placed the crown on Charles's head at Scone, 
But his power had now passed to the Hamilton party. He 
strongly opposed, but was unable to prevent, the expedition into 
England, and in the subsequent reduction of Scotland, after 
having held out in Inveraray Castle for nearly a year, was at last 
surprised in August 1632 and submitted to the Commonwealth. 
His ruin was then complete. His policy had failed, his power had 
vanished. In his estate he was hopelessly in debt, and on terms 
of such violent hostility with his eldest son as to be obliged to 
demand a garrison in his house for his protection. During his 
visit to Monk at Dalkeith in 1654 to complain of this, he was 
subjected to much persona] insult from his creditors, and on 
visiting London in September 1655 to obtain money due to him 
from the Scottish parliament, he was arrested for debt, though 
soon liberated. In Richard Cromwell's parliament of 1659 
Argyll sat as member for Aberdeenshire. At the Restoration he 
presented himself at Whitehall, but was at once arrested by order 
of Charles and placed in the Tower (1 660) , being sent to Edinburgh 
to stand his trial for high treason. He was acquitted of com- 



plicity in the death of Charles I., and his escape from the whole 
charge seemed imminent, but the arrival of a packet of letters 
written by Argyll to Monk showed conclusively his collaboration 
with Cromwell's government, particularly in the suppression 
of Glencairn's royalist rising in 1652. He was immediately 
sentenced to death, his execution by beheading taking place on 
the 27th of May 1661, before even the death warrant had been 
signed by the king. His head was placed on the same spike 
upon the west end of the Tolbooth on which that of Montrose 
had previously been exposed, and his body was buried at the 
Holy Loch, where the head was also deposited in 1664. A 
monument was erected to his memory in St Giles's church in 
Edinburgh in 1895. 

While imprisoned in the Tower he wrote Instructions to a 
Son (1661; reprinted in 1689 and 1743). Some of his speeches, 
including the one delivered on the scaffold, were published 
and are printed in the Harleian Miscellany. He married Lady 
Margaret Douglas, daughter of William, 2nd earl of Morton, and 
had two sons and four daughters. 

See also the Life and Times of Archibald Marquis of Argyll (1903), 
by John Willcock, who prints for the first time the six incriminating 
letters to Monk; Eng. Hist. Review, xviii. 369 and 624; Scottish 
History Society, vol. xvii. (1894) ; Charles II. and Scotland in 1650, 
ed. by S. R. Gardiner, and vol. xviii. (1895) ; History of Scotland, 
by A. Lang, vol. iii. (1904). 

Archibald Campbell, 9th earl of Argyll (1620-1683), eldest 
son of the 8th earl, studied abroad, and at the age of thirteen 
was appointed captain in the Scottish regiment serving in 
France under his uncle the earl of Irvine. He returned home 
at the close of 1649, an d was made captain of Charles II.'s life 
guards on the king's arrival in Scotland in 1650. He declared 
himself a royalist in opposition to his father, with the view, as 
some said, of securing the family estates in any event. He 
fought at Dunbar on the 3rd of September 1650, and after the 
battle of Worcester joined Glencairn in the Highlands. Bitter 
disputes arose, and on the 2nd of January 1654 Lome, quitting 
his troops, fled to avoid arrest. In 1655 he submitted to Monk. 
He appears, however, to have maintained communications with 
Charles, and on his refusal to take the oath renouncing allegiance 
to the Stuarts in 1657 he was imprisoned, remaining in confine- 
ment probably till a short time before the Restoration. He 
was then well received at court by Charles II. After the execu- 
tion of his father, he endeavoured to obtain the restitution of his 
forfeited estates and title, but having incautiously attacked 
certain members of the government in letters which were made 
public, he was indicted at Edinburgh on the capital charge of 
" leasing-making " and was sentenced to death on the 26th of 
August. He remained a prisoner in Edinburgh Castle till the 
4th of June 1663, when the sentence was cancelled and he was 
re-created earl and restored to his estates. He disapproved 
of the severities practised upon the Covenanters in the west, 
and in 1671 pleaded for milder methods. His staunch Protest- 
antism rendered him exceedingly obnoxious to James, duke of 
York, who in 1680 arrived as high commissioner in Scotland 
and at once expressed his jealousy of Argyll's immense terri- 
torial influence. Argyll moved the re-enactment of " all the acts 
against popery " omitted on James's account, and opposed the 
exemption of the royal family from the test, though allowing 
it in the case of James. In signing the test himself, in its final 
form both ambiguous and self-contradictory, he made the 
reservation " so far as consistent with itself and the Protestant 
faith," and declined to engage himself not'to promote any altera- 
tion of advantage in church or state. On his refusal to record 
his oath in writing and to sign it, he was dismissed from the 
Scottish privy council, and on the 9th of November 1681 was 
accused of treason, a charge which Halifax declared openly in 
England "they would not hang a dog upon." A trial followed, 
a scandalous exhibition of illegality and injustice, at the close 
of which Argyll was sentenced to death and to the forfeiture of 
his estates. Shortly afterwards, ' through the instrumentality 
of his step-daughter, Sophia Lindsay, he succeeded in making 
his escape, and after some adventures retired to Holland. His 
subsequent movements are uncertain, but he appears to have 



ARGYLL 



485 



again visited London, and was in correspondence with the Rye 
House plotters and proposing to head a rebellion in Scotland 
in 1683. In 1685 he joined the conspiracy in Holland to set 
Monmouth on the throne instead of James II., arriving in Orkney 
on the 6th of May and making his way to his own country. But 
his clansmen refused to join him, and whatever small chances of 
success remained were destroyed by constant and paralysing 
disputes. His ships and ammunition were captured, and after 
some aimless wanderings he found himself deserted, with but 
one companion, Major Fullerton. On the 18th of June he was 
taken prisoner at Inchinnan and arrived at Edinburgh on the 
20th, where he was paraded through the streets and put in 
irons in the castle. James ordered his summary execution on 
the 29th, and it was carried out by beheading on the following 
day, on the old charge of 1681. His head was exposed on the 
west side of the Tolbooth, where his father's and Montrose's 
had also been exhibited, his body finding its final place of burial 
at Inveraray. 

By his first wife, Lady Mary Stewart, daughter of the 4th 
earl of Moray (Murray), he had four sons and three daughters. 

See Argyll Papers (1834) ; Letters from Archibald, gth Karl of At gyle, 
to the Duke of Lauderdale (1829) ; Hist. MSS. Comm. vi. Rep. 606; 
Life of Mr Donald Cargile, by P. Walker, pp. 45 et seq.; The 3rd 
Part of the Protestant Plot . . . and a Brief Account of the Case of the 
Earl of Argyle (1682); Sir George Mackenzie's Hist, of Scotland, 
p. 70; and J. Willcock, A Scots Earl in Covenanting Times (1908). 

Archibald Campbell, 1st duke of Argyll (?i6si-i703), was 
the eldest son of the 9th earl. He tried to get his father's 
attainder reversed by seeking the king's favour, but being un- 
successful he went over to the Hague and joined William of 
Orange as an active promoter of the revolution of 1688. In 
spite of the attainder, he was admitted in 1689 to the convention 
of the Scottish estates as earl of Argyll, and he was deputed, 
with Sir James Montgomery and Sir John Dalrymple, to present 
the crown to William III. in its name, and to tender him the 
coronation oath. In 1600 an act was passed restoring his title 
and estates, and it was in connexion with the refusal of the 
Macdonalds of Glencoe to join in the submission to him that 
he organized the terrible massacre which has made his name 
notorious. In 1696 he was made a lord of the treasury, and his 
political services were rewarded in 1701 by his being created 
duke of Argyll. He had two sons by his wife Elizabeth, daughter 
of Sir Lionel Talmash, John (the 2nd duke) and Archibald (the 
3rd duke). 

John Campbell, 2nd duke of Argyll and duke of Greenwich 
(1678-1743), was born on the 10th of October 1678. He entered 
the army in 1694, and in 1701 was promoted to the command 
of a regiment. On the death of his father in 1703, he was ap- 
pointed a member of the privy council, and at the same time 
colonel of the Scotch horse guards, and one of the extraordinary 
lords of session. In return for his services in promoting the 
Union, he was created (1705) a peer of England, by the titles 
of baron of Chatham and earl of Greenwich, and in 1710 was 
made a knight of the Garter. He first distinguished himself 
in a military capacity at the battle of Oudenarde (1708), where 
he served as a brigadier-general; and was afterwards present 
under the duke of Marlborough at the sieges of Lille, Ghent, 
Bruges and Tournay, and did remarkable service at the battle 
of Malplaquet in 1709. He was very popular with the troops, 
and his rivalry with Marlborough on this account is thought to 
have been the cause of the enmity shown by Argyll afterwards 
to his old commander. In 17 n he was sent to take command 
in Spain ; but being seized with a violent fever at Barcelona, and 
disappointed of supplies from home, he returned to England. 
Having a seat in the House of Lords, and being gifted with an 
extraordinary power of oratory, he censured the measures of the 
ministry with such freedom that all his places were disposed of 
to other noblemen; but at the accession of George I. he recovered 
his influence. On the breaking out of the rebellion in 1715 he 
was appointed commander-in-chief of the forces in North Britain, 
and was principally instrumental in effecting the total extinc- 
tion of the rebellion in Scotland without much bloodshed. He 
arrived in London early in March 1716, and at first stood high 



in the favour of the king, but in a few months was stripped of 
his offices. This disgrace, however, did not deter him from the 
discharge of his parliamentary duties; he supported the bill 
for the impeachment of Bishop Atterbury, and lent his aid to 
his countrymen by opposing the bill for punishing the city of 
Edinburgh for the Porteous riot. In the beginning of the year 
1 7 19 he was again admitted into favour, appointed lord steward 
of the household, and, in April following, created duke of Green- 
wich; he held various offices in succession, and in 1735 was 
made a field marshal. He continued in the administration till 
after the accession of George II., when, in April 1740, a violent 
speech against the government led again to his dismissal from 
office. He was soon restored on a change of the ministry, but 
disapproving the measures of the new administration, and 
apparently disappointed at not being given the command of the 
army, he shortly resigned all his posts, and spent the rest of 
his life in privacy and retirement. He died on the 4th of 
October 1743. A monument by Roubillac was erected to his 
memory in Westminster Abbey. He was twice married, and 
by his second wife, Jane Warburton, had five daughters; his 
Scottish titles passed to his brother, but his English titles became 
extinct, and though his eldest daughter was created baroness of 
Greenwich in 1767 this title also became extinct on her death 
in 1794. 

Archibald Campbell, 3rd duke of Argyll (1682-1761), was 
born at Ham House in Surrey, in June 1682. On his father 
being created a duke, he joined the army, and served for a short 
time under the duke of Marlborough. In 1705 he was appointed 
treasurer of Scotland, and in the following year was one of the 
commissioners for treating of the Union; on the consummation 
of which, having been raised to the peerage of Scotland as earl 
of Islay, he was chosen one of the sixteen peers for Scotland in 
the first parliament of Great Britain. In 171 1 he was called to 
the privy council, and commanded the royal army at the battle 
of Sheriffmuir in 1715- He was appointed keeper of the privy 
seal in 1721, and was afterwards entrusted with the principal 
management of Scottish affairs to an extent which caused him 
to be called " king of Scotland." In 1733 he was made keeper 
of the great seal, an office which he held till his death. He 
succeeded to the dukedom in 1743. Both as earl of Islay and as 
duke of Argyll he was prominently connected (with Duncan 
Forbes of Culloden) with the movement for consolidating 
Scottish loyalty by the formation of locally recruited highland 
regiments. The duke was eminent not only for his political 
abilities, but also for his literary accomplishments, and he 
collected one of the most valuable private libraries in Great 
Britain. He died suddenly on the 15th of April 1761. He was 
married but had no legitimate issue, and his English property 
was left to a Mrs Williams, by whom he had a son, William 
Campbell. 

The succession now passed to the descendants of the younger 
son of the 9th earl, the Campbells of Mamore; the 4th duke died 
in 1770, and was succeeded by his son John, the 5th duke (1723- 
1806). He was a soldier who had fought at Dettingen and 
Culloden, and became colonel of the 42nd regiment (Black 
Watch), and eventually a field marshal. He sat in the House 
of Commons for Glasgow from 1744 to 1761, when on his father's 
succession to the dukedom he became legally disqualified, as 
courtesy marquess of Lome, for a Scottish constituency; he could 
sit, however, for an English one, and was returned for Dover, 
which he represented till 1766, when he was created an English 
peer as Baron Sundridge, the title by which till 1892 the dukes 
of Argyll sat in the House of Lords. The 5th duke was an 
active landlord, and was the first president of the Highland and 
Agricultural Society. In 1759 he had married the widowed 
duchess of Hamilton (the beautiful Elizabeth Gunning), by whom 
he had two sons and two daughters. The eldest of his sons, 
George (d. 1841), became 6th duke, and on his death was 
succeeded as 7th duke by his brother John (1777-1847), who 
from 1799-1822 sat in parliament as member for Argyllshire. 
He was thrice married, and by his second wife, Joan Glassell 
(d. 1828), had two sons, the eldest of whom (b. 1821) died 



4 86 



ARGYLLSHIRE 



in 1837, and two daughters, the second of whom died in 
infancy. 

George John Douglas Campbell, 8th duke (1823-1900), 
the second son of the 7th duke, was born on the 30th of April 
1823, and succeeded his father in April 1847. He had already 
obtained notice as a writer of pamphlets on the disruption of the 
Church of Scotland, whiah he strove to avert, and he rapidly 
became prominent on the Liberal side in parliamentary politics. 
He was a frequent and eloquent speaker in the House of Lords, 
and sat as lord privy seal (1852) and postmaster-general (1855) 
in the cabinets of Lord Aberdeen and Lord Palmerston. In 
Mr Gladstone's cabinet of 1868 he was secretary of state for 
India, and somewhat infelicitously signalized his term of office 
by his refusal, against the advice of the Indian government, 
to promise the amir of Afghanistan support against Russian 
aggression, a course which threw that ruler into the arms of 
Russia and was followed by the second Afghan War. His 
eminence alike as a great Scottish noble, and as a British states- 
man, was accentuated in 1871 when his son, the marquess of 
Lome, married Princess Louise, the fourth daughter of Queen 
Victoria; but in the political world few memorable acts on his 
part call for record except his resignation of the office of lord 
privy seal, which he held in Mr Gladstone's administration of 
1880, from his inability to assent to the Irish land legislation 
of 1 88 1. He opposed the Home Rule Bill with equal vigour, 
though Mr Gladstone subsequently stated that, among all the 
old colleagues who dissented from his course, the duke was the 
only one whose personal relations with him remained entirely 
unchanged. Detached from party, the duke took an independent 
position, and for many years spoke his mind with great freedom 
in letters to The Times on public questions, especially such as 
concerned the rights or interests of landowners. He was no less 
active on scientific questions in their relation to religion, which 
he earnestly strove to reconcile with the progress of discovery. 
With this aim he published The Reign of Law (1866), Primeval 
Man (1869), The Unity of Nature (1884), The Unseen Founda- 
tions of Society (1893), and other essays. He also wrote on the 
Eastern question, with especial reference to India, the history 
and antiquities of Iona, patronage in the Church of Scotland, and 
many other subjects. The duke (to whose Scottish title was added 
a dukedom of the United Kingdom in 1892) died on the 24th of 
April 1900. He was thrice married: first (1844) to a daughter 
of the second duke of Sutherland (d. 1878); secondly (1881) to 
a daughter of Bishop Claughton of St Albans (d. 1894); and 
thirdly (1895) to Ina Erskine M'Neill. Few men of the duke's 
era displayed more versatility of intellect, and he was remarkable 
among the men of his time for his lofty eloquence. 

He was succeeded as 9th duke by his eldest son John Douglas 
Sutherland Campbell (1845- ), whose marriage in 1871 
to H.R.H. Princess Louise gave him a special prominence in 
English public life. He was governor-general of Canada from 
1878 to 1883; member of parliament for South Manchester, in 
the Unionist interest, 1895 to 1900; and he also became known 
as a writer both in prose and verse. In 1907 he published his 
reminiscences, Pages from the Past. 

See the Autobiography and Memoirs of the 8th duke, edited by 
his widow (1906), which is full of interesting historical and personal 
detail. (P. C. Y.; H. Ch.) 

ARGYLLSHIRE, a county on the west coast of Scotland, the 
second largest in the country, embracing a large tract of country 
on the mainland and a number of the Hebrides or Western Isles. 
The mainland portion is bounded N. by Inverness-shire; E. by 
Perth and Dumbarton, Loch Long and the Firth of Clyde; 
S. by the North Channel (Irish Sea); and W. by the Atlantic. 
Its area is 1,990,471 acres or 3 no sq. m. The principal districts 
are Ardnamurchan on the Atlantic, Ardnamurchan Point being 
the most westerly headland of Scotland; Morven or Morvern, 
bounded by Loch Sunart, the Sound of Mull and Loch Linnhe; 
Appin, on Loch Linnhe, with piers at Ballachulish and Port 
Appin; Benderloch, lying between Loch Creran and Loch Etive; 
Lome, surrounding Loch Etive and giving the title of marquess 
to the Campbells; Argyll, in the middle of the shire, containing 



Inveraray Castle and furnishing the titles of earl and duke to 
the Campbells; Cowall, between Loch Fyne and the Firth of 
Clyde, in which lie Dunoon and other favourite holiday resorts; 
Knapdale between the Sound of Jura and Loch Fyne; and 
Kintyre or Cantyre, a long narrow peninsula (which, at the 
isthmus of Tarbert, is little more than 1 m. wide), the southern- 
most point of which is known as the Mull, the nearest part of 
Scotland to the coast of Ireland, only 13 m. distant. 

There are no navigable rivers. The two principal mountain 
streams are the Orchy and Awe. The Orchy flows from Loch 
Tulla through Glen Orchy, and falls into the north-eastern end 
of Loch Awe; and the Awe drains the loch at its north-western 
extremity, discharging into Loch Etive. Among other streams 
are the Add, Aray, Coe or Cona, Creran, Douglas, Eachaig, Etive, 
Euchar, Feochan, Finart, Fyne, Kinglass, Nell, Ruel, Shiel, 
Shira, Strae and Uisge-Dhu. The county is remarkable for the 
numerous sea-lochs which deeply indent the coast, the principal 
being Loch Long (with its branches Loch Goil and the Holy 
Loch), Loch Striven (Rothesay's " weather glass "), Loch 
Riddon, Loch Fyne (with Loch Gilp and Loch Gair), Lochs 
Tarbert, Killisport, Swin, Crinan, Craignish, Melfort, Feochan, 
Etive, Linnhe (with its branches Loch Creran, Loch Leven and 
Loch Eil) and Sunart. There are also a large number of inland 
lakes, the total area of which is about 25,000 acres. Of these the 
principal are Lochs Awe, Avich, Eck, Lydoch and Shiel. The 
principal islands are Mull, Islay, Jura, Colonsay, Lismore, Tyree, 
Coll, Gigha, Luing and Kerrera. Besides these there are the two 
small but interesting islands of Staffa and Iona. The mountains 
are so many as to give the shire a markedly rugged character. 
Some of them are among the loftiest in the kingdom, as Ben 
Cruachan with its summit of twin pyramids (3689 ft.), Ben More, 
in- Mull' (3172), Ben Ima (3318), Buachaille Etive (3345), Ben 
Bui (3106), Ben Lui (or Loy), on the confines of the shires of 
Perth and Argyll (3708), Ben Starav near the head of Loch Etive 
(3541), and Ben Arthur, called from its shape " The Cobbler " 
(2891), on the borders of Dumbartonshire. There are many 
picturesque glens, of which the best-known are Glen Aray, Glen 
Croe, Glen Etive, Glendaruel, Glen Lochy (" the wearisome glen" 
—some 10 m. of bare hills and boulders — between Tyndrum and 
Dalmally),Glen Strae,Hell's Glen (off Lech Goil) and Glencoe, the 
scene of the massacre in 1692. The waterfalls of Cruachan are 
beautiful; and those of Connel, which are more in the nature of 
rapids, caused by the rush of the ebbing tide over the rocky bar 
at the narrowing mouth of Loch Etive, have been made cele- 
brated by Ossian, who called them " the Falls of Lora." In 
several of the glens, as Glen Aray, small falls may be seen, 
enhanced in beauty when the rivers are in flood. Pre-eminently 
Argyll is the shire of the sportsman. The lovely Western Isles 
provide endless enjoyment for the yachtsman; the lochs and 
rivers abound with salmon and trout; the deer forests and 
grouse moors are second to none in Scotland. 

Geology. — The mainland portion of the county consists chiefly of 
the metamorphic rocks of the Eastern Highlands, nearly all the sub- 
divisions of that series (see Scotland: Geology) being represented. 
They form parallel belts of varying width trending north-east and 
south-west. The slates and phyllites referred to the lowest group 
occur along the shore at Dunoon, and are followed by the Beinn 
Bheula grits and albite schists, forming nearly all the highest ground 
in Cowall between Loch Fyne and the Firth of Clyde and the greater 
part of Kintyre. The green beds, Glensluan mica-schists and Loch 
Tay limestones are developed in Glendaruel, and have been traced 
north-east to Glen Fyne and at intervals south-west to Campbeltown. 
The next prominent zone is that of the Ardrishaig phyllites, with 
quartzites in the lower portion and soft phyllites in the upper part, 
which cover a belt from 3 to 6 m. across, stretching from Glen Shira 
by Inveraray and Ardrishaig to south Knapdale. 

Next in order come the Easdale slates, phyllites with thin dark 
limestone, the main limestone of Loch Awe and the pebbly quartzite 
(Schiehallion), which are repeated by innumerable folds and spread 
northwards to Loch Linnhe and westwards to Jura and Islay. The 
slates of this horizon have been largely quarried at Easdale and 
Ballachulish, and this main limestone is typically developed near 
Loch Awe, near Kilmartin, on the islands of Lismore and Shuna, 
and in Islay between Bridgend and Portaskaig. The quartzites of 
this series form the highest hills in the south of Islay, occupy nearly 
the whole of Jura, and are continued in the mainland, where, by 



ARGYLLSHIRE 



48? 



means of the rapid isoclinal folding, they form lenticular masses. In 
Islay and at various localities on the mainland a conglomerate 
occurs at or near the base of the quartzites, which contains frag- 
ments of the underlying rocks and boulders of granite not now found 
in place in that region. 

On the mainland, on the north side of the compound synclinal 
folding of Loch Awe, the Ardrishaig phyllites reappear at Craignish 
near Kilmartin, and the quartzites of this group are supposed to 
come to the surface again in Glencoe, not far from the outcrop of the 
Schiehallion quartzite. 

The metamorijhic rocks are associated with bands of epidiorite 
which have shared in the folding and metamorphism of the region. 
These are largely developed near Loch Awe, in Knapdale, and on the 
south-east coast of Islay. They have been usually regarded as 
intrusive, but south of Tayvallich on the mainland, lavas and tuffs, 
which have escaped deformation, occur in the Easdale slates and the 
pebbly limestone. 

The Lower Old Red Sandstone, chiefly composed of volcanic 
rocks — lavas and tuffs— rests unconformably on the metamorphic 
series. These rocks cover a wide area in Lome between Loch 
Melfort. Oban and the Pass of Brander, and they reappear in the 
lofty mountains on both sides of Glencoe. Representatives of this 
formation are found in Kintyre, south of Campbeltown, where the 
sediments prevail. The intrusive igneous rocks belonging to this 
period are widely distributed and form conspicuous features. The 
plutonic masses are represented by the granite of Ben Cruachan, by 
the diorite of Gleann Domhainn, and by the kentallenite (a basic 
rock related to the monxonites), near Ballachulish. Throughout the 
Lome volcanic plateau there are numerous dykes of porphyrite 
which likewise traverse the schists and part of the Ben Cruachan 
granite. Sheets of quartz-porphyry, lamprophyre and diorite are 
also represented, the first of these types being quarried at Crarae on 
the north shore of Loch Fyne. 

The Upper Old Red Sandstone forms isolated patches resting 
unconformably on all older rocks, on the west coast of Kintyre, 
and between Campbeltown and Southend. In the district of 
Campbeltown these red sandstones and cornstones are followed by 
the volcanic rocks of the Calciferous Sandstone series, which lie 
to the south of the depression at Machrihanish, and are succeeded 
by the lower limestones and coals of the Carboniferous Limestone 
series. 

On the north and south shores of the promontory of Ardnamurchan 
there are small patches of Jurassic strata ranging from the Lower 
Lias to the Oxford Clay, and in Morvern on the shores of Loch Aline 
representatives of the Upper Greensand are covered by the basaltic 
lavas of Tertiary age. The acid and basic plutonic rocks (gabbros 
and granophyres) of Tertiary time occur in Ardnamurchan. A 
striking geological feature of the county is the number of dolerite 
and basalt dykes trending in a north-west direction, which are 
referred to the same period of intrusion. There is, however, another 
group of dolerite dykes running east and west near Dunoon and 
elsewhere, which are cut by the former and are probably of older 
date. 

Lead veins occur at Strontian which have yielded a number of 
minerals, including sphalerite, fluorite, strontianite, harmotone, 
brewsterite and pilolite. Near Inveraray, nickeliferous ore has been 
obtained at two localities. 

Climate. — The rainfall is very abundant. At Oban, the 
average annual amount is 64-18 in.; in Glen Fyne, 104-11 in.; 
at the bridge of Orchy, 113-62 in., and at Upper Glencoe 127-65. 
The prevailing winds, as observed near Crinan, are south-west 
and south-east, and next in frequency are the north-west and 
north-east. The average yearly temperature is 48 F. 

Agriculture. — Argyllshire was formerly partly covered with 
natural forests, remains of which, consisting chiefly of oak, ash, 
pine and birch, are still visible in the mosses; but, owing to 
the clearance of the ground for the introduction of sheep, and 
to past neglect of planting, the county is now remarkable for 
its lack of wood, except in the neighbourhood of Inveraray, 
where there are extensive and flourishing plantations, and a few 
other places. Replanting, however, has been carried on. Most 
of the county is unfitted for agriculture; but many districts 
afford fine pasturage for mountain sheep ; and some of . the 
valleys, such as Glendaruel, are very fertile. The chief crop 
is oats; there is a little barley, but no wheat. The shire is one 
of those where the crofting system exists, but it is by no means 
universal. It is predominant in Tyree arid the western district 
of the mainland, but elsewhere farms of moderate size are the 
rule. The cattle, though small, are equal to any other breed 
in the kingdom, and are marketed in large numbers in the south. 
Dairy farming is carried on to some extent in the southern parts 
of Kintyre* where there is a large proportion of arable land. 
In the higfler tracts sheep have taken the place of cattle with 



excellent results. The black-faced is the species most generally 
reared. 

Industries. — Whisky is manufactured at Campbeltown, in 
Islay, at Oban, Ardrishaig and elsewhere. Gunpowder is made 
atKames(KylesofBute), Melfort and Furnace. Coarse woollens 
are made for home use; but fishing is the most important 
industry, Loch Fyne being famous for its herrings. The season 
lasts from June to January, but white fishing is carried on at 
one or other of the ports all the year round. Slate and granite 
quarrying and some coal-mining are the only other industries 
of any consequence. 

Communications. — Owing partly to the paucity of trading 
industries and partly to the fact that, owing to its greatly 
indented coast-line, no place in the shire is more than 12 m. 
from the sea, the railway mileage in the county is very small. 
The Tyndrum to Oban section of the Caledonian railway com- 
pany's system is within the county limits; a small portion of 
the track of the North British railway company's line to Mallaig 
skirts the extreme west of the shire, and the Caledonian line 
from Oban to Ballachulish serves the northern coast districts of 
the Argyllshire mainland. In connexion with this last route 
mention should be made of the cantilever bridge crossing the 
Falls of Lora with a span of 500 ft. at a height of 125 ft. above 
the water-way. The chief means of communication is by 
steamers, which maintain regular intercourse between Glasgow 
and various parts of the coast. In order to avoid the circuitous 
passage round the Mull of Kintyre the Crinan Canal, across the 
isthmus from Ardrishaig to Loch Crinan, a distance of 9 m., 
was constructed in 1 793-1801, at a cost of £142,000. It has 
15 locks, an average depth of 10 ft., a surface width of 66 ft., and 
bottom width of 30 ft., is navigable by vessels of 200 tons, and 
runs through a district of remarkable beauty. Another canal 
unites Campbeltown with Dalavaddy. In summer the mails 
for the islands and the great bulk of the tourist traffic by the 
MacBrayne fleet is conveyed through the Crinan Canal, tran- 
shipment being effected at Ardrishaig and Crinan. Throughout 
the year goods traffic between the Clyde and elsewhere and the 
West Highland ports is conveyed by deep-sea steamers round 
the Mull. Before the advent of railways the shire contained 
many famous coaching routes, but now coaches only run during 
the tourist season, either in connexion with train and steamer, 
or in districts still not served by either. 

Population and Government. — Owing to emigration, chiefly 
to Canada, the population has declined, almost without a 
break, since 1831, when it was 100,973, to 74,085 in 1891 and 
73,642 in 1901, in which year there were 24 persons to the 
sq. m. In 1901 the number of Gaelic-speaking persons was 
34,224, of whom 3313 spoke Gaelic only. The chief towns are 
Campbeltown (population in 1901, 8286), Dunoon (6779) and 
Oban (5427), with Ardrishaig (1285), Ballachulish (1143), 
Lochgilphead (1313) and Tarbert (1697). The county returns 
a member to parliament. Inveraray, Campbeltown and Oban 
belong to the Ayr district group of parliamentary burghs. 
Argyllshire is a sheriffdom, and there are resident sheriffs- 
substitute at Inveraray, Campbeltown and Oban; courts are 
held also at Tobermory, Lochgilphead, Bowmore in Islay, 
and Dunodn. Both Presbyterian bodies are strongly repre- 
sented; there are Roman Catholic and (Anglican) Episcopal 
bishops of Argyll and the Isles, and there is a Roman Catholic 
pro-cathedral at Oban. Campbeltown, Dunoon and Oban have 
secondary schools, Tarbert public school has a secondary de- 
partment, and several other schools earn grants for giving 
higher education. Part of the " residue " grant is spent by the 
county council on classes of navigation and other subjects in 
various schools, short courses in agriculture for farn^p, and 
in providing bursaries. 

History. — The early history of Argyll (Airergaidheal) is very 
obscure. At the close of the 5th century Fergus, son of Ere, 
a descendant of Conor II., airdrigh or high king of Ireland, came 
over with a band of Irish Scots and established himself in Argyll 
and Kintyre. Nothing more is known till, in the days of Conall I., 
the descendant of Fergus in the fourth generation, St Columba 



4 88 



ARGYRODITE— ARGYROPULUS 



appears. Conall died in 574, and Columba was mainly instru- 
mental in establishing his first cousin, Aidan, founder of the 
Dalriad kingdom and ancestor of the royal house of Scotland, 
in power. In the 8th century Argyll, with the Western Islands 
and Man, fell under the power of the Norsemen until, in the 
12th century, Somerled (or Somhairle), a descendant of Colla- 
Uais, airdrigh of Ireland (327-331), succeeded in ousting them 
and established his authority, not only as thane of Argyll, but 
also in Kintyre and the Western Islands. Somerled died in 
1 164 and his descendants maintained themselves in Argyll 
and the islands, between the conflicting claims of the kings 
of Scotland, Norway and Man, until the end of the 15th 
century. 

Up to 1222 Argyll had formed an independent Celtic prince- 
dom; but in that year it was reduced by Alexander II., the 
Scottish king, to a sheriffdom, and was henceforth regarded 
as an integral part of Scotland. Among the various clans 
in Argyll, the Campbells of Loch Awe, a branch of the clan 
McArthur, now began to come to the fore, though the mainland 
was still chiefly in the possession of the MacDougals. The 
position of the lords of the house of Somerled was now curious, 
since they were feudatories of the king of Norway for the isles 
and of the king of Scotland for Argyll. Their policy in the wars 
between the two powers was a masterly neutrality. Thus, 
during the expedition of Alexander II. to the Western Isles in 
1249, Ewan (Eoghan), lord of Argyll, refused to fight against the 
Norwegians; in 1263 the same Ewan refused to join Haakon 
of Norway in attacking Alexander III. Forty years later the 
clansmen of Argyll, mainly MacDougals, were warring on the 
side of Edward of England against Robert Bruce, by whom they 
were badly beaten on Loch Awe in 1300. The clansmen o A the 
house of Somerled in the isles, on the other hand, the MacDorfil&s, 
remained loyal to Scotland in spite of the persuasions of Jonn 
of Argyll, appointed admiral of Edward II. 's western fie et; 
and, under their chief Angus Og, they contributed much to the 
victory of Bannockburn. The alliance of John, earl of Ross and 
lord of the Isles, with Edward IV. of England in 1461 led to 
the breaking of the power of the house of Somerled, and in 1478 
John was forced to resign Ross to the crown and, two years later, 
his lordships of Knapdale and Kintyre as well. In Argyll itself 
the Campbells had already made the first step to supremacy 
through the marriage of Colin, grandson of Sir Duncan Campbell 
of Lochow, first Lord Campbell, with Isabel Stewart, eldest 
of the three co-heiresses of John, third lord of Lome. He 
acquired the greater part of the lands of the other sisters by 
purchase, and the lordship of Lome from Walter their uncle, the 
heir in tail male, by an exchange for lands in Perthshire. In 
1457 he was created, by James II., earl of Argyll. He died on 
the 10th of May 1493. From him dates the greatness of the house 
of the earls and dukes of Argyll (q.v.), whose history belongs to 
that of Scotland. The house of Somerled survives in two main 
branches— that of Macdonald of the Isles, Alexander Macdonald 
(d. 1795) having been raised to the peerage in 1776, and that 
of the Macdonnells, earls of Antrim in Ireland. The principal 
clans in Argyll, besides those already mentioned, were the 
Macleans, the Stewarts of Appin, the Macquarries and the 
Macdonalds of Glencoe, and the Macfarlanes of Glencroe. The 
Campbells are still very numerous in the county. 

Argyllshire men have made few contributions to English 
literature. For long the natives spoke Gaelic only and their 
bards sang in Gaelic (see Celt: Literature: Scottish). Near 
Inistrynich on the north-eastern shore of Loch Awe stands the 
monumental cairn erected in honour of Duncan Ban Mclntyre 
(1724-1812), the most popular of modern Gaelic bards. But 
the romantic beauty of the country has made it a favourite 
setting for the themes of many poets and story-tellers, from 
" Ossian " and Sir Walter Scott to Robert Louis Stevenson, 
while not a few men distinguished in affairs or in learning have 
been natives of the county. 

The antiquities comprise monoliths, circles of standing stones, 
crannogs and cairns. In almost all the burying-grounds — as 
at Campbeltown, Keil, Soroby, Kilchousland, Kilmun — there 



are specimens of sculptured crosses and slabs. Besides the 
famous ecclesiastical remains at Iona {q.v.), there are ruins 
of a Cistercian priory in Oronsay, and of a church founded 
in the 12 th century by Somerled, thane of Argyll, at Saddell. 
Among castles may be mentioned Dunstaffnage, Ardtornish, 
Skipness, Kilchurn (beloved of painters), Ardchonnel, Dunolly, 
Stalker, Dunderaw and Carrick. 

Authorities. — The (Eighth) Duke of Argyll, Commercial Prin- 
ciples Applied to the Hire of Land (London, 1877) ; Crofts and Farms 
in the Hebrides (Edinburgh, 1883); Iona (Edinburgh, 1889); Scot- 
land as it Was and Is (Edinburgh, 1887), House of Argyll (Glasgow, 
1871); A. Brown, Memorials of Argyllshire (Greenock, 1889); 
Harvie-Brown and Buckley, Vertebrate Fauna of Argyll and the 
Inner Hebrides (Edinburgh, 1892); D. Clerk, " On the Agriculture 
of the County of Argyll " {Trans, of H. and A. Soc, 1878) ; T. Gray, 
Week at Oban (Edinburgh, 1881); Stewart, Collection of Views of 
Campbeltown. For antiquities see The Sculptured Stones of Scotland, 
vol. ii., published by the Spalding Club, and Capt. T. P. White's 
Archaeological Sketches in Kintyre and Proc. Antia. Soc. of Scotland, 
vols, iv., v., viii. 

ARGYRODITE, a mineral which is of interest as being that 
in which the element germanium was discovered by C. Winkler 
in 1886. It is a silver sulpho-germanate, Ag 8 GeS6, and crystal- 
lizes in the cubic system. The crystals have the form of the 
octahedron or rhombic dodecahedron, and are frequently 
twinned. The botryoidal crusts of small indistinct crystals 
first found in a silver mine at Freiberg in Saxony were originally 
thought to be monoclinic, but were afterwards proved to be 
identical with the more distinctly developed crystals recently 
found in Bolivia. The colour is iron-black with a purplish tinge, 
and the lustre metallic. There is no cleavage; hardness 2 \, 
specific gravity 6-2. It is of interest to note that the Freiberg 
mineral was long ago imperfectly described by A. Breithaupt 
under the name Plusinglanz, and that the Bolivian crystals 
were incorrectly described in 1849 as crystallized brongniardite. 
The name argyrodite is from the Greek apyvpuih-qs, rich in 
silver. 

Isomorphous with argyrodite is the corresponding tin 
compound AgsSnS^ also found in Bolivia as cubic crystals, 
and known by the name canfieldite. Other Bolivian crystals 
are intermediate in composition between argyrodite and 
canfieldite. (L. J. S.) 

ARGYROKASTRO, or Argyrocastron (Turkish, Ergeri; 
Albanian, Ergir Castri), a town of southern Albania, Turkey, in 
the vilayet of Iannina. Pop. (1900) about 1 1 ,000. Argyrokastro 
is finely situated 1060 ft. above sea-level, on the eastern slopes 
of the Acroceraunian mountains, and near the left bank of the 
river Dhrynos, a left-hand tributary of the Viossa. It is the 
capital of a sanjak bearing the same name, and was formerly 
important as the headquarters of the local Moslem aristocracy, 
partly owing to the mountainous and easily defensible nature 
of the district. It contains the ruins of an imposing castellated 
fort. A fine kind of snuff, known as fuli, is manufactured here. 
Argyrokastro has been variously identified with the ancient 
Hadrianopolis and Antigonea. In the 18th century it is said 
to have contained 20,000 inhabitants, but it was almost de- 
populated by plague in 1814. Albanian Moslems constitute the 
greater part of the population. 

ARGYROPULUS, or Argyroptjlo, JOHN (c. 1416-1486), 
Greek humanist, one of the earliest promoters of the revival of 
learning in the West, was born in Constantinople, and became 
a teacher there, Constantine Lascaris being his pupil. He then 
appears to have crossed over to Italy, and taught in Padua in 
1434, being subsequently made rector of the university. About 
1441 he returned to Constantinople, but after its capture by the 
Turks, again took refuge in Italy. About 1456 he was invited to 
Florence by Cosimo de'Medici, and was there appointed professor 
of Greek in the university. In 147 1, on the outbreak of the 
plague, he removed to Rome, where he continued to act as 
a teacher of Greek till his death. Among his scholars were 
Angelus Politianus and Johann- Reuchlin. His principal works 
were translations of the following portions of Aristotle, — 
Categoriae, De Inter pretatione, Analytica Posterior a, Physica, De 
Caelo, De Anima, Metaphysica, Ethica Nicomachea, Politico; 



ARIA 



489 



and an Expositio Ethicorum Aristotelis. Several of his writings 

exist still in manuscript. 

See Humphrey Hody, De Graecis Illustribus, 1742, and Smith's 
Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography, s.v. Joannes. 

ARIA (Ital. for "air"), a musical term, equivalent to the 
English " air," signifying a melody apart from the harmony, but 
especially a musical composition for a single voice or instrument, 
with an accompaniment of other voices or instruments. 

The aria originally developed from the expansion of a single 
vocal melody, generally on the lines of what is known as binary 
form (see Sonata and Sonata Forms). Accordingly, while the 
germs of aria form may be traceable in the highest developments 
of folk-song, the aria as a definite art-form could not exist before 
the middle of the 17th century; because up to that time the 
whole organization of music was based upon polyphonic principles 
which left no room for the development of melody for melody's 
sake. When at the beginning of the 17th century the Monodists 
(see Harmony and Monteverde) inaugurated a new era and 
showed in their first experiments the enormous possibilities 
latent in their new art of accompanying single voices by instru- 
ments, it was natural that for many years the mere suggestiveness 
and variety of their experiments should suffice to retain the 
attention of contemporary listeners, without any real artistic 
coherence in the works as wholes. But, even at the outset, 
mere novelty of harmony, however poignant its emotional 
expression, was felt by the profounder spirits of the new art 
to be an untrustworthy guide to progress. And Monteverde's 
famous lament of the deserted Ariadne is one of many early 
examples that appeal to an elementary sense of form by making 
the last phrase identical with the first. As instrumental music 
grew, and the modern sense of key became strong and consistent, 
composers felt themselves more and more able to appeal to that 
sense of harmonically consistent melody which has asserted 
itself in folk-music before the history of harmonic music may be 
said to have begun. The technique of solo singers grew as 
rapidly as that of solo players, and composers soon found their 
chief musical interest in doing justice to both. In Sir Hubert 
Parry's work, The Music of the 17th Century (Oxford History 
of Music, vol. iii.), will be found numerous illustrations of the 
early development of aria forms, from their first indications 
in Monteverde's instinctive struggles after coherence, to their 
complete maturity in the works of Alessandro Scarlatti. 

By Scarlatti's time it was thoroughly established that the binary 
form of melody was that which could best be expanded into a 
form which should do justice both to singers and to the players 
who accompanied them. Thus the aria became on a small scale 
the prototype of the Concerto; and under that heading will 
accordingly be found all that need be said as to the relation 
between the instrumental ritornello and the material of the voice 
part in an aria. 

So far we have spoken only of the main body of the aria; 
but the addition of a middle section with a da Capo, which 
constitutes the universal 18th-century da Capo form of aria, 
adds a very simple new principle to the essential scheme without 
really modifying it. A typical aria of the Scarlatti or Handelian 
type is a very large melody in binary form, delivered by the 
voice, which expands it with florid perorations before each 
cadence (and sometimes also with florid preludes); while relief 
is given to the voice, further spaciousness to the form, and 
justice done to the accompaniment, by the addition of an 
instrumental ritornello containing the gist of the melody not only 
at the beginning and end, but also in suitable shorter forms 
at the principal intermediate cadences in foreign keys. A 
smaller scheme of the same kind in a new group of related keys, 
but generally without much new material, is then appended as 
a middle section after which follows the main section da Capo. 
The result is generally a piece of music of cpnsiderable length, 
in a form which cannot fail to be effective and coherent; and 
there is little cause for wonder in the extent to which it dominated 
18th-century music. It was not, however, invariable. In the 
Cavaiina we find a form too small for the da Capo; and in 
the oratorios of Handel and the choral works of Bach we find 



a majority of arias in a larger form which evades the possibility 
of exact repetition. 

The aria forms are profoundly influenced by the difference 
between the Sonata style and the style of Bach and Handel. 
But the scale of the form is inevitably small, and in any opera 
an aria is hardly possible except in a situation which is a tableau 
rather than an action. Consequently there is no such difference 
between the form of the classical operatic aria of Mozart and that 
of the Handelian type as there is between sonata music and 
suite music. The scale, however, has become too large for the 
da Capo, which was in any case too rigid to survive in music 
designed to intensify a dramatic situation instead of to distract 
attention from it. The necessary change of style was so success- 
fully achieved that, until Wagner succeeded in devising music 
that moved absolutely pari passu with his drama, the aria 
remained as the central formal principle in dramatic music; 
and few things in artistic evolution are more interesting than 
the extent to which Mozart's predecessor, the great dramatic 
reformer Gluck, profited by the essential resources of his pet 
aversion, the aria style, when he had not only purged it of what 
had become the stereotyped ideas of ritornellos and vocal 
flourishes, but animated it by the new sense of dramatic climax 
to which the sonata style appealed. 

In modern opera the aria is almost always out of place, and 
the forms in which definite melodies nowadays appear are rather 
those of the song in its limited sense as that of a poem in formal 
stanzas all set to the same music. In other words, a song in a 
modern opera tends to be something which would be sung even 
if the drama had to be performed as a play without music; 
whereas a classical aria would in non-musical drama be a soliloquy. 
This can be shown by works at such opposite poles of musical 
and dramatic technique as Bizet's Carmen and the later works 
of Wagner. In Carmen the librettist has so managed that, if 
his work were performed as a play, almost the whole of it would 
have to be sung; and the one exception of musical importance 
is the developed soliloquy of Micaela in the third act, which, 
although treated in no old-fashioned or commonplace spirit by the 
composer, is the one thing in the opera which sounds " operatic." 

In the later works of Wagner those passages in which we can 
successfully detach complete melodies from their context have, 
one and all, dramatically the aspect of songs and not of soli- 
loquies. Siegmund sings the song of Spring to his sister-bride; 
Mime teaches Siegfried lessons of gratitude in nursery rhymes; 
and the whole story of the Meistersinger is a series of opportunities 
for song-singing. 

The distinctions and gradations between aria and song are 
of great aesthetic importance, but their history would carry 
us too far. The distinction is obviously of the same import- 
ance as that between dramatic and lyric poetry. Beethoven's 
Adelaide is a famous example of what is called a song when it is 
really entirely in aria style; while the operas of Mozart and 
Weber naturally contain in appropriate situations many numbers 
which really are songs. The composers themselves generally give 
appropriate names. Thus Mozart, in Figaro, calls " Non so 
piu cosa son " an aria, because of its free style, though Cherubino 
actually sings it as a song he has just invented; while " Voi 
che sapete," being more purely lyric, is called Canzona. 

The term aria form is applied, . generally most inaccurately, 
to all kinds of slow cantabile instrumental music of which the 
general design can be traced to the operatic aria. Mozart, for 
example, is very fond of slow movements in large binary form 
without development, and this is constantly called aria-form, 
though the term ought certainly to be restricted to such examples 
as have some traits of the aria style, such as the first slow move- 
ment in the great serenade in B flat. At all events, until writers 
on music have agreed to give the term some more accurate use, 
it is as well to avoid it and its cognate version, Lied-form, alto- 
gether in speaking of instrumental music. 

The air or aria in a suite is a short binary movement in a 
flowing rhythm in common or duple time and by no means of 
the broadly tunelike quality which its name would seem to 
imply. (D. F. T.) 



49° 



ARIADNE— ARIEGE 



ARIADNE (in Greek mythology), was the daughter of Minos, 
king of Crete, and Pasiphae, the daughter of Helios the Sun-god. 
When Theseus landed on the island to slay the Minotaur (q.v.), 
Ariadne fell in love with him, and gave him a clue of thread to 
guide him through the mazes of the labyrinth. After he had 
slain the monster, Theseus carried her off, but, according to 
Homer (Odyssey, xi. 322) she was slain by Artemis at the request 
of Dionysus in the island of Dia near Cnossus, before she could 
reach Athens with Theseus. In the later legend, she was 
abandoned, while asleep on the island of Naxos, by Theseus, 
who had fallen a victim to the charms of Aegle (Plutarch, 
Theseus, 20; Diodorus, iv. 60, 61). Her abandonment and 
awakening are celebrated in the beautiful Epithalamium of 
Catullus. On Naxos she is discovered by Dionysus on his return 
from India, who is enchanted with her beauty, and marries her 
when she awakes. She receives a crown as a bridal gift, which 
is placed amongst the stars, while she herself is honoured as a 
goddess (Ovid, Metam. viii. 152, Fasti, hi. 459). 

The name probably means "very holy" = apt- ayvri; 
another (Cretan) form 'ApiSriXa ( = (pavepa ) indicates the return 
to a " bright " season of nature. Ariadne is the personification 
of spring. In keeping with this, her festivals at Naxos present 
a double character; the one, full of mourning and sadness, 
represents her death or abandonment by Theseus, the other, 
full of joy and revelry, celebrates her awakening from sleep 
and marriage with Dionysus. Thus nature sleeps and dies during 
winter, to awake in springtime to a life of renewed luxuriance. 
With this may be compared the festivals of Adonis and Osiris 
and the myth of Persephone. Theseus himself was said to have 
founded a festival at Athens in honour of Ariadne and Dionysus 
after his return from Crete. The story of Dionysus and Ariadne 
was a favourite subject for reliefs and wall-paintings. Most 
commonly Ariadne is represented asleep on the shore at Naxos, 
while Dionysus, attended by satyrs and bacchanals, gazes 
admiringly upon her; sometimes they are seated side by side 
under a spreading vine. The scene where she is holding the 
clue to Theseus occurs on a very early vase in the British 
Museum. There is a statue of the sleeping Ariadne in the Vatican 
Museum. 

Kanter, De Ariadne (1879); Pallat, De Fabula Ariadnea (1891). 

ARIANO DI PUGLIA, a town and episcopal see, which, de- 
spite its name, now belongs to Campania, Italy, in the province 
of Avellino, 1509 ft. above sea-level, on the railway between 
Benevento and Foggia, 24 m. E. of the former by rail. Pop. 
(1901) town, 8384; commune, 17,653. It lies in the centre of 
a fertile district, but has no buildings of importance, as it has 
often been devastated by earthquakes. A considerable part of 
the population still dwells in caves. It has been supposed to 
occupy the site of Aequum Tuticum, an ancient Samnite town, 
which became a post-station on the Via Traiana l in Roman 
times; but this should probably be sought at S. Eleuterio 
5j m. north. It was a military position of some importance in 
the middle ages. Thirteen miles south-south-east is the Sorgente 
Mefita, identical with the pools of Ampsanctus (q.v.). (T. As.) 

ARIAS MONTANO, BENITO (1527-1598), Spanish Orientalist 
and editor of the Antwerp Polyglot, was born at Fregenal de la 
Sierra, in Estremadura, in 1527. After studying at the uni- 
versities of Seville and Alcala, he took orders about the year 
1559 and in 1562 he was appointed consulting' theologian to the 
council of Trent. He retired to Pefia de Aracena in 1 564, wrote 
his commentary on the minor prophets (1571), and was sent to 
Antwerp by Philip II. to edit the polyglot Bible projected by 
Christopher Plantin. The work appeared in 8 volumes folio, 
between 1568 and 1573. Le6n de Castro, a professor at Sala- 
manca, thereon brought charges of heresy against Arias Montano, 
who was finally acquitted after a visit to Rome in 1575-1576. 
He was appointed royal chaplain, but withdrew to Pefia de 
Aracena from 1579 to 1583; he resigned the chaplaincy in 1584, 

1 This has generally been supposed to be the place referred to by 
Horace (Sat. i. 5. 87), as one which the metre would not allow him 
to mention by name; but H.-Nissen (Halische Landeskunde, Berlin, 
1902, ii. 845) proposes Ausculum instead. 



and went into complete seclusion at Santiago de la Espada in 
Seville, where he died in 1598. 

He is the subject of an Elogio histdrico by Tomas Gonzalez Car- 
vajal in the Memorias de la Real Academia de la Historia (Madrid, 
1832), vol. vii. 

ARICA (San Marcos de Arica), a town and port of the 
Chilean-governed province of Tacna, situated in 18 28' 08" S. 
lat. and 70 20' 46" W. long. It is the port for Tacna, the capital 
of the province, 38 m. distant, with which it is connected by rail, 
and is the outlet for a large and productive mining district. 
Arica at one time had a population of 30,000 and enjoyed much 
prosperity, but through civil war, earthquakes and conquest, 
its population had dwindled to 2853 in 1895 and 2824 in 1902. 
The great earthquake of 1868, followed by a tidal wave, nearly 
destroyed the town and shipping. Arica was captured, looted 
and burned by the Chileans in 1880, and in accordance with the 
terms of the treaty of Ancon (1883) should have been returned to 
Peru in 1894, but this was not done. Late in 1906 the town 
again suffered severely from an earthquake. 

ARICIA (mod. Ariccia), an ancient city of Latium, on the Via 
Appia, 16 m. S.E. of Rome. The old town, or at any rate its 
acropolis, now occupied by the modern town, lay high (1350 ft. 
above sea-level) above the circular Valle Aricciana, which is 
probably an extinct volcanic crater; some remains of its fortifica- 
tions, consisting of a mound of earth supported on each side by a 
wall of rectangular blocks of peperino stone, have been discovered 
(D. Marchetti, in Notizie degli scan, 1892, 52). The lower town 
was situated on the north edge of the valley, close to the Via 
Appia, which descended into the valley from the modern Albano, 
and re-ascended partly upon very fine substructions of opus 
quadratum, some 200 yds. in length, to the modern Genzano. 
Remains of the walls of the lower town, of the cella of a temple 
built of blocks of peperino, and also of later buildings in brick- 
work and opus reticulatum, connected with the post-station 
(Aricia being the first important station out of Rome, cf . Horace, 
Sat. i. 5. 1, Egressum magna me excepit Aricia Roma hospitio 
modico) on the highroad, may still be seen (cf. T. Ashby in 
Melanges de I'Scole jrancaise de Rome, 1903, 399). Aricia was 
one of the oldest cities of Latium, and appears as a serious 
opponent of Rome at the end of the period of the kings and 
beginning of the republic. In 338 B.C. it was conquered by 
C. Maenius and became a civitas sine suffragio, but was soon given 
full rights. Even in the imperial period its chief magistrate was 
styled dictator, and its council senatus, and it preserved its own 
calendar of festivals. Its vegetables and wine were famous, and 
the district is still fertile. (T. As.) 

ARICINI, the ancient inhabitants of Aricia (q.v.), the form of 
the name ranking them with the Sidicini, Marrucini (q.v.), &c, 
as one of the communities belonging probably to the earlier or 
Volscian stratum of population on the west side of Italy, who 
were absorbed by the Sabine or Latin immigrants. Special 
interest attaches to this trace of their earlier origin, because of 
the famous cult of Diana Nemorensis, whose temple in the forest 
close by Aricia, beside the lacus Nemorensis, was served by " the 
priest who slew the slayer, and shall himself be slain "; that is to 
say, the priest, who was called rex Nemorensis, held office only so 
long as he could defend himself from any stronger rival. This 
cult, which is unique in Italy, is picturesquely described in the 
opening chapter of J. G. Frazer's Golden Bough (2nd ed., 1900) 
where full references will be found. Of these references the most 
important are, perhaps, Strabo v. 3. 12; Ovid, Fasti, iii. 263-272; 
and Suetonius, Calig. 35, whose wording indicates that the old- 
world custom was dying out in the 1st century a.d. It is a 
reasonable conjecture that this extraordinary relic of barbarism 
was characteristic of the earlier stratum of the population who 
presumably called themselves Arid. 

On the anthropological aspect of the cult, see also A. B. Cook, Class. 
Rev. xvi., 1902, p. 365, where the whole evidence is very fully collected; 
and Frazer's Studies in the Early History of Kingship (1907), where he 
accepts Cook's criticism of his own earlier theory. (R. S. C.) 

ARIEGE, an inland department of southern France, bounded 
S. by Spain, W. and N. by the department of Haute- Garonne, 
N.E. and E. by Aude, and S.E. by Pyrenees-Orientales. ll 



ARIES— ARIOBARZANES 



491 



embraces the old countship of Foix, and a portion of Langue- 
doc and Gascony. Area, 1893 sq. m. Pop. (1906) 205,684. 
Ariege is for the most part mountainous. Its southern border is 
occupied by the snow-clad peaks of the eastern Pyrenees, the 
highest of which within the department is the Pic de Montcalm 
(10,512 ft.). Communication with Spain is afforded by a large 
number of ports or cols, which are, however, for the most part 
difficult paths, and only practicable for a few months in the year. 
Farther to the north two lesser ranges running parallel to the 
main chain traverse the centre of the department from south- 
east to north-west. The more southerly, the Montagne de Tabe, 
contains, at its south-eastern end, several heights between 7200 
and 9200 ft., while the Montagnes de Plantaurel to the north of 
Foix are of lesser altitude. These latter divide the fertile 
alluvial plains of the north from the mountains of the centre 
and south. The department is intersected by torrents belonging 
to the Garonne basin — the Salat, the Arize, which, near Mas 
d'Azil, flows through a subterranean gallery, the Ariege and the 
Hers. The climate is mild in the south, but naturally very 
severe among the mountains. Generally speaking, the arable 
land, which is chiefly occupied by small holdings, is confined to 
the lowlands. Wheat, maize and potatoes are the chief crops. 
Good vineyards and market gardens are found in the neighbour- 
hood of Pamiers in the north. Flax and hemp are also cultivated. 
The mountains afford excellent pasture, and a considerable 
number of cattle, sheep and swine are reared. Poultry- and bee- 
farming flourish. Forests cover more than one-third of the 
department and harbour wild boars and even bears. Game, 
birds of prey and fish are plentiful. There is abundance of 
minerals, including lead, copper, manganese and especially iron. 
Grindstones, building-stone, talc, gypsum, marble and phosphates 
are also produced. Warm mineral springs of note are found at 
Ax, Aulus and Ussat. Pamiers and St Girons are the most im- 
portant industrial towns. Iron founding and forging, which have 
their chief centre at Pamiers, are principal industries. Flour- 
milling, paper-making and cloth-weaving may also be mentioned. 
Ariege is served by the Southern railway. It forms the diocese 
of Pamiers and belongs to the ecclesiastical province of Toulouse. 
It is within the circumscriptions of the academie (educational 
division) and of the court of appeal of Toulouse and of the XVII. 
army corps. Its capital is Foix; it comprises the arrondisse- 
ments of Foix, St Girons and Pamiers, with 20 cantons and 
338 communes. Foix, Pamiers, St Girons and St Lizier-de-Cou- 
serans are the more noteworthy towns. Mention may also be made 
of Mirepoix, once the seat of a bishopric, and possessing a cathe- 
dral (15th and 16th centuries) with a remarkable Gothic spire. 

ARIES (" The Ram "), in astronomy, the first sign of the 
zodiac (q.v.), denoted by the sign °p, in imitation of a ram's head. 
The name is probably to be associated with the fact that when 
the sun is in this part of the heavens (in spring) sheep bring forth 
their young; this finds a parallel in Aquarius, when there is 
much rain. It is also a constellation, mentioned by Eudoxus 
(4th century B.C.) and Aratus (3rd century B.C.); Ptolemy 
catalogued eighteen stars, Tycho Brahe twenty-one, and 
Hevelius twenty-seven. According to a Greek myth, Nephele, 
mother of Phrixus and Hellc, gave her son a ram with a golden 
fleece. To avoid the evil designs of Hera, their stepmother, 
Phrixus and Helle fled on the back of the ram, and reaching the 
sea, attempted to cross. Helle fell from the ram and was drowned 
(hence the Hellespont) ; Phrixus, having arrived in Colchis and 
been kindly received by the king, Aeetes, sacrificed the ram to 
Zeus, to whom he also dedicated the fleece, which was afterwards 
carried away by Jason. Zeus placed the ram in the heavens as 
the constellation. 

ARIKARA, or Aricara (from ariki, horn), a tribe of North 
American Indians of Caddoan stock. They are now settled 
with the Hidatsas and the Mandans on the Fort Berthold 
Reservation, North Dakota. They originally lived in the Platte 
Valley, Nebraska, with the Pawnees, to whom they are related. 
They number about 400. 

See Handbook of American Indians, ed. F. W. Hodge (Washington, 
1907.) 



ARIMASPI, an ancient people in the extreme N.E. of Scythia 
(q.v.), probably the eastern Altai. All accounts of them 
go back to a poem by Aristeas of Proconnesus, from whom 
Herodotus (iii. 116, iv. 27) drew his information. They were 
supposed to be one-eyed (hence their Scythian name), and to 
steal gold from the griffins that guarded it. In art they are 
usually represented as richly dressed Asiatics, picturesquely 
grouped with their griffin foes; the subject is often described 
by poets from Aeschylus to Milton. They are so nearly mythical 
that it is impossible to insist on the usual identification with 
the ancestors of the Huns. Their gold was probably real, as 
gold still comes from the Altai. 

ARIMINUM (mod. Rimini), a city of Aemilia, on the N.E. 
coast of Italy, 69 m. S.E. of Bononia. It was founded by the 
Umbrians, but in 268 B.C. became a Roman colony with Latin 
rights. It was reached from Rome by the Via Flaminia, con- 
structed in 220 B.C., and from that time onwards was the bulwark 
of the Roman power in Cisalpine Gaul, to which province it even 
gave its name. Its harbour was of some importance, but is 
now silted up, the sea having receded. The remains of its moles 
were destroyed in 1807-1809. Ariminum became a place of 
considerable traffic owing to the construction of the Via Aemilia 
(187 B.C.) and the Via Popilia (132 B.C.), and is frequently men- 
tioned by ancient authors. In 90 B.C. it acquired Roman citizen- 
ship, but in 82 B.C. having been held by the partisans of Marius, 
it was plundered by those of Sulla (who probably made the 
Rubicon the frontier of Italy instead of the Aesis), and a mili- 
tary colony settled there. Caesar occupied it in 49 B.C. after 
his crossing of the Rubicon. It was one of the eighteen richest 
cities of Italy which the triumviri selected as a reward for their 
troops. In 27 B.C. Augustus planted new colonists there, and 
divided the city into seven vici after the model of Rome, from 
which the names of the vici were borrowed. He also restored 
the Via Flaminia (Mon. Ancyr. c. 20) from Rome to Ariminum. 
At the entrance to the latter the senate erected, in his honour, 
a triumphal arch which is still extant — a fine simple monument 
with a single opening. At the other end of the decumanus 
maximus or main street (3000 Roman ft. in length) is a fine 
bridge over the Ariminus (mod. Marecchia) begun by Augustus 
and completed by Tiberius in a.d. 20. It has five wide arches, 
the central one having a span of 35 ft., and is well preserved. 
Both it and the arch are built of Istrian stone. The present 
Piazza Giulio Cesare marks the site of the ancient forum. The 
remains of the amphitheatre are scanty; many of its stones 
have gone to build the city wall, which must, therefore, at 
the earliest belong to the end of the classical period. In 
a.d. 1 Augustus's grandson Gaius Caesar had all the streets of 
Ariminum paved. In a.d. 69 the town was attacked by the 
partisans of Vespasian, and was frequently besieged in the Gothic 
wars. It was one of the five seaports which remained Byzantine 
until the time of Pippin. (See Rimini.) 

See A. Tonini, Storia delta Citta di Rimini (Rimini, 1848-1862). 

(T. As.) 

ARIOBARZANES, the name of three ancient kings or satraps 
of Pontus, and of three kings of Cappadocia and a Persian 
satrap. 

Of the Pontic rulers two are most famous. (1) The son of 
Mithradates I., who revolted against Artaxerxes in 362 B.C. and 
may be regarded as the founder of the kingdom of Pontus (q.v.). 
According to Demosthenes he and his three sons received from 
the Athenians the honour of citizenship. (2) The son of Mithra- 
dates III., who reigned c. 266-240 B.C., and was one of those 
who enlisted the help of the invading Gauls (see Galatia). 

Of the Cappadocian rulers the best-known one (" Philo- 
Romaeus " on the coins) reigned nominally from 93 to 63 B.C., 
but was three times expelled by Mithradates the Great and as 
often reinstated by Roman generals. Soon after the third 
occasion he formally abdicated in favour of his son Ariobarzanes 
" Philopator," of whom we gather only that he was murdered 
some time before 51. His son Ariobarzanes, called " Eusebes " 
and " Philo-Romaeus," earned the gratitude of Cicero during 
his proconsulate in Cilicia, and fought for Pompeyin the civil 



492 



ARION— ARIOSTO 



wars, but was afterwards received with honour by Julius Caesar, 
who subsequently reinstated him when expelled by Pharnaces 
of Pontus. In 42 B.C. Brutus and Cassius declared him a traitor, 
invaded his territory and put him to death. 

The Persian satrap of this name unsuccessfully opposed Alex- 
ander the Great on his way to Persepolis (331 B.C.). 

ARION, of Methymna, in Lesbos, a semi-legendary poet and 
musician, friend of Periander, tyrant of Corinth. He flourished 
about 625 B.C. Several of the ancients ascribe to him the in- 
vention of the dithyramb and of dithyrambic poetry; it is 
probable, however, that his real service was confined to the 
organization of that verse, and the conversion of it from a mere 
drunken song, used in the Dionysiac revels, to a measured 
antistrophic hymn, sung by a trained body of performers. The 
name Cycleus given to his father indicates the connexion of the 
son with the " cyclic " or circular chorus which was the origin 
of tragedy. According to Suidas he composed a number of songs 
and proems; none of these is extant; the fragment of a hymn 
to Poseidon attributed to him (Aelian, Hist. ytw.xii.45) i s spurious 
and was probably written in Attica in the time of Euripides. 
Nothing is known of the life of Arion, with the exception of 
the beautiful story first told by Herodotus (i. 23) and elaborated 
and embellished by subsequent writers. According to Herodotus, 
Arion being desirous of exhibiting his skill in foreign countries 
left Corinth, and travelled through Sicily and parts of Italy, 
where he gained great fame and amassed a large sum of money. 
At Taras (Tarentum) he embarked for his homeward voyage in a 
Corinthian vessel. The sight of his treasure roused the cupidity 
of the sailors, who resolved to possess themselves of it by putting 
him to death. In answer to his entreaties that they would spare 
his life, they insisted that he should either die by his own hand 
on shipboard or cast himself into the sea. Arion chose the latter, 
and as a last favour begged permission to sing a parting song. 
The sailors, desirous of hearing so famous a musician, consented, 
and the poet, standing on the deck of the ship, in full minstrel's 
attire, sang a dirge accompanied by his lyre. He then threw 
himself overboard; but instead of perishing, he was miraculously 
borne up in safety by a dolphin, supposed to have been charmed 
by the music. Thus he was conveyed to Taenarum, whence he 
proceeded to Corinth, arriving before the ship from Tarentum. 
Immediately on his arrival Arion related his story to Periander, 
who was at first incredulous, but eventually learned the truth 
by a stratagem. Summoning the sailors, he demanded what had 
become of the poet. They affirmed that he had remained 
behind at Tarentum; upon which they were suddenly confronted 
by Arion himself, arrayed in the same garments in which he had 
leapt overboard. The sailors confessed their guilt and were 
punished. Arion's lyre and the dolphin were translated to the 
stars. Herodotus and Pausanias (iii. 25. 7) both refer to a brass 
figure at Taenarum which was supposed to represent Arion seated 
on the dolphin's back. But this story is only one of several 
in which the dolphin appears as saving the lives of favoured 
heroes. For instance, it is curious that Taras, the mythical 
founder of Tarentum, is said to have been conveyed in this 
manner from Taenarum to Tarentum. On Tarentine coins a 
man and dolphin appear, and hence it may be thought that 
the monument at Taenarum represented Taras and not Arion. 
At the same time the connexion of Apollo with the dolphin must 
not be forgotten. Under this form the god appeared when he 
founded the celebrated oracle at Delphi, the name of which 
commemorates the circumstance. He was also the god of music, 
the special preserver of poets, and to him the lyre was sacred. 

Among the numerous modern versions of the story, particular 
mention may be made of the pretty ballad by A. W. Schlegel ; see 
also Lehrs, Populate Aufsdtze aus dem Alterthum (1844-1846) 
Clement, Arion (1" " s 



ARIOSTO, LODOVICO (1474-1533) Italian poet, was born at 
Reggio, in Lombardy, on the 8th of September 1474. His father 
was Niccolo Ariosto, commander of the citadel of Reggio. He 
showed a strong inclination to poetry from his earliest years, 
but was obliged by his father to study the law — a pursuit in 
which he lost five of the best years of his life. Allowed at last to 



follow his inclination, he applied himself to the study of the 
classics under Gregorio da Spoleto. But after a short time, 
during which he read the best Latin authors, he was deprived of 
his teacher by Gregorio's removal to France as tutor of Francesco 
Sforza. Ariosto thus lost the opportunity of learning Greek, 
as he intended. His father dying soon after, he was compelled 
to forego his literary occupations to undertake the management of 
the family, whose affairs were embarrassed, and to provide for 
his nine brothers and sisters, one of whom was a cripple. He 
wrote, however, about this time some comedies in prose and a 
few lyrical pieces. Some of these attracted the notice of the, 
cardinal Ippolito d'Este, who took the young poet under his 
patronage and appointed him one of the gentlemen of his 
household. This prince usurped the character of a patron of 
literature, whilst the only reward which the poet received for 
having dedicated to him the Orlando Furioso, was the question, 
" Where did you find so many stories, Master Ludovic ?" The 
poet himself tells us that the cardinal was ungrateful; deplores 
the time which he spent under his yoke; and adds, that if he 
received some niggardly pension, it was not to reward him for 
his poetry, which the prelate despised, but to make some just 
compensation for the poet's running like a messenger, with the 
risk of his life, at his eminence's pleasure. Nor was even this 
miserable pittance regularly paid during the period that the 
poet enjoyed it. The cardinal went to Hungary in 1518, and 
wished Ariosto to accompany him. The poet excused himself, 
pleading ill health, his love of study, the care of his private 
affairs and the age of his mother, whom it would have been 
disgraceful to leave. His excuses were not received, and even 
an interview was denied him. Ariosto then boldly said, that 
if his eminence thought to have bought a slave by assigning him 
the scanty pension of 75 crowns a year, he was mistaken and 
might withdraw his boon — which it seems the cardinal did. 

The cardinal's brother, Alphonso, duke of Ferrara, now took 
the poet under his patronage. This was but an act of simple 
justice, Ariosto having already distinguished himself as a 
diplomatist, chiefly on the occasion of two visits to Rome as 
ambassador to Pope Julius II. The fatigue of one of these hurried 
journeys brought on a complaint from which he never recovered; 
and on his second mission he was nearly killed by order of the 
violent pope, who happened at the time to be much incensed 
against the duke of Ferrara. On account of the war, his salary 
of only 84 crowns a year was suspended, and it was withdrawn 
altogether after the peace; in consequence of which Ariosto 
asked the duke either to provide for him, or to allow him to 
seek employment elsewhere. A province, situated on the wildest 
heights of the Apennines, being then without a governor, Ariosto 
received the appointment, which he held for three years. The 
office was no sinecure. The province was distracted by factions 
and banditti, the governor had not the requisite means to enforce 
his authority and the duke did little to support his minister. 
Yet it is said that Ariosto's government satisfied both the sover- 
eign and the people confided to his care; and a story is added 
of his having, when walking out alone, fallen in with a party 
of banditti, whose chief, on discovering that his captive was 
the author of Orlando Furioso, humbly apologized for not having 
immediately shown him the respect which was due to his rank. 
Although he had little reason to be satisfied with his office, he 
refused an embassy to Pope Clement VII. offered to him by the 
secretary of the duke, and spent the remainder of his life at 
Ferrara, writing comedies, superintending their performance 
as well as the construction of a theatre, and correcting his 
Orlando Furioso, of which the complete edition was published 
only a year before his death. He died of consumption oi* the 
6th of June 1533. 

That Ariosto was honoured and respected by the first men of 
his age is a fact; that most of the princes of Italy showed him 
great partiality is equally true; but it is not less so that their 
patronage was limited to kind words. It is not known that he 
ever received any substantial mark of their love for literature; 
he lived and died poor. He proudly wrote on the entrance of a 
house built by himself, 



ARISTAENETUS— ARISTAGORAS 



493 



" Parva, sed apta mihi, sed nulli obnoxia, sed non 
Sordida, parta meo sed tamen aere domus;" 

which serves to show the incorrectness of the assertion of 
flatterers, followed by Tiraboschi, that the duke of Ferrara built 
that house for him. The only one who seems to have given 
anything to Ariosto as a reward for his poetical talent was the 
marquess del Vasto, who assigned him an annuity of ioo crowns 
on the revenues of Casteleone in Lombardy; but it was only 
paid, if ever, from the end of 1 53 1 . That he was crowned as poet 
by Charles V. seems untrue, although a diploma may have been 
issued to that effect by the emperor. 

The character of Ariosto seems to have been fully and justly 
delineated by Gabriele, his brother: — 

" Ornabat pietas et grata modestia Vatem, 
Sancta fides, dictique memor, munitaque recto 
Justitia, et nullo patientia victa labore, 
Et constans virtus animi, et dementia mitis, 
Ambitione procul pulsa, fastusque tumore." 

His satires, in which we see him before us such as he was, 
show that there was no flattery in this portrait. In these com- 
positions we are struck with the noble independence of the poet. 
He loved liberty with a most jealous fondness. His disposition 
was changeable withal, as he himself very frankly confesses in 
his Latin verses, as well as in the satires. 

" Hoc olim ingenio vitales hausimus auras, 
Multa cito ut placeant, displicitura brevi. 
Non in amore modo mens haec, sed in omnibus impar 
Ipsa sibi longa non retinenda mora." 

Hence he never would bind himself, either by going into orders, 
or by marrying, till towards the end of his life, when he espoused 
Alessandra, widow of Tito Strozzi. He had no issue by his wife, 
but he left two natural sons by different mothers. 

His Latin poems do not perhaps deserve to be noticed: in 
the age of Flaminio, Vida, Fracastoro and Sannazaro, better 
things were due from a poet like Ariosto. His lyrical composi- 
tions show the poet, although they do not seem worthy of his 
powers. His comedies, of which he wrote four, besides one which 
he left unfinished, are avowedly imitated from Plautus and 
Terence; and although native critics may admire in them the 
elegance of the diction, the liveliness of the dialogue and the 
novelty of some scenes, few will feel interest either in the subject 
or in the characters, and it is hard to approve the immoral 
passages by which they are disfigured, however grateful these 
might be to the audiences and patrons of theatrical representa- 
tions in Ariosto's own day. 

Of all the works of Ariosto, the most solid monument of his 
fame is the Orlando Furioso, the extraordinary merits of which 
have cast into oblivion the numberless romance poems which 
inundated Italy during the 15th, 16th and 17th centuries. 

The popularity which an earlier poem on the same theme, 
Orlando Innamorato, by Boiardo, enjoyed in Ariosto's time, 
cannot be well conceived, now that the enthusiasm of the 
crusades, and the interest which was attached to a war against 
the Moslems, have passed away. Boiardo wrote and read his 
poem at the court of Ferrara, but died before he was able to 
finish it. Many poets undertook the difficult task of its com- 
pletion; but it was reserved for Ariosto both to finish and to 
surpass, his original. Boiardo did not, perhaps, yield to Ariosto 
either in vigour or in richness of imagination, but he lived in 
a less refined age, and died before he was able to recast or even 
finish the poetical romance which he had written under the 
impulse of his exuberant fancy. Ariosto, on the other hand, 
united to a powerful imagination an elegant and cultivated taste. 
He began to write his great poem about 1503, and after having 
consulted the first men of the age of Leo X., he published it in 
1 516, in only 40 cantos (extended afterwards to 46); and up 
to the moment of his death never ceased to correct and improve 
both the subject and the style. It is in this latter quality that 
he excels, and for which he had assigned him the name of Divino 
Lodovico. Even when he jests, he never compromises his 
dignity; and in pathetic description or narrative he excites 
the reader's deepest feelings. In his machinery he displays a 
vivacity of fancy with which no other poet can vie; but he 



never lets his fancy carry him so far as to omit to employ, with 
an art peculiar to himself, those simple and natural pencil- 
strokes which, by imparting to the most extraordinary feats 
a colour of reality, satisfy the reason without disenchanting the 
imagination. The death of Zerbino, the complaints of Isabella, 
the effects of discord among the Saracens, the flight of Astolfo 
to the moon, the passion which causes Orlando's madness, teem 
with beauties of every variety. The supposition that the poem 
is not connected throughout is wholly unfounded; there is a 
connexion which, with a little attention, will become evident. 
The love of Ruggero and Bradamante forms the main subject 
of the Furioso; every part of it, except some episodes, depend 
upon this subject; and the poem ends with their marriage. 

The first complete edition of the Orlando Furioso was published 
at Ferrara in 1532, as noted above. The edition of Morali (Milan, 
1818) follows the text of the 1532 edition with great correctness. 
Of editions published in England, those of Baskerville (Birmingham, 
!773) an d Panizzi (London, 1834) are the most important. The 
indifferent translations into English of Sir John Harrington (1591) 
and John Hoole (1783) have been superseded by the spirited render- 
ing of W. Stewart Rose (1823). See also E. Gardner, Ariosto: the 
Prince of Court Poets (1906). 

ARISTAENETUS, Greek epistolographer, flourished in the 
5th or 6th century a.d. He was formerly identified with Aris- 
taenetus of Nicaea (the friend of Symmachus), who perished 
in an earthquake at Nicomedia, a.d. 358, but internal evidence 
points to a much later date. Under his name two books of love 
stories, in the form of letters, are extant; the subjects are 
borrowed from the erotic elegies of such Alexandrian writers as 
Callimachus, and the language is a patchwork of phrases from 
Plato, Lucian, Alciphron and others. The stories are feeble 
and insipid, and full of strange and improbable incidents. 

Text: Boissonade (1822); Hercher, Epistolographi Graeci (1873). 
English translations: Boyer (1701); Thomas Brown (1715); 
R. B. Sheridan and Halked (1771 and later). 

ARISTAEUS, a divinity whose worship was widely spread 
throughout ancient Greece, but concerning whom the myths 
are somewhat obscure. The account most generally received 
connects him specially with Thessaly. Apollo carried off from 
Mount Pelion the nymph Cyrene, daughter or granddaughter of 
the river-god Peneus, and conveyed her to Libya, where she gave 
birth to Aristaeus. From this circumstance the town of Cyrene 
took its name. The child was at first handed over to the care 
of the Hours, or the nymph Melissa and the centaur Cheiron. 
He afterwards left Libya and went to Thebes, where he received 
instruction from the Muses in the arts of healing and prophecy, 
and married Autonoe, daughter of Cadmus, by whom he had 
several children, among others, the unfortunate Actaeon. He 
is said to have visited Ceos, where, by erecting a temple to Zeus 
Icmaeus (the giver of moisture), he freed the inhabitants from 
a terrible drought. The islanders worshipped him, and occa- 
sionally identified him with Zeus, calling him Zeus Aristaeus. 
After travelling through many of the Aegean islands, through 
Sicily, Sardinia and Magna Graecia, everywhere conferring 
benefits and receiving divine honours, Aristaeus reached Thrace, 
where he was initiated into the mysteries of Dionysus, and 
finally disappeared near Mount Haemus. While in Thrace he is 
said to have caused the death of Eurydice, who was bitten by 
a snake while fleeing from him. Aristaeus was essentially a 
benevolent deity; he was worshipped as the first who introduced 
the cultivation of bees (Virgil, Georg. iv. 315-558), and of the 
vine and olive; he was the protector of herdsmen and hunters; 
he warded off the evil effects of the dog-star; he possessed the 
arts of healing and prophecy. He was often identified with 
Zeus, Apollo and Dionysus. In ancient sculptures and coins he 
is represented as a young man, habited like a shepherd, and 
sometimes carrying a sheep on his shoulders. Coins of Ceos 
exhibit the head of Aristaeus and Sirius in the form of a dog 
crowned with rays. 

Pindar, Pythia, ix. 5-65 ; Apollonius Rhodius, schol. on ii. 498, 
500; Diodorus, iv. 81. 

ARISTAGORAS (d. 497 B.C.), brother-in-law and cousin of 
Histiaeus, tyrant of Miletus. While Histiaeus was practically 
a prisoner at the court of Darius, he acted as regent in Miletus. 



494 



ARISTANDER— ARISTIDES 



In 500 B.C. he persuaded the Persians to join him in an attack 
upon Naxos, but he quarrelled with Megabates, the Persian 
commander, who warned the inhabitants of the island, and the 
expedition failed. Finding himself the object of Persian sus- 
picion, Aristagoras, instigated by a message from Histiaeus, 
raised the standard of revolt in Miletus, though it seems likely 
that this step had been under consideration for some time (see 
Ionia). After the complete failure of the Ionian revolt he 
emigrated to Myrcinus in Thrace. Here he fell in battle (497), 
while attacking Ennea Hodoi (afterwards Amphipolis) on the 
Strymon, which belonged to the Edonians, a Thracian tribe. 
The aid given to him by Athens and Eretria, and the burning of 
Sardis, were the immediate cause of the invasion of Greece by 
Darius. 

See Herodotus v. 30-51, 97-126; Thucydides iv. 102; Diodorus 
xii. 68 ; for a more favourable view see G. B. Grundy, Great Persian 
War (London, 1901). 

ARISTANDER, of Telmessus in Lycia, was the favourite 
soothsayer of Alexander the Great, who consulted him on all 
occasions. After the death of the monarch, when his body had 
lain unburied for thirty days, Aristander procured its burial by 
foretelling that the country in which it was interred would be 
the most prosperous in the world. He is frequently mentioned 
by the historians who wrote about Alexander, and was probably 
the author of a work on prodigies, which is referred to by Pliny 
(Nat. Hist. xvii. 38) and Lucian. 

Philopatris, 21; Arrian, Anabasis, ii. 26, iii. 2, iv. 4; Plutarch, 
Alexander; Curtius iv. 2, 6, 15, vii. 7. 

ARISTARCHUS, of Samos, Greek astronomer, flourished about 
250 B.C. He is famous as having been the first to maintain 
that the earth moves round the sun. On this account he was 
accused of impiety by the Stoic Cleanthes, just as Galileo, in 
later years, was attacked by the theologians. His only extant 
work is a short treatise (with a commentary by Pappus) On the 
Magnitudes and Distances of the Sun and Moon. His method 
of estimating the relative lunar and solar distances is geometri- 
cally correct, though the instrumental means at his command 
rendered his data erroneous. Although the heliocentric system 
is not mentioned in the treatise, a quotation in the Arenarius 
of Archimedes from a work of Aristarchus proves that he anti- 
cipated the great discovery of Copernicus. Further, Copernicus 
could not have known of Aristarchus's doctrine, since Archi- 
medes's work was not published till after Copernicus's death. 
Aristarchus is also said to have invented two sun-dials, one hemi- 
spherical, the so-called scaphion, the other plane. 

Editio princeps by Wallis (1688); Fortia d'Urban (1810); Nizze 
(1856). See Bergk-Hinrichs, Aristarchus von Samos (1883) ; Tannery, 
Aristarque de Samos; also Astronomy. 

ARISTARCHUS, of Samothrace (c. 220-143 B.C.), Greek gram- 
marian and critic, flourished about 155. He settled early in 
Alexandria, where he studied under Aristophanes of Byzantium, 
whom he succeeded as librarian of the museum. On the accession 
of the tyrant Ptolemy Physcon (his former pupil), he found his 
life in danger and withdrew to Cyprus, where he died from 
dropsy, hastened, it is said, by voluntary starvation, at the age 
of 72. Aristarchus founded a school of philologists, called after 
him " Aristarcheans," which long nourished in Alexandria and 
afterwards at Rome. He is said to have written 800 com- 
mentaries alone, without reckoning special treatises. He edited 
Hesiod, Pindar, Aeschylus, Sophocles and other authors; but 
his chief fame rests on his critical and exegetical edition of 
Homer, practically the foundation of our present recension. In 
the time of Augustus, two Aristarcheans, Didymus and Aris- 
tonicus, undertook the revision of his work, and the extracts 
from these two writers in the Venetian scholia to the Iliad 
give an idea of Aristarchus's Homeric labours. To obtain a 
thoroughly correct text, he marked with an obelus the lines 
he considered spurious ; other signs were used by him to indicate 
notes, varieties of reading, repetitions and interpolations. He 
arranged the Iliad and the Odyssey in twenty-four books as we 
now have them. As a commentator his principle was that the 
author should explain himself, without recourse to allegorical 
interpretation; in grammar, he laid chief stress on analogy 



and uniformity of usage and construction. His views were 
opposed by Crates of Mallus, who wrote a treatise Utpl 
'Avca/iaXias, especially directed against them. 

See Lehrs, De Aristarchi Stud. Homericis (3rd ed., 1882) ; Ludwich, 
A ristarchs homerische Textcritik ( 1 884) ; especially Sandys, Hist, of 
Class. Schol. (ed. 1906), vol. i. with authorities; also Homer. 

ARISTEAS, a somewhat mythical personage in ancient 
Greece, said to have lived in the time of Cyrus and Croesus, 
or, according to some, ca. 690 B.C. We are chiefly indebted 
to Herodotus (iv. 13-15) for our knowledge of him and his poem 
Arimaspeia. He belonged to a noble family of Proconnesus, 
an island colony from Miletus in the Propontis, and was sup- 
posed to be inspired by Apollo. He travelled through the 
countries north and east of the Euxine, and visited the Hyper- 
boreans, Issedonians and Arimaspians, who fought against the 
gold-guarding griffins. An important historical fact which 
seems to be indicated in his poem is the rush of barbarian hordes 
towards Europe under pressure from their neighbours. Twelve 
lines of the poem are preserved in Tzetzes and Longinus. 
Wonderful stories are told of Aristeas. At Proconnesus, he fell 
dead in a shop; simultaneously a traveller declared he had 
spoken with him near Cyzicus; his body vanished; six years 
afterwards, he returned. Again disappearing, 240 years later 
he was at Metapontum, and commanded the inhabitants to 
raise a statue to himself and an altar to Apollo, whom he had ac- 
companied in the form of a raven, at the founding of the city. 
According to Suidas, Aristeas also wrote a prose theogony. 
The genuineness of his works is disputed by Dionysius of 
Halicarnassus. 

See Tournier, De Aristea Proconneso(i&6$) ; Macan,H<2<. iv.14 note. 

ARISTEAS, the pseudonymous author of a famous Letter in 
which is described, in legendary form, the origin of the Greek 
translation of the Old Testament known as the Septuagint 
(q.v.). Aristeas represents himself as a Gentile Greek, but was 
really an Alexandrian Jew who lived under one of the later 
Ptolemies. Though the Letter is unauthentic, it is now recognized 
as a useful source of information concerning both Egyptian and 
Palestinian affairs in the 2nd and possibly in the 3rd century B.C. 

An English translation, based on a critical Greek text, was pub- 
lished by H. St J. Thackeray in the Jewish Quarterly Review, vol. xv. 
There are two modern editions of the Greek, one by the last named 
(in Swete's Introduction to the Old Testament in Creek, Cambridge, 
1900), the other by P. Wendland (Leipzig, 1900). 

ARISTIDES [' Apio-TilSijs] (c. 530-468 B.C.), Athenian statesman, 
called " the Just," was the son of Lysimachus, and a member 
of a family of moderate fortune. Of his early life we are told 
merely that he became a follower of the statesman Cleisthenes 
and sided with the aristocratic party in Athenian politics. 
He first comes into notice as strategus in command of his native 
tribe Antiochis at Marathon, and it was no doubt in consequence 
of the distinction which he then achieved that he was elected 
chief archon for the ensuing year (489-488). In pursuance of 
his conservative policy which aimed at maintaining Athens as 
a land power, he was one of the chief opponents of the naval 
policy of Themistocles (q.v.). The conflict between the two 
leaders ended in the ostracism of Aristides, at a date variously 
given between 485 and 482. It is said that, on this occasion, 
a voter, who did not know him, came up to him, and giving 
him his sherd, desired him to write upon it the name of Aristides. 
The latter asked if Aristides had wronged him. " No," was 
the reply, " and I do not even know him, but it irritates me to 
hear him everywhere called the just." 

Early in 480 Aristides profited by the decree recalling the 
post-Marathonian exiles to help in the defence of Athens against 
the Persian invaders, and was elected strategus for the year 
480-479. In the campaign of Salamis he rendered loyal support 
to Themistocles, and crowned the victory by landing Athenian 
infantry on the island of Psyttaleia and annihilating the Persian 
garrison stationed there (see Salamis). In 479 he was re-elected 
strategus, and invested with special powers as commander of 
the Athenian contingent at Plataea; he is also said to have 
judiciously suppressed a conspiracy among some oligarchic 
malcontents in the army, and to have played a prominent part 



ARISTIDES 



495 



in arranging for the celebration of the victory. In 478 or 
477 Aristides was in command of the Athenian squadron off 
Byzantium, and so far won the confidence of the Ionian allies 
that, after revolting from the Spartan admiral Pausanias, they 
offered him the chief command and left him with absolute 
discretion in fixing the contributions of the newly formed con- 
federacy (see Delian League). His assessment was universally 
accepted as equitable, and continued as the basis of taxation 
for the greater part of the league's duration; it was probably 
from this that he won the title of " the Just." Aristides soon 
left the command of the fleet to his friend Cimon (q.v.), but 
continued to hold a predominant position in Athens. At first 
he seems to have remained on good terms with Themistocles, 
whom he is said to have helped in outwitting the Spartans over 
the rebuilding of the walls of Athens. But in spite of state- 
ments in which ancient authors have represented Aristides as 
a democratic reformer, it is certain that the period following 
the Persian wars during which he shaped Athenian policy was 
one of conservative reaction. (For the theory based on Plutarch, 
Aristid. 22, that Aristides after Plataea threw open the archon- 
ship to all the citizens, see Archon.) 

He is said by some authorities to have died at Athens, by 
others on a journey to the Euxine sea. The date of his death 
is given by Nepos as 468; at any rate he lived to witness the 
ostracism of Themistocles, towards whom he always displayed 
a generous conduct, but had died before the rise of Pericles. 
His estate seems to have suffered severely from the Persian 
invasions, for apparently he did not leave enough money to 
defray the expenses of his burial, and it is known that his 
descendants even in the 4th century received state pensions. 
(See Athens; Themistocles.) 

Authorities. — Herodotus viii. 79-81, 95; ix. 28; " Constitution 
of Athens" (Alh. Pol.), 22-24, 4 1 ! Plutarch, Aristides; Cornelius 
Nepos, Vita Aristidis. See also E. Meyer, Geschichte des Altertums 
(Stuttgart, 1901), iii. pp. 481, 492. In the absence of positive 
information the 4th-century writers (on whom Plutarch and Nepos 
mainly rely) seized upon his surname of " Just," and wove round it 
a number of anecdotes more picturesque than historical. Herodotus 
is practically our only trustworthy authority. (M. O. B. C.) 

ARISTIDES, of Miletus, generally regarded as the father of 
Greek prose romance, flourished 150-100 B.C. He wrote six 
books of erotic M ilesian Tales (MiAjjoxa/c a), which enjoyed great 
popularity, and were subsequently translated into Latin by 
Cornelius Sisenna (110-67 B.C.). They are lost, with the excep- 
tion of a few fragments, but the story of the Ephesian matron 
in Petronius gives an idea of their nature. They have been 
compared with the old French fabliaux and the tales of 
Boccaccio. 

Plutarch, Crassus, 32; Ovid, Tristia, ii. 413, 443; Miiller, Frag- 
menta Historicorum Graecorum, iv. 

ARISTIDES, of Thebes, a Greek painter of the 4th century 
B.C. He is said to have excelled in expression. For example, 
a picture of his representing a dying mother's fear lest her infant 
should suck death from her breast was much celebrated. He 
also painted one of Alexander's battles. One of his pictures 
is said to have been bought by King Attalus for 100 talents 
(more than £20,000). 

ARISTIDES, AELIUS, surnamed Theodorus, Greek rheto- 
rician and sophist, son of Eudaemon, a priest of Zeus, was born 
at Hadriani in Mysia, a.d. 117 (or 129). He studied under 
Herodes Atticus of Athens, Polemon of Smyrna, and Alexander of 
Cotyaeum, in whose honour he composed a funeral oration still 
extant. In the practice of his calling he travelled through 
Greece, Italy, Egypt and Asia, and in many places the in- 
habitants erected statues to him in recognition of his talents. 
In 156 he was attacked by an illness which lasted thirteen years, 
the nature of which has caused considerable speculation. How- 
ever, it in no way interfered with his studies; in fact, they were 
prescribed as part of his cure. Aristides' favourite place of 
residence was Smyrna. In 178, when it was destroyed by an 
earthquake, he wrote an account of the disaster to Aurelius, 
which deeply affected the emperor and induced him to rebuild 
the city. The grateful inhabitants set up a statue in honour of 



Aristides, and styled him the " builder " of Smyrna. He refused 
all honours from them except that of priest of Asclepius, which 
office he held till his death, about 189. The extant works of 
Aristides consist of two small rhetorical treatises and fifty-five 
declamations, some not really speeches at all. The treatises are 
on political and simple speech, in which he takes Demosthenes 
and Xenophon as models for illustration; some critics attribute 
these to a later compiler (Spengel, Rhetor es Graeci). The six 
Sacred Discourses have attracted some attention. They give a 
full account of his protracted illness, including a mass of super- 
stitious details of visions, dreams and wonderful cures, which 
the god Asclepius ordered him to record. These cures, from his 
account, offer similarities to the effects produced by hypnotism. 
The speeches proper are epideictic or show speeches — on certain 
gods, panegyrics of the emperor and individual cities (Smyrna, 
Rome); justificatory — the attack on Plato's Gorgias in defence 
of rhetoric and the four statesmen, Thucydides, Miltiades, 
Pericles, Cimon; symbouleutic or political, the subjects being 
taken from the past history of free Greece — the Sicilian expedi- 
tion, peace negotiations with Sparta, the political situation after 
the battle of Leuctra. The Panathenaicus and Encomium of 
Rome were actually delivered, the former imitated from Isocrates. 
The Leplinea — the genuineness of which is disputed- — contrast 
unfavourably with the speech of Demosthenes. Aristides' works 
were highly esteemed by his contemporaries; they were much 
used for school instruction, and distinguished rhetoricians wrote 
commentaries upon them. His style, formed on the best models, 
is generally clear and correct, though sometimes obscured by 
rhetorical ornamentation; his subjects being mainly fictitious, 
the cause possessed no living interest, and his attention was 
concentrated on form and diction. 

Editio princeps (52 declamations only) (1517); Dindorf (1829); 
Keil (1899); Sandys, Hist, of Class. Schol. i. 312 (ed. 1906). 

ARISTIDES, QUINTILIANUS, the author of an ancient treatise 
on music, who lived probably in the third century a.d. According 
to Meibomius, in whose collection (Antiq. Musicae Auc. Septem, 
1652) this work is printed, it contains everything on music that is 
to be found in antiquity. (See Pauly-Wissowa, Realencyc. ii. 894.) 

ARISTIDES, APOLOGY OF. Until 1878 our knowledge of the 
early Christian writer Aristides was confined to the statement of 
Eusebius that he was an Athenian philosopher, who presented an 
apology " concerning the faith " to the emperor Hadrian. In 
that year, however, the Mechitharists of S. Lazzaro at Venice 
published a fragment in Armenian * from the beginning of the 
apology; and in 1889 Dr Rendel Harris found the whole of it in a 
Syriac version on Mount Sinai. While his edition was passing 
through the press, it was observed by the present writer that all 
the while the work had been in our hands in Greek, though in a 
slightly abbreviated form, as it had been imbedded as a speech 
in a religious novel written about the 6th century, and entitled 
